CONTEMPORARY ASTROLOGY
Series Editor: Erin Sullivan Howard Sasportas THE GODS OF
CHANGE
Pain, Crisis and the Transits of
Uranus, Neptune and Pluto ARKANA
PENGUIN BOOKS ARKANA
Published by the Penguin Group
Penguin Books Ltd, 27 Wrights Lane, London W8 5TZ, England
Penguin Books USA Inc., 375 Hudson Street, New York, New York 10014, USA
Penguin Books Australia Ltd, Ringwood, Victoria, Australia
Penguin Books Canada Ltd, 10 Alcorn Avenue, Toronto, Ontario, Canada M4V 3B2
Penguin Books (NZ) Ltd, 182-190 Wairau Road, Auckland 10, New Zealand
Penguin Books Ltd, Registered Offices: Harmondsworth, Middlesex, England
First published 1989
57910864
Copyright© Howard Sasportas, 1989
All rights reserved
Printed in England by Clays Ltd, St Ives pic
Filmset in 10/12 pt Photina
Except in the United States of America, this book is sold subject
to the condition that it shall not, by way of trade or otherwise, be lent,
re-sold, hired out, or otherwise circulated without the publisher's
prior consent in any form of binding or cover other than that in
which it is published and without a similar condition including this
condition being imposed on the subsequent purchaser Contents Acknowledgements
Introduction
Part One: The Collaboration with the Inevitable
I
The Search for Meaning
2 Breaking Down to Break Through
3 Interpreting Transits: Some Practical Guidelines
Part Two: Uranus Transits Júpiter Uranian Crises
5 The Transits of Uranus to the Planets and Through the
Houses
Part Three: Neptune Transits
6 Neptunian Crises
7 The Transits of Neptune to the Planets and Through
the Houses
Part Four: Pluto Transits
8 Plutonian Crises Mercúrio The Transits of Pluto to the Planets and Through the
Houses
Part Five: The Light at the End of the Tunnel
I o
Three Case Histories Notes
Suggested Reading viii
ix 3
I2 22 3I
48 II3
I27 22 I 256 3 53
379 384 Introduction
Your pain is but the breaking of the shell that encloses your understanding.
KAHLIL GIBRAN Life isn't always easy. It's impossible to live deeply and not to feel
pain or go through times of crisis, breakdown or major disruptive
change. Although this is clearly inevitable, what is not always
obvious is the crucial role pain and crisis play in the process of ·
growth and evolution. While some people fall apart altogether and
never make it through difficult times, many others emerge from
conflict and turmoil renewed and transformed, indeed, more fully
alive. They 'return' to life with a renewed commitment to a neglected
potential, with a renewed sense of what we might call the 'sacred' in
life, aJ!.d,.W.ith a richly enhanced sensitivity to others.
·
The ancient Chinese had a wise word for crisis: wei-chi, a combination of two words, danger (wei) and opportunity (chi). A crisis can be
viewed as a catastrophe, as something terrible· to be avoided at all
costs, but it also can be understood as a turning point, a critical step
or stage in development - as the possibility for something new to
happen, an opportunity for letting go and changing. It's quite human
to draw away from painful situations, to crave for things to return to
the way they were before the crisis occurred. And yet it's also
possible that these times can be used as opportunities to develop and
grow, to learn more about life and oneself. Something dies, but
something new is born. Nothing is left unchanged: the old is taken
away, but something different may emerge.
The question is thus not 'how can we avoid pain, crisis or change?'
but rather 'how can we understand and use these periods in our
lives most creatively?' Roberto Assagioli, the founder of Psychosynthesis called this 'the collaboration with the inevitable' . 1 Living fully
ix x Introduction means experiencing and accepting both the light and the dark, joy
and pain. Inevitably there will be times of disruption, even anguish,
in all our lives, but there is nothing to stop us from finding ways to
grow and learn from these periods.
I'm often asked 'What brings people to astrologers?' Some of my
clients come primarily out of curiosity - a friend of theirs had a
reading done and told them about it and now they want to know
more about what goes on in an astrology session. Others are motivated by a beHef or hope that the chart might cast some light on how
they could more fully use their potentials and resources. But in my
experience, the majority of people come because they are in some
sort of crisis. They pick up the phone and ring an astrologer because
they are desperate to know what is going on in their lives; something
is happening which they are unable to deal with - their usual ways
of trying to resolve their problems aren't working, and they feel as if
they've lost control. They're in the middleA>f relationship turmoils;
they're having crises at work; they can't cope wit/:1 their children;
they can't cope with their parents; they're confronting a life-threatening illness or facing the death of someone close to them; they are in
the middle of a depression or they have lost the will to live. Some
people come to me in the hope that I will work magic, and make
'everything instantly all better for them. Others see my role as
astrologer more realistically, as a counsellor and guide, someone
who may be able to help them find meaning and relevance in what
they are having to face.
In most cases, times of pain, crisis, breakdown or change correlate
with major transits to or from Saturn, Chiron, Uranus, Neptune and
Pluto, or progressions involving these planets. Each of these planets
brings its own distinctive dilemma, its own particular type of trauma,
test or trial. A conflict earmarked by Saturn is different in nature
from a crisis involving Uranus; Neptunian confusion doesn't feel the
same as Uranian disruption; and pulverizing Pluto works on us in its
own unforgettable way, reminding us of the adage that 'life is like a
stone - either it grinds you down or polishes you up'. Sometimes
two, three, or all of these planets join forces, and touch important
points in the chart at nearly the same time, as if the cosmos has
decided to 'gang up' on a person. But no matter what specific kind~ Introduction xi of conflicts, traumas, paradoxes or dilemmas they bring, these planets
all have one thing in common: they don't want to leave us the same
way they found us.
Dane Rudhyar once wrote that 'it is not the event which happens
to the person, but the person which happens to the event. An
individual meets particular events because he needs them in order to
become more fully what he is only potentially.' 2 Clearly then, our
attitude towards pain and crisis will affect the way we go through
such periods: if we believe that a crisis is only something terrible and
our main impetus is somehow to turn back the clock and get rid of it
as quickly as possible, we are likely to stay caught in the crisis for a
longer period of time. However, if we believe, like the ancient Chinese,
that a crisis is an opportunity for something new to be born, we
increase our capacity to use these periods constructively. Some
people are fortunate: even in the midst of great turmoil or despair,
they can glimpse the meaning or relevance a crisis has in terms of
their growth and development, and this understanding helps them
through their difficulties. For others, a longer time passes before they
can begin to see any purpose in their misfortune, or the opportunities
for new life which it offers. And, sadly, a number of people may
never come out of the crisis at all - they remain oriented not to the
future but to the past, longing for what life used to be ·like, and
forgoing the chance to live with a new, hard-won wisdom.
Our attitudes towards these phases of life not only affect how we
as individuals go through such periods, but also how we as astrologers communicate with our clients. If our tendency is to view
these times as wholly neg~tive, how can we help others find meaning
in what they are going through? If our pattern is to avoid turmoil or
conflict at all costs, we will probably (directly or indirectly) encourage
our clients to do the same. We will try to make everything 'all better'
and rescue people as quickly as possible - not realizing that in doing
so, we are depriving them of the strength or the transformation
.which facing the crisis could bring.
The purpose of this book is to focus on the kinds of changes and
crises associated with the transits of Uranus, Neptune and Pluto,
and the potentials for growth and development which they offer. 3
Wherever possible, I have included examples gathered from my xii Introduction astrological practice, and the last chapter explores three case histories
in greater depth. Júpiter This book can be used simply as a guide to
interpreting the outer planets by transit; but more than that, I hope
it will enable the reader to gain a little more insight into what is
needed to turn a crisis into an opportunity.
/ Howard Sasportas
London, 1988 PART ONE The Collaboration
with the
Inevitable I The Search for Meaning
Woe to him who saw no more sense in his life, no aim, no purpose, and therefore
no point in carrying on. He was soon lost.
VIKTOR FRANKL Jung once wrote that 'meaning makes a great deal of things bearable
- perhaps everything'. Meaning helps us get through life. We have
more chance of dealing constructively with pain or crisis if we can
find some sort of meaning, relevance or purpose in what we are
going through or having to endure. No better example of this can be
found than in Viktor Frankl's book Man's Search for Meaning. 1 In this
book, Frankl describes the time he spent in a German concentration
camp from 1943 to 1945. historical events which, for many, mark a
watershed in Western consciousness, radically calling into question
our notions of moral and immgr_al behaviour, or even of good and
evil, of the existence of a benevolent deity. From his personal experience, he concludes that (aside from pure chance) the inmates who
managed to survive such degradation were those who could attribute
some kind of meaning or purpose to what they had to face. Some
people found meaning through the belief that God was testing them,
while others found a more concrete, personal motive for staying
alive: 'I have to survive in order to see my family again.' Frankl's
own capacity to endure the horrors of the camp stemmed from a
powerful urge to live so that he could tell others about what had
actually gone on there. Frankl writes of the day when he felt he
could take no more, when the winds were bitterly cold; when, he,
sick and starving, was forced to march many miles, his feet already
covered in sores. He wanted to die. But then he had a vision, a
picture of himself standing on the platform of a comfortable, well-lit
lecture room where a captivated audience sat in ~t of him to hear
him deliver a talk on the psychology of the conccmtration camp. This 3 Júpiter The Collaboration with the Inevitable vision helped to keep him alive - it gave meaning and purpose to
what he had to endure. He had to survive in order to tell the world
just how horrific it had been. At that moment, Frankl realized
something he would never forget and which later became one of the
philosophical premises upon which his own form of psychotherapy
(logotherapy) was based: 'The prisoner who had lost faith in the
future- his future- was doomed. With his loss of belief in the future,
he also lost his spiritual hold; he let himself decline and became
subject to mental and physical decay . . . he simply gave up.' 2
Nietzsche wrote:-'He who has a why to live can bear with almost any
how.' As Frankl discovered through his personal ordeal, if we can
find some sort of meaning in a painful event, even if we are only
open to the possibility of meaning, we may find the resources to face
the crisis more honestly, perhaps even courageously. 'Life ultimately
means taking the responsibility to find the right answer to its .
problems and to fulfil the tasks which it constantly sets for each
individual.' 3
The Core Self and the Birthchart
One way I find meaning in life is through the belief that we all have
a deeper Self or core Self which guides, unfolds, and regulates our
growth and development. Just as an apple seed 'knows' that it is
meant to grow into an apple and not a pear, there is a part of us
which 'knows' what we are meant to become and the path we need
to follow to get there. Concepts such as individuation, self-realization
and self-fulfilment describe the process of growing into what we are
meant to become. Piero Ferrucci, in What We May Be, describes his
view of how we unfold according to certain inner designs:
There seems to be a way for things to happen which is intrinsically
right for them: they become what they were meant to be. Aristotle
called the end of this process entelechy - the full and perfect
realization of what was previously in a potential state. Whether it
appears in a butterfly flying out of its cocoon, in a ripe fruit falling
from a tree, or in the development of an acorn into an oak, this
process clearly evidences qualities of harmony and underlying The Search for Meaning 5 intelligence ... According to the Eastern doctrine of dharma, we
,are each called upon to achieve a particular life-pattern ... Each
of us should try to discover the pattern and cooperate with its realization. Júpiter .
This is where the birthchart is uniquely useful, for it reveals the
nature of our seed: it is a map or guide suggesting what the deeper,
core Self has in mind for us. The birthchart tells us something about
the kind of seed we are- whether, as Liz Greene puts it, we're a lentil
or avocado or a brussel sprout. Consultant astrologer Christina Rose
compares looking at the birthchart with looking at the picture on
the front of a seed packet: you can see from the picture what the seed
is meant to grow into and become.
In the introduction to Planets in Transit, Robert Hand makes a
similar point:
It is my belief, which I cannot 'prove' here, that within each of us is a creative core that actively creates the universe, either by
making up each part out of nothing or by agreeing in advance,
prior to our physical incarnation, to play a certain game with
certain rules. In this scheme your horoscope becomes a symbol
of your intentions, not a record of what is going to happen
to you. As astrologer Zipporah Dobyns likes to say, character is
destiny. 5
The idea that there is a deeper Self guiding our development also is
echoed by Liz Greene, although she chooses to call it by another
name:
From what I have observed in my analysands and my astrological
clients, there is certain something - whether one calls it fate,
Providence, natural law, karma or the unconscious -that retaliates when its boundaries are transgressed or when it receives
no respect or effort at relationship, and which seems to possess a
kind of 'absolute knowledge' not only of what the individual
needs, but of what he is going to need for his unfolding in life ... I
make no pretence of knowing what 'it' is, but I am unashamedly
prepared to call it fate. 6 6 The Collaboration with the Inevitable The Timing of the Seed
The birthchart is a moment frozen in time - a picture of the heaven
as it appeared at the ti.rn,e of birth from the place of birth. But the
planets don't stop moving at birth: they keep going, and as they keep
moving, they do things such as coming back full circle to where they
were at birth, or they cross over another planet's natal position, or
they make a square (go-degree angle), or an opposition (r8o-degree
angle) or other angles to where they were in the birthchart. Transits
show where the planets are now in the heaven in relationship to
where they were at birth. Progressions, another form of updating the
chart, symbolically depict how the movements of the planets after
birth are affecting the natal chart. The birthchart reveals what kind
of seed we are, but the transits and progressions to the chart tell us
something about the timing of our seed. Is something ready to be
sown? Is something new ready to grow? Some seeds may take only
weeks to germinate, others may take many months or years to
grow.
Each of us is in a continual process of unfoldment, and it is my
belief that transits and progressions show what our deeper Self (that
part of us which guides and unfolds our development) has in mind
for us at any point in our lives. The core Self energizes different
aspects of the psyche and the chart according to what new or
further growth is to be achieved at any particular phase of development. Transits and progressions reveal what the core Self wants to
make happen for us - what the deeper Self intends to bring to our
attention to develop or work on. In order to co-operate with our
inner growth and unfoldment, we need to listen to what is going on
inside us. If we do so, we will experience transits and progressions to
our birthcharts as urges and inclinations stemming from within our
own psyches.
However, we cannot deriy the fact that transits and progressions
often do correlate with outer events which seem to land on us out of
the blue. Even so, I still believe that these events are the synchronous
external manifestation of inner changes which are taking place. In
other words, the core Self may use outer events to promote the kinds
of changes we need to go through in order to grow into what we are The Search for Meaning 7 meant to become. Earlier I quoted Robert Hand's theory that the
birthchart shows the original intentions of our creative core Self. He
also makes this point about transits and progressions:
Both transits and progressions indicate the working out of various
phases of this original intention. Although I frequently lapse into
causal vocabulary ... I do not believe that the planets 'cause'
anything. They are merely signs of the manifestation of the
original intention, part of which is experitmced as flowing through
you as will. This is the intention that you are aware of. Part of the
intention is experienced as coming from without; you may call it
fate, destiny or circumstances beyond your control. But this, too,
comes from within you, and you need only raise your consciousness to know it. Part of the function of astrology is to raise the
individual's consciousness in just this way. 7
If we are not listening to or respecting the growth pattern the core Self has in mind for us, we are more likely to attract outer circumstances into oi.Ir lives which force us to change or adapt. For
instance, when transiting Uranus conjuncts our Venus, the time has
arrived for us to alter our existing patterns of relationship. If we are
attuned to our inner world, we probably know this and can do what
is necessary to respect this next step of development. But if we are
frightened or reluctant to accept the Uranian urges which are
making themselves felt through our Venus. the transit could manifest
as an external event which coerces us to change. In this case, our
partner may leave or disrupt the relationship, forcing us to make
needed changes in this area of life. In other words, the core Self will
often work through events to bring to our awareness the kind of
growth it expects from us at any time in our life. Again, I quote
Hand, who elaborates on the relationship between the inner psychological significance of transits and the kinds of outer events we
attract into our lives:
It is my contention that ultimately transits signify changes totally within the self- psychological changes, to be sure, but only if you
expand what is normally meant by psychological. However, you
may experience these inward changes either as psychological 8 The Collaboration with the Inevitable
changes in the conventional sense, as social interactions, or as
events totally outside of yourself. An 'event' may also be felt as an
illness. These are projections through which your inner energies
are experienced at various different levels of life. This is an important idea to understand, because if you do not understand how
you are involved in causing a particular event, it means that you
are operating unconsciously and are therefore not in control of
the circumstances. 8 Liz Greene, in The Astrology of Fate, also attributes an uncanny
intelligence to what she calls fate, and to what I am referring to as
the core Self:
It appears to make arrangements of the most particular and
astonishing kind, bringing a person together with another person
or an external situation at precisely the right moment, and it
appears to be as much part of the inner man as the outer. It also
appears to be both psychic, and physical, personal and collective,
'higher' and 'lower', and can wear the mask of Mephistopheles as
readily as it can present itself as God . . . And I feel that if we
understood this thing better we might be of far greater assistance
to our clients, not to mention ourselves. Mercúrio Finding Meaning in Transits and Progressions
Properly understood, transits and progressions give the astrologer
insight into the deeper and more essential meaning of a particular
life-experience or phase of development in the client's life. An examination of the chart through these methods reveals in a clear and
concise way those parts of a person's nature which are ready to be
consciously integrated, explored or transformed. A major part of the
work of the psychological astrologer is to somehow align his or her
self with the core Self of the client. Through establishing this link or
congruence with the client's Self, the astrologer can best gnide the
person to co-operate with or promote what the Self is wanting to
bring forth or make conscious within the.personality.
In Psychosynthesis, a branch of transpersonal psychology founded The Search for Meaning Mercúrio by the Italian psychiatrist Roberto Assagioli, the next step in development which a person has to take is referred to as purpose. 10 Purpose
reflects the intention of the core Self at any time, and will be related
in some way to the client's immediate concerns and life issues. These
immediate concerns - or presenting problems as they are sometimes
called - will also mirror the kinds of transits and progressions
occurring in the client's chart. When examining the transits and
progressions in a chart, the astrologer can ask him- or herself these
three questions in order to help assess what the deeper Self has in
mind for a person at any particular time:
What is trying to emerge or be born through the presenting problem?
2 What archetypal quality or qualities is the client's Self trying to
bring through?
3 What is the next step for this person that the Self is trying to
make happen? I Although the French writer and philosopher Pascal asserted that
'the branch cannot hope to know the tree's meaning', Frankl, by
contrast, is a little more hopeful about our capacity to fathom the
workings of the Self. He asserts that apes used to test polio vaccines had
no way of comprehending the purpose for the periodic jabs to which
they were subjected, but then argues that human beings are different:
our more highly developed brain enables us to stand back and reflect
on why something is happening. 11 Through the birthchart and the
system of transits and progressions, we have a symbolic mapping
which will help us discover meaning in the kinds of experiences- both
positive and negative - we create and attract into our lives.
Sometimes it's fairly clear what the deeper Self is up to. At other
times, the reasons for the Self putting us through times of pain and
crisis are not always that obvious or straightforward. I don't believe
that the Self sets up situations which torture us simply for the
sadistic fun of it. The Self just doesn't work that way. The purpose of
the Self is to oversee and guide our development and full unfoldment;
therefore, whatever the Self brings our way - even if this involves
times of upheaval, trauma and turmoil- must have some bearing on
our growing into what we are meant to become. ro The Collaboration with the Inevitable The deeper Self may ask that we suffer periods of pain and crisis in
order to develop certain qualities or traits which we wouldn't develop
if we didn't have these challenging times. In other words, conflict,
when viewed from the larger perspective of our overall unfoldment
and individual journey, may serve creative and constructive ends.
Also, if we have grown away from ourselves, then some degree of
pain or conflict might be needed as a way of helping us regain touch
with who we really are or as a way of guiding us back to the path we
are meant to follow. Pain can be a messenger telling us that things
are not as they should be. If over a period of time we have not been
true to ourselves - if we persistently neglect fundamental needs or
truths of our nature- the resulting disharmony is reflected in illness,
tension, and pain. Whether we choose to listen or not, physical
symptoms or other life-difficulties are often attempts on the part of
the Self to let us know that somewhere along the line something has
gone wrong.
Some people seem quite happy to live out or express certain parts
of their charts, while ignoring other bits with which, for whatever
reasons, they are not comfortable. In .a lecture given to the Astrological Association of Great Britain on the use of astrology in
psychotherapy, Beata Bishop, a practising astrologer and psychotherapist, underlined the consequences of suppressing or denying
parts of our chart or parts of our own nature. One of her clients was
a woman with the Sun in Leo, Moon in Aries, Sagittarius midheaven,
and Pisces rising. She was able to live out her Neptunian and
Piscean side, but had problems coming to terms with her fiery Aries,
Leo and Sagittarian urges - that part of her nature which is more
extroverted and wilful. In line with her Pisces rising, she constantly
put her own needs aside for the sake of other people, centring her life
around her husband and family. When transiting Uranus in Sagittarius came to conjunct her midheaven, the denial of the fiery bits of
her chart clearly expressed itself in her presenting symptoms symptoms which included terrible panic attacks, nightmares and fits
of anxiety. Beata Bishop's deductions will strike a chord with anyone
who has used astrology as a counselling tool: 'It seems to me that
when people don't resemble their charts, don't live out their most
important chart factors, the resulting conflict is easily translated into The Search for Meaning I I physical symptoms. The woman in my previous example got away
comparatively lightly with her night terrors and daytime panics. But
it can be much worse .. .' 12
This woman's physical and mental symptoms were a way of
letting her know that she was out of touch with much of her true
nature. The resulting pain and discomfort led her to seek help, as if
the Self had to resort to these ploys in order to communicate to her
that something needed to be done about how she was conducting
her life. We can't deny that her discomfort must have been great,
but it was this very discomfort that was necessary to initiate the selfhealing process. In the following chapter, we will look more closely
at how stress and crisis serve to transform us, and in particular, the
role the transits of Uranus, Neptune and Pluto play in this process. 2 Breaking Down to Break Through
Near is but difficult to grasp the god
But where there is danger
the saving powers also rise.
HOLDERLIN Whether we attribute it to fate or to the workings of the deeper Self,
the transits of Uranus, Neptune and Pluto challenge and disrupt our
existing ego-identity or sense of self, so that we can put ourselves
back together again in a new way. However, before we can discuss
specific transits of these planets, we need to come to a clearer
definition of how I am using the term 'ego'; and we need to understand a little something about how our ego develops in childhood. ,
Ego is usually defined as that part of the mind which has a sense
of individuality. In other words, the ego is our sense of 'I', the feeling
of a 'me-in-here'. We are not born with a very clear sense of 'I'. In
the womb, we are in an ego-less state and have no awareness of the
self· as a separate, distinct entity. We think we are everything; we
think we are the whole universe.
Being born means 'taking on' a body, and once we become aware
we have a body, we also become aware we have a boundary; my
body ends somewhere and yours begins somewhere else. This is
called a 'body-ego'. Time passes and we develop a 'mental-ego': the
sense that we have a mind which is our own, and feelings which are
our own. People may sometimes share our thoughts and emotions,
but in general, what we are thinking and feeling is not what the
whole world is thinking and feeling. The ego, or our sense of being a
separate 'I' with our own body, mind and feelings, once established,
expands to include more and more attributes.
We come to think of ourselves as pretty, clever, and lovable or as
stupid, useless and inadequate. We have many different urges and
drives, some of which we feel are acceptable and will allow into our
12 Breaking Down to Break Through I 3 awareness, and others which we are frightened to admit are there usually because the environment doesn't condone these in us.* So
we start off in life thinking we are everything, but gradually, our
original global identity narrows down to include certain qualities
and traits, and to exclude others. Our ego is a limited edition of the
Self, made up of those parts of our nature we are willing to accept.
Our ego-identity is thus like a boundary line: everything inside the
boundary we define as ourselves, everything outside the boundary
line is 'not-us'. The most common line of demarcation is the skin:
what is inside my skin is me, what is outside my skin is not-me.
Things outside the boundary line of my skin may belong to me -my
car, my family, my house, my job- but they are not me. 1
However, the skin-boundary is not the only type of dividing line we
make. We also draw boundaries inside our own skin. Some of what
goes on inside us we are willing to allow into our ego-identity, and
other parts we will keep out. We may accept that part of us which is
loving and kind, and deny that part of us which is cruel and destructive.
Some of us do the reverse: we identify with being cold and harsh, and
deny our softer, more sensitive side. So even within the boundary line
of the skin, we make further boundaries, further divisions between
what is us and what is not-us. Jungians would call this the ego/shadow
boundary, or the boundary between what we are conscious of in
ourselves and what we are unconscious of in ourselves- the boundary
between what we let others see and what we keep dark and hidden.
Astrologically, Saturn is the planet associated with boundaries
and represents the skin that separates us from 'other'. Most positively, Saturn helps us to define ourselves and to steady, focus and
harness our energy within specific forms and structures - through
Saturn, we learn discipline and commitment. Saturn also is the
boundary line we draw between those parts of our nature we are
willing to admit into our identity, and those parts we want to
prohibit entering into our awareness. In this sense, Saturn symbolizes
the ego's urge to structure itself - the ego's defence system - a *For a fuller discussion of how we come to deny or repress parts of our nature, see
pp. 226-30 and pp. 245-7. 14 The Collaboration with the Inevitable dynamic in us which builds and tries to stabilize and maintain the
status quo of our narrowed-down identity. In this capacity, Saturn
can express itself negatively by disallowing the new and compelling
us to defend ourselves - our thoughts, our feelings, our behaviour in rigid, outworn ways.
Anyone familiar with military strategy knows that a boundary
line is a border, and that borders are potential battle lines. Borders
are where wars are fought. As soon as we create boundaries whether between ourselves and others, or between those facets of
our nature we own and express and those facets of ourselves we
deny are in us - we also create the possibility of war and conflict
between the elements on either side of the border. 2
Uranus, Neptune and Pluto are inimical to boundaries, and in this
sense, they are anti-Saturn. As these planets transit the chart, they
threaten our existing ego-identity because their energies destroy the
boundaries the ego has built. They will undermine the boundary
between ourselves and others and make us aware once more of our
essential unity and interconnectedness with all life (Neptune is
particularly adept at this). Or, even more significantly, they will
destroy the boundary between what we are conscious of in ourselves
and what we are unconscious of or are denying, so that we are
forced to admit into our awareness those aspects of our psyche we
have hitherto banned. Saturn will struggle to maintain the status
quo and to keep things the same; but in the end, Saturn will lose.
Whether we choose to change or we are made to change, transiting
Uranus, Neptune and Pluto challenge our old ways of being, and
coerce us to remap the borders of our identity.
The Theory of Dissipative Structures
In 1977, the Nobel Prize for chemistry was awarded to a Belgian
physical chemist, llya Prigogine, for his theory ofdissipative structures,
and his work scientifically demonstrated what the ancient Chinese
knew very well: that stress and crisis play a critical role in the
process of transformation. Like wei-chi, the Chinese word for crisis,
Prigogine's results support the idea that breakdowns and upheavals
in our lives are also opportunities for something new to happen. 3 Breaking Down to Break Through I 5 Prigogine was studying what in physics are called 'open systems'.
An open system is any system that is involved in some sort of
continuous interchange of energy with the environment. They are
characterized by a certain amount of fluctuation, that is, they are
vulnerable and accessible to different kinds of energies coming into
them. Human-made things like towns, cities, groups and organizations also are open systems. A town, for example, is not something
isolated and closed off from the rest of life: the town's industries use
power and raw materials from neighbouring areas and then recycle
this energy in a transformed state back into the environment again.
Because you and I can be changed by our interaction with the
environment and by the invasion of unconscious contents of our
psyche into our existing conscious awareness, our ego-identity is
also an open system, and therefore subject to the laws of Prigogine's
theory.
According to Prigogine, provided that the fluctuations and disturbances coming into an open system stay within a certain limit, the
system's self-regulating properties allow it to maintain its overall
function and identity. In other words, the system can cope with a
certain amount of disturbance and perturbation and not completely
break down. Similarly, inevitable external or internal disruptions
may periodically shake up our lives; but providing the disruptions
aren't too great, the homoeostatic nature of the ego enables us to
adjust to these fluctuations without having to alter to any great
degree what is going on in our lives. We make some minor adjustments and remain pretty much the same.
However, if the fluctuations and disturbances coming into an open
system increase beyond a certain limit, they will drive the system into
a state of 'creative chaos'. What has been there before, and what has
previously worked, can no longer continue in the same way. The
system is forced to assimilate or accommodate too great a disruptive
influence to survive in its old format and a crisis occurs: if the system is
going to function at all, some new order of things must be established.
In other words, the breakdown of the system makes it possible for it to
break through to a whole other way of organizing itself. Such is the
dynamic nature of growth and the nature of transformation.
Similarly, when our lives are progressing smoothly, there really is 16 The Collaboration with the Inevitable no reason to change. It's usually only when things start going all
wrong, when we suffer major set-backs in important spheres of our
life, or when circumstances become intolerably difficult, tedious or
chaotic, that we seriously begin to think about making changes. Or
existing structures in our life collapse so totally that we can no
longer maintain our normal or habitual functioning: a relationship
which we have been closely identified with breaks up, a partner dies,
a child dies, we lose a parent, we are made redundant, a philosophy
we dearly believed in fails or we are faced with a life-threatening
illness. While not everyone will be affected to the. same degree or in
the same way, disruptions such as these generally call for significant
transformations in our lives. It becomes difficult or impossible to go
on in the same manner as before; the upheaval creates or necessitates
a process of re-examination and re-evaluation of our life, attitudes,
motives and values.
The connections between the theory of dissipative structures to
the possible effects of the transits of (or progressions involving)
Uranus, Neptune or Pluto are obvious. I have already said that
Saturn is associated with form, boundary and structure; and that
Uranus, Neptune and Pluto are,- in this respect, the enemies of
Saturn. They are 'de-structuring principles', undermining existing
structures so that something new can take the place of what has
been there before. In one sense, Saturn represents the homoeostatic
principle of the ego - the desire to maintain and preserve what is. By
contrast, Uranus, Neptune and Pluto (each in its own way and style)
bring fluctuations and critical perturbations: they break us down so
that we can break through to a new way of being.
Sometimes the disturbances they bring are unpleasant: illness,
depression, etc. But the disruptions could be of a positive nature as
well: getting married, falling in love, buying a home, gaining new
knowledge which alters our view of life, sudden success, achieving a
promotion or even winning the pools. These outwardly positive
events cause nearly as mu~ Saturno stress to the existing order of our lives
as do negative occurrences. No matter what the exact nature of the
disturbing fluctuations, no matter how Uranus, Neptune or Pluto
go about it, the kinds of shifts, conflicts, paradoxes, tensions and
traumas they bring are all calling out for some sort of change. Breaking Down to Break Through I 7 Making changes is not always easy. Being human and creatures
of habit, much of our energy is invested in trying to avoid pain and
crisis. Most of us don't relish the idea of losing anything which we
are attached to - even, as Jungian psychologist Sallie Nichols reminds us, our 'decaying teeth or falling hair'. Júpiter We especially don't
like to lose those things from which we are deriving our sense of
identity or 'I-ness': relationships, jobs, income, ideals or principles.
Outworn parts of our psychic make-up such as old habit patterns,
negative self-images, or what Transactional Analysis calls 'scripts',
which may really have never helped us that much to begin with, are
just as difficult to let go of as possessions or people who have been
close to us. Maharishi Mahesh Yogi used to tell the story of a couple
who moved from a tiny hut into a magnificent palace, but still
mourned for the cosy little hut they knew so well.
In her work with the terminally ill and dying, illizabeth KiiblerRoss noted five steps or stages that many of her patients had to go
through before they could accept their imminent death. Her findings
are not dissimilar to the way people often react to difficult transits of
Uranus, Neptune or Pluto. Because these planets threaten to tear us
down and rebuild us- bringing an 'ego-death' -we may try to resist
the effects of these transits in the same way that many of KiiblerRoss's clients resisted the fact they were dying. 5 Most of her patients
reacted to the knowledge of their terminal illness with the response:
'No, not mel It can't be true!' So the first stage was denial: 'There
must be some mistake; my records have been mixed up with those of
somebody else.' Similarly, when Uranus, Neptune or Pluto are beginning to make their effects felt and we are sensing a crisis around the
corner, we often do whatever we can to avoid acknowledging it. We
employ a tactic known as 'selective perception' - we choose not to
look where the crisis is. A number of years ago I did the charts of a
married couple. I saw them separately, the husband in the morning
and the wife in the afternoon. He was a Libran with the Sun in the
seventh house and Uranus was transiting over this placement. At
the same time, transiting Uranus was squaring his wife's natal Sun
in Cancer. During the session with him, I enquired about his marital
relationship, and he replied that everything was just fine and couldn't
be better. His wife, however, began the afternoon reading with the I8 The Collaboration with the Inevitable comment, 'Well I'm sure you know why I'm here- I'm so fed up
with the marriage.' Sadly, such selective perception is quite
common.
The second phase or reaction Kiibler-Ross observed among the
patients was that of anger. Instead of 'No, not me', the cry became
'Why me? It isn't fair. Why isn't this happening to Joe Bloggs down
the road, who smokes forty cigarettes a day and guzzles six pints at
the local every night?' They are angry about the fact that their lives
are coming to an end. Hopes they had about the future, projects they
were in the middle of working on, relationships they were involved
in - all these would end. Most displayed a tendency to displace their
anger on to the environment, complaining that the doctors were
incompetent, the nurses did nothing right, the bed was never comfortable, and so on. People who find themselves on the verge of other
kinds of major life crises also may go through a similar phase,
becoming angry with any other people involved in the situation, and
blaming them for what is happening. Some vent their anger at God,
the cosmos, or the planets involved for putting them through such
turmoil. There are a number of people walking around right now
angry at Pluto for doing such-and-such to them.
After the denial and the anger comes what Kiibler-Ross labelled
'the bargaining stage', when patients can no longer deny they are
seriously ill. They have expressed their anger at God, life, the doctors,
the nurses, etc., but nothing has changed, so they now attempt to
make a deal with the powers that be. They bargain with their
disease or illness: 'If I promise to change my ways right now, eat
well for the rest of my life and exercise regularly, can I get better?' Or
'If I can be made well again, I will devote the rest of my life to serving
God or the church.' Trying to postpone death is another form of
bargaining exhibited by her patients: 'Just let me live until my son's
wedding' or 'Don't let me die until I at least have one chance to sing
on stage again.' Sometimes, with a significant change of diet or
attitude towards life, bargaining may work and the person is healed.
But for most of her patients, all this came too late.
Bargaining is an attempt to avert the crisis, to make amends in
the hope that the situation can be reversed, or to turn back the clock
to before all the trouble happened. We are all familiar with this in Breaking Down to Break Through 19 · children. For instance, what if a fourteen-year-old girl asks permission from her mother to go to the disco that night? The mother is
likely to reply that she is too young,· at fourteen, to go somewhere
like that. In short, mother's answer is a firm 'No'. The young girl
may react first with denial: 'I don't care, I'm going anyway.' Mother
retorts with a chorus of 'over my dead body', swiftly putting an end
to the daughter's attempt at denial. Then the girl gets angry: 'I hate
you. You are the worst mother. You never let me do anything!' Not
influenced in the least by this anger, the mother still says no. Finally,
the girl resorts to bargaining as yet another way of trying to get her
way and to avert the crisis: 'Well if I promise to wash the dishes
every day this week and not to fight with my brother any more and
keep my room clean from now on, then can I go to the disco?'
People who find themselves in the midst of the kind of disruption,
pain or turmoil symbolized by the more difficult transits of Uranus,
Neptune or Pluto, often try the tactic of bargaining. 'Okay, darling, if
I promise from now on to be a faithful and devoted husband and
never sleep around again, will you stop the divorce proceedings?'
They look for ways to get off the hook. If the ploys or reparations
don't work and there is no way the upheaval can be avoided, they
may slip back into the anger or denial phase. Or they move on to a
fourth stage, that of depression.
Kiibler-Ross makes a distinction between two kinds of depression
that a dying person goes through: reactive depression and preparatory
depression. Reactive depression is the first to set in, and will begin to
take hold when patients realize that nothing can be done about their
illness. Their symptoms grow worse, and they become increasingly
weak and debilitated. What they are left with is a sense of loss. A
woman with cervical cancer who has had her uterus removed may
feel that she is no longer a woman. A businessman who has worked
his whole life to prove his worth as a man by providing for his
family, and who has derived much of his sense of identity from his
job, grows sicker, thinner and more helpless and must now forfeit
this 'identity'. Understanding friends and family can help people
through this phase of reactive depression; a woman can be reassured
that she is still attractive and worthwhile even after the loss of her
womb, and she can learn from other people who have gone through 20 The Collaboration with the Inevitable, a similar operation and yet still lead full, meaningful lives. A man
can be reassured that his self-esteem and self-worth are not based
just on how much money he can earn or how well he functions in
the world. Social workers can deal with the immediate problems of
mother being in hospital and away from home, and find ways of
giving assistance to families suffering financial problems as a result
of the breadwinner's illness. Reactive depression, which comes about
as a result of having to deal with the contingencies surrounding
illness, can be helped.
Preparatory depression is quite different: this is the grief people
need to undergo in order to prepare for their death and final separation from the world. Preparatory grief involves mourning the future,
a.deep sadness and regret about all the things the dying person will
now not be able to live to do. The patient is about to lose everything
and everyone. The time has come to mourn the lost future and
grieve for those people the dying person is leaving behind and will
never see again. Trying to make a person feel better about their
bodies, or reassuring them that their children and families are being
looked after in their absence, can help people going through a
reactive depression. But reassurances and encouragements to look
on the bright side of life are not the way to deal with someone in a
preparatory depression. In order to arrive at the possibility of accepting death, the dying person needs to have this depression: they need
this time to be with their grief and deep sense of loss.
The same applies not only to the situation of an imminent physical
death, but also to any crisis in which our old way of life is dying.
Blessed are those that mourn. Grieving is part of a process which
helps to clear away the old so that room can be made for the new. It
prepares us for the next stage of our journey. People having challenging transits of Uranus, Neptune or Pluto, and who are faced with the
disruption of their life as they knew it, need time to mourn what is
passing away.
Finally, after the sadness and the grief, comes acceptance. If dying
patients have enough time and are helped through the previously
mentioned stages, they often arrive at a point where they reconcile
themselves to their imminent death. They have expressed their
anger and feelings of injustice, they have grieved for the past and the Breaking Down to Break Through 2I future, and now they are able quietly to contemplate the inevitability
of their death. This phase is not one of hopeless resignation or a
'what's the use' kind of giving up. Yes, the struggle has been let go
of, but the feeling is more one of quiet acceptance rather than
despair. One of Kiibler-Ross's patients compared this phase to 'the
final rest before a long journey'. It is not necessarily a happy stage,
but it is, on the whole, peaceful. The patient reaches for the doctor's
hand and they sit silently together, listening to the song of a bird
coming from the outside.
Likewise, those of us experiencing the challenges or disruptions of
Uranus, Neptune and Pluto, eventually can reach a stage where we
accept the kinds of crises and changes these planets bring with them
by transit. When this stage has been reached, the writer and psychoanalyst James Hillman would say that our feelings finally have
succeeded in flowing freely into our fate, reconciling us _with an
event - what he also calls 'that union of love with necessity'. 6 The
crisis is accepted, and along with the acceptance, there may, in time,
come the recognition that what we have had to go through has been
a necessary part of our growth and unfoldment. Bitter tears turn
into the salt of wisdom.
Acceptance allows the healing magic to work. I'm not saying that
arriving at this point is simple or happens overnight. It's not always
easy to trust the workings of Uranus, Neptune or Pluto, or to
recognize that pain, breakdown, disruption and change, which feel
more like some sort of curse when they are occurring, have something worthwhile to offer. Pain, conflict and tension are, however,
'transformations trying to happen'. By denying them, we cheat
ourselves of transformation. By accepting them, the process of transformation begins. 7 3
Interpreting Transits: Some Practical Guidelines In actual practice, the entire chart must be examined to assess the
effects of any particular transit to it. For this reason, astrological
'cookbooks' on transits have their inherent limitations. However,
even within these limits, they still can be used as a guide to stimulate
our thinking about the possible expressions of a transit. It is difficult
when writing on this topic not to slip into causal language. For
instance, I might write that Uranus brings disruption or that Nepture
asks us to make adjustments, or that Pluto tears us down in some
way. But I don't believe the planets themselves do things to us, or
make us do anything. Transiting planets don't cause events, but they
do symbolize psychological energies and forces at work in us which
influence what we meet and attract in life. Bearing this in mind,
before we examine specific Uranus transits, we need to establish a
few practical guidelines for assessing and interpreting these and
other outer planet transits. The Question of Orbs
What orbs should we give transiting aspects? Astrologers will advise
differently on this point, but experience has taught me to be generous
with orbs in respect to the transits of Uranus, Neptune, and Pluto. In
the case of a transiting outer planet conjuncting, squaring or opposing a natal planet, we usually start noticing its influence when it is 5
degrees away from the exact transiting aspect - in some cases, even
sooner than that. The stage is being set: if we take the time to attune
to what we are feeling inside, we will be aware of certain rumblings,
22 Interpreting Transits 23 perhaps a growing sense of restlessness, boredom or frustration. Or
we are aware of a desire inside ourselves for change, a need for
something new to happen. Such feelings mark the prelude to the
events which might occur as the transiting aspect becomes more
exact. For a transiting trine or sextile, I would reduce the orb of
influence slightly, to 3 or Júpiter degrees before an exact aspect.
I believe we can prepare for an outer planet transit well before it
becomes exact. For instance, if we know an important Uranus
transit is coming, we can listen to that part of us which wants
change, and begin to explore and experiment with bringing new
things into our life. We don't have to destroy totally existing structures in our lives, but we need to make room for some new elements
to enter. If we anticipate and co-operate with the upcoming transit
in this way, its force when exact will not catch us off guard or
overwhelm us with its intensity. However, if we are not conscious of
the changes that need to be made and are not doing anything to
integrate the new, the transiting aspect will gather greater power as
it approaches exactitude. The end result is that our desire for-change
explodes uncontrollably and expresses itself in an extreme way, or
change is forced upon us via external events and agencies.
Betty Lundsted, in her book Transits: The Time of Your Life uses a
ro degree orb in charting upcoming transits, and her rationale
makes sense:
Transits signify periods of growth. If we wish to use the transit
period for our growing, we need to begin when the seeds of the
transit are planted . . . Many students attempt to interpret a
transit when it is basically over, for they begin to work with it
when the crop is being harvested. The unpleasant crop harvested
from a difficult transit occurs when we haven't been aware of the
effect of a transit soon enough. I use a ten degree applying orb. In
that way the energy can be transformed with knowledge and
understanding. 1
Tracy Marks makes a similar point:
If we don't want the universe to burn down our houses. or destroy our cars or send our spouses or lovers to bed with other people in 24 The Collaboration with the Inevitable
order to get us to pay attention to what is happening, we must
motivate ourselves to actively live our transit; we must attune
ourselves to the energy of the transit as it first approaches, and
discover ways to express that energy constructively. 2 Robert Hand has devised a rather sophisticated system for timing
outer planet transits. In part, it involves watching for inner planet
transits which trigger the outer planet transit. For instance, if you
have transiting Uranus squaring your natal Moon, you will notice
the effects of this transit most clearly when an inner planet, such as
the Sun or Mars, moves into aspect (by transit or progression) with
transiting Uranus or your natal Moon. For a complete explanation of
Hand's method for timing transits, the reader is referred to chapter 2
of Planets in Transit. 3
We will normally continue to feel the influence of an outer planet
transit until it is two or three degrees past the exact aspect in
question. However, judging the passing of a transit is complicated by
the incidence of retrogradation, which we cover next.
Retrogradation
The term retrograde denotes the apparent backward motion of a
planet. The Sun and Moon never appear retrograde, but all the other
planets will move forward or direct, then seemingly pause for a space
of time {in a stationary phase), before moving backwards. After going
backwards for a while, a planet will eventually pause or appear
stationary once more, and then turn direct again.
The direct, stationary, and retrograde movements of Uranus, Neptune or Pluto need to be taken into consideration when interpreting
their transits. When one of these transiting planets makes an exact
aspect to a natal one, we usually register the need to make changes
in relation to the facet of life associated with that natal planet.
However, when the transiting planet stops going direct and moves
backward, our efforts to make alterations or adjustments may be
hindered or blocked - our desire or need to change also may recede
for the time being as well. When it turns around again and begins to
move forward to the exact aspect, the blockage will pass, and the Interpreting Transits 25 changes can occur more readily. When a transiting outer planet
changes direction, it makes what is called a station, and for a while it
hardly appears to be moving at all. If that station is within one
degree of an exact aspect to a planet in the natal chart, we will feel
the effects of the transiting planet very strongly.
The Nature ofthe Transiting Aspect
In discussing the transits of Uranus, Neptune and Pluto to the
planets, I have grouped trines and sextiles together and called them
soft or harmonious transits, and have grouped conjunctions and the
major hard angles - squares and oppositions - into the category of
difficult or stressful transits. I do, however, encourage the reader to
be flexible with these groupings. A transiting Uranus trine to a
planet could, in some instances, activate problematic natal configurations and therefore feel quite stressful. Conversely, some transiting
Uranus conjunctions, squares and oppositions may not be that
difficult to handle - in certain cases they even may be enjoyable,
while transiting trines of Neptune and Pluto can sometimes be as
testing as the transiting conjunction, square or opposition of these
planets.
To judge the effects of a transiting outer planet conjuncting a natal
one, it is necessary to consider how that natal planet is aspected in
the birthchart. If, for example, transiting Uranus conjuncts a natal
Mars squared by Jupiter and opposing Saturn, the transit is likely to
stir a great deal of conflict; but should transiting Uranus conjunct a
natal Mars which is trine Jupiter and sextile natal Uranus, the
transiting conjunction usually will be less stressful.
On an inner psychological level, a transiting square or opposition
from an outer planet are similar. However, we are more likely to
experience the opposition in terms of outside forces which either
coerce us into change, or block our attempts to change. The following
general points are worth noting when interpreting transiting squares
and oppositions made by outer planets.
r The area of experience associated with the planet being transited
is in a process of change or renewal. 26 The Collaboration with the Inevitable The need for change is felt more intensely and often will be
accompanied by more upheaval than in the case of the transiting
trine or iextile.
3 There may be an internal conflict between those parts of us
which require change and another part of us which is resisting
it. In the case of the transiting opposition (and sometimes in the
case of the transiting conjunction and square), the resistance
may appear to come from external agents, but these can be
understood as reflections of our internal uncertainty or ambivalence. The reverse is also true. In the case of the transiting
opposition (and sometimes in the case of the transiting conjunction and square), external contingencies apparently force change
or disruption on us. However, I would argue that these external
factors reflect an inner need to change which we are not aware
of. 2 Although I have not discussed the transiting inconjunct (quincunx), semi-square or sesquiquadrate, I would interpret these along
the lines of the transiting conjunction, square and opposition. Their
effects may not always be felt so strongly or clearly, but they can
have an important influence - especially in the case of the inconjunct. The same applies to the transiting semi-sextile and quintile,
which can be grouped with the transiting trine and sextile.
·The triggering of Natal Aspects
An outer planet transiting in aspect to a natal planet will activate
any natal aspects to that planet. Remember this when using the
cookbook sections of this book. For instance, if you are born with
Mars in 7 degrees of Aries in square to Saturn in 13 degrees of
Cancer, when transiting Uranus comes to square Mars it also will
start to have an effect on Saturn - even though transiting Uranus is
still 6 degrees wide of an exact opposition to Saturn. Transiting
Uranus will bring out the natal Mars-saturn square. In this case,
the interpretation of the Uranus-Mars transit will need to take the
natal Saturn square to Mars into account, as well as the upcoming
influence of transiting Uranus opposing Saturn. Because of Saturn's Interpreting Transits 27 natal connection to Mars, the freeing of assertive energy usually
associated with a Uranus-Mars transit is likely to be more difficult to
deal with and accept. The effects of the transit will last until Uranus
finishes squaring Mars and opposing Saturn.
Midpoint Transits and Transits to Progressions
Outer planet transits to midpoints in the natal chart are important,
and often do coincide with major events and times of cr:isis and
change. If the Sun is natally conjunct the midpoint of Mars and
-Pluto, a planet transiting over the Sun will activate the principles of
Mars and Pluto as well. Midpoints to squares and oppositions in the
chart are particularly influential. When a transiting planet crosses
such a midpoint, the natal square or opposition will be brought to
the fore. Transits occurring at the midpoint of two planets not in
natal aspect also are worth noting. For example, if 5 degrees of Libra
is the midpoint of Venus and Saturn, a planet transiting over that
degree of Libra (whether or not there is a natal planet there) will
stimulate Venus and Saturn. Júpiter Similarly, the impact outer planet transits to progressions have on
our lives should not be underestimated. In the cookbook sections, I
discuss outer planet transits to natal planets, although there is no
reason why these interpretations cannot be used to amplify the
significance of outer planet transits to progressed planets as well.
Transits and Houses
Uranus, Neptune or Pluto transiting through a house signifies
change, disruption, breakthrough and crisis in relation to the affairs
of that house. An outer planet spends many years moving through a
house, but this doesn't mean we will be experiencing dramatic shifts
and upheaval for the entire period it is there. Besides having an
obvious effect when it crosses into a house, its influence will be most
apparent when it conjuncts a planet in that house, forms a transiting
aspect from that house to any other planet in the chart, or when
another transiting planet in the heaven aspects it. In the case of the
transiting outer planet aspecting a natal planet, the house (or houses) 28 The Collaboration with the Inevitable which the natal planet rules in the chart will be affected. For
instance, if transiting Uranus opposes Saturn, the house (or houses)
with Capricorn on the cusp or contained within it, will be involved
in the kinds of issues raised by the transit. Obviously, the house
transiting Uranus is passing through, and the house Saturn is in, are
also essential to consider. I do not always repeat these general
guidel.i.lles in the sections of this book dealing with the specific
transits of Uranus, Neptune and Pluto, so please bear them in mind. PART TWO Uranus Transits Júpiter Uranian Crises
Where are you making for? It takes
So many thousand years to wake,
But will you wake for pity's sake?
CHRISTOPHER FRY It seems as if ideas choose the time when they're going to be born.
The French astronomer Pierre Lemonnier (1715-99) had sighted
Uranus on at least 12 different occasions, and yet he never suspected
that this tiny flickering light could be a planet. Perhaps he found it impossible to conceive that the neat arrangement of the solar system,
with its seven heavenly bodies revolving around the Sun, could be
any other way. Little did he know that disrupting existing systems
was exactly what Uranus would come to symbolize. The actual
discovery of Uranus is attributed to William Herschel (1738-1822),
who reported his findings to the Royal Society of Astronomers on 26
April 1781. How fitting for Uranus -the planet associated with
eccentricity and surprise - that its discoverer was not at the time a
professional astronomer, but a musician who had taken up stargazing as a hobby.
Uranus is twice as far from the Sun as Saturn, and its recognition
as a planet doubled the size of the solar system in one go. The
existence of Uranus also accounted for certain inexplicable eccentricities in the orbits of the known planets, a mystery that had
been bothering astronomers for some time. Right from the start,
Uranus was a rule-breaker, with little regard for the traditional
cosmological scheme. And, as synchronicity would have it, Uranus
timed its entrance with flair, to coincide with three major social
revolutions also intent on disrupting the established order of things.
In the American and French revolutions, those oppressed rose up to
challenge the status quo and existing authority. And along with
Uranus came the advent of the Industrial Revolution: the emergence
ji 32 Uranus Transits of major new breakthroughs in science, technology and communication, which would drastically change the pattern of life on earth.
On a personal level, a Uranus transit is associated with change
and disruption, and a phase in our lives when something new something 'eccentric'- needs to break through into conscious awareness. It's a time to be curious and experimentative, a period when
new things can be tried, and there are risks to be taken. Sometimes
we consciously choose to make these changes; at other times they
seem to be forced on us by external events. In any case, Uranus is
intent on putting us in touch with unexplored parts of our nature.
Where, for the sake of safety or security, we have become set in our
ways, Uranus signals that we are ready to break out of routines and
patterns which are too rigid or limiting. Uranus, whether we like it
or not, is the dlarm which jolts us out of our sleep and wakes us up
to a new day. Some people leap out of bed eager to embark on what's
ahead; others pull the covers back over their heads and just don't
want to know.
Uranus in Mythology
Not a great deal is written about Ouranus in mythology, but the
main myth concerning this 'deity helps to clarify the workings of
Uranus by transit. For the Greeks, Ouranus played a key role in the
saga of creation. In the beginning there was Chaos, out of which
came Gaia or Mother Earth. Gaia then gave birth to Ouranus, and
although he was her son, he also became her mate and lover. Gaia
had control over the earth, while Ouranus, the first sky-god, ruled
the starry heavens and vast limitless space. Already we can see that
Ouranus was not an eart~ Netuno principle: he was married to one, but he
himself was associated with the airy realm of visions and ideals, not
with the mundane practicalities of everyday existence. Every night
the starry heavens (Ouranus) came to lie on the earth (Gaia), and as
a result, they produced a rather odd assortment of children. First
there were the Titans, a race of giants believed to be the progenitors
of the human race. Then there came the Cyclopses and various
other monsters, some with a hundred arms and fifty heads.
Ouranus was not pleased with the children he produced, finding Uranian Crises 33 them ugly, gross and deformed~ not at all what he had hoped for his
offspring. Rather than allow them to exist, he pushed each one back
into Gaia's womb, a poetic way of saying that he banished them to
the underworld of the unconscious and disallowed them expressive
life (something we all do with parts of ourselves we dislike).
In his mind, Ouranus had an ideal vision or picture of what his
children should be like; but once they came into being, they didn't
live up to his expectations. Similarly, when people born with a
strong Uranian element in their chart try to turn a vision into a
concrete reality, they're often disappointed with the result. They
might have an image, for instance, of what their ideal relationship
would be like, but when they manage to establish a union, the
reality falls far short of their hopes. Somehow the relationship doesn't
match the concept they had in their minds, so they destroy it and try
again in a continual search for one that meets their ideal. Or the
Uranian person might conceive of a perfect political system which,
when put into practice, none the less lets them down, so they
abandon that one and turn to another. Strongly Uranian types leave
a wake of half-finished projects behind them, and a parallel situation
sometimes occurs wherever Uranus is transiting in our charts: we
grow discontented or restless with the affairs of the house or sphere
oflife affected by Uranus. We want to disrupt or revamp that area of
our existence, and we will be tempted by anything that comes along
promising something better than what we have already.
Mother Earth, not surprisingly, wasn't overjoyed when Ouranus
kept forcing their children back into her womb, and retaliated by
forming sickle out of steel and imploring one of her offspring to
castrate their father. Her youngest, Cronus or Saturn, already exhibiting his characteristic sense of responsibility, volunteered for the task.
Ouranus descended as usual that night, and just as he was about to
lie on Gaia, Cronus cut off his father's phallus, and threw it into the
sea.
As Cronus castrated Ouranus, so astrologically does Saturn cut off
the creative impulse and potency of Uranus. This image encapsulates
a basic war that exists in all our psyches: a Saturnian urge for
maintenance and preservation conflicts with our Uranian urge for a 34 Uranus Transits disruption, variety and change. One part of us prefers to keep things·
as they are (the principle of homoeostasis) while another part wants
new growth and development. Saturn builds, conserves, and
honours what is known and tried; Uranus, in the name of progress,
wants to tear down and make room for something new. The Saturn/Uranus Dilemma
A myth is something which never happened but is always happening. Psychologically, Saturn castrates Uranus every time forces of
resistance (sometimes external, sometimes internal, and sometimes
both) inhibit our taking some new action or direction. We could
block Uranus for a whole range of reasons. It might be a sense of
duty, commitment and responsibility which keeps Uranus at bay; or
it could be a basic need for security coupled with a fear of the
unknown which overrules any disruptive inclinations. Paying
homage to Saturn, we stop and stay put, but the Uranian need for
change is still there, hiding underground.
The consequences of Cronus castrating Ouranus are clearly portrayed in the myth. Some of the blood from the dismembered phallus
fell on to the ground (Gaia's womb) and gave birth to the Furies,
whose names translate into envious anger, retaliation and neverendingness. If we block or repress the changes called for by Uranus,
the Furies are born inside us. Outwardly we keep the lid on things,
but inside we boil with resentment towards those we feel are holding
us back - we seethe with envy towards those who are free to
progress while we remain stuck. And, whether we know it or not,
we are probably angry with ourselves as well. Uranus demands that
we take some action, but in not allowing this to happen, the energy
which would have been used to make changes in our lives now has
nowhere to go. It turns back on itself, attacking the body in the guise
of illness. Or it dangerously festers in the psyche until it erupts,
sometimes in the form of a nervous breakdown. Or so much of our
energy is used to keep Uranus down that we have very little left over
with which to live life. No wonder we end up tired, apathetic and
depressed. Transits of Uranus are not usually associated with depression, sickness or fatigue; but should such states occur under Uranian Crises 35 major Uranus transits, they are signs that some needed movement
or expression is being blocked.
However, let's say we do decide to obey our Uranian impulses,
and disrupt existing structures in our lives for the sake of something
new. In other words, what happens if Saturn is not totally successful
at the job? He takes a swipe at Uranus and misses; perhaps a few
drops of blood are spilled, but Uranus remains intact, proceeding
happily on his way. Now Uranus is still in one piece, but it is Saturn
who is angry. If, in true Uranian spirit, we challenge the status quo
or established order of thihgs, we may find that the Furies are hurled
at us by those who are threatened by our 'rebellious' actions. We
have taken the step and carried out our Uranian urges, so its energy
is not left to fester within. The Furies are not born inside us, but
instead come at us from the outside.
Such a reversal is not uncommon in cases such as the break-up of
a relationship. I did the chart for a womari who had been in a
relationship with a man for a number of years, but as Uranus inched
its way closer to her Venus, she became increasingly discontented.
Both in obvious and in subtle ways, her partner made her feel
inadequate, and at the same time wouldn't support any of her
attempts at self-development. He objected to her attending evening
classes in astrology, through which she hoped not only to discover
more about herself but also to learn skills she could ultimately use in
a professional capacity. Even when Uranus went over her Venus and
then moved backwards again on to it, she kept her anger towards
him in check, although she admitted to a growing frustration with
the relationship. The Furies were building up inside her. She tried to
discuss the problem with him, and he would at first make some
small efforts to change his attitude, but eventually slip back into his
old patterns. When Uranus turned direct and was coming to pass
over her Venus for the third time, she could no longer tolerate the
limitations of their relationship, and finally moved out of the flat
they shared.
Her immediate reaction was one of relief. She felt a little sad about
the ending of the relationship, but with all the new possibilities
opening before her, she had few regrets. Her life felt so exciting now;
she was sure she had done the right thing. It was her boyfriend who 36 Uranus Transits suffered: he was furious with her. The Furies no longer seethed
inside her, but for weeks and months after she had left, the Furies
badgered her through the post and taunted her over the phone in
the form of angry and threatening letters and calls from the man she
had left behind. It is obvious from this story that the Furies are as
alive and well as they were in ancient Greece, and are kept incredibly
busy not only in divorce courts around the world, but also in various
government offices where they are set in motion against dissenters
and rebels who threaten the state.
Families, too, form systems or structures which organize and
determine how its members interact. Unwritten rules and repeated
transactions create patterns and boundaries regulating what kind of
behaviour is allowed in the family - who can do or say what to
whom. Should one family member begin to act in ways that threaten
the maintenance of the established system, the Furies are likely to be
released on that person. This was the case of a young man I
counselled on a weekly basis for a number of years. Originally it was
his mother who brought him along. She desperately wanted him to
train as an accountant, which had been her late father's profession.
The boy in question, however, had the Sun in Pisces in the fifth
house and the Moon in Leo in the tenth, and showed no interest in
maths or business. He dreamed of being an actor. His mother hoped
therapy would 'straighten him out', that ·through it he would be
brought to his senses, stop being so impractical, and agree to follow her wishes. As our work together progressed, transiting Uranus
passed over his Scorpio ascendant, and then moved into Sagittarius,
squaring his Sun in the early degrees of Pisces and trining his Moon
in Leo. Rather than adjusting himself to her will, he became increasingly determined to pursue his acting ambitions.
Gradually his mother realized things weren't going the way she
had planned. She and the rest of the household (which included an
aunt and an older sister) colluded in an expertly choreographed
attempt to unleash the Furies on him, and to sabotage his sessions
with me. The family system did not allow room for his own individuality; and they were all reaping dubious psychological benefits
from keeping him in his place. About three-quarters of an hour
before our scheduled appointment time, his mother, aunt, or sister Uranian Crises 37 would present him with some urgent task they needed done immediately, designed to ensure his not being able to get to our meeting on
time, if at all. 'You must run to the chemist and pick up this
prescription for me right now,' or 'You have to go and collect your
nephew from school.' Transiting Uranus was squaring his Sun and
part of him desperately wanted to free himself from the bondage of
his family. The more he listened to his urges to change and grow
into a person in his own right, the more the family contrived ways to
keep him within the boundaries of the existing family structure. He
was caught in a vice between Uranus and the Furies. If he didn't
follow his own Uranian need to break out and pursue the path he
wanted to follow, the Furies seethed inside him. He became increasingly depressed and angry. But whenever he tried to asserthis
individuality, the Furies were direct~d at him by his family, who
quickly gathered forces and closed ranks around him. In the end
Uranus won out, and he enrolled in drama school.
The Birth ofVenus Fortunately, the Furies are not the only things born out of the
conflict between Uranus (change) and Saturn (the desire to maintain
or preserve). Accqrding to the myth, Cronus throws Ouranus' dismembered phallus into the sea, where it merges with the foam and
gives birth to Aphrodite or Venus. What does this mean?
This part of the myth suggests that Venus- the principle of love,
beauty, harmony, diplomacy and balance- can be born from the
tension between Saturnian forces of homoeostasis and Uranian forces
of disruption and change. The birth of Venus indicates the possibility
of presenting new ideas and alternatives in a way that is tactful and
diplomatic, and will not be so threatening to the existing order of
things. Unrestrained, the Uranian tendency is to do away with
Saturn altogether, or to smash it to pieces. Saturn's response to this
attack is to dig his heels in and do everything possible to suppress
any change. However, if Uranus evolves a more Venusian style, it
may be possible to coax Saturn into a stance of greater flexibility.
Tempered by Venus, Uranus could plead his case: 'Let's keep the best
of the old, but make room in it for something new.' Or, 'I've been 38 Uranus Transits around for a while, Saturn, and have been observing your way of
doing things; a lot of what you do makes sense, but I've been
thinking that maybe we should try altering certain things slightly to
see if they wouldn't work better in a new way.' Helped by Venus,
Uranus could more gently and thoughtfully prepare Saturn for
something new.
For example, let's say that we are in work which we don't like.
Rather than just quitting the job and leaving ourselves without
anything, we could hold on to the job but use our free time to study
or train at something else. If possible, we might be able to cut down
on the number of hours we are working at our present employment
in order to create more time to pursue our new interests. Eventually,
we could progress far enough along with the new study or training
to find some work in that line. In this way, we have gradually made
room within the old for something new to happen. We have made
the transition from Saturn to Uranus, but in a diplomatic, Venusian
fashion.
Or let's say that we have just begun a new job. We come in and
see all sorts of aspects of the work that could be improved. The
chances are, however, that if we rush up to our boss with a list of all
the things we're sure should be changed, he or she will look at us
and think, 'Who is this upstart? You've been here a week and you
think you know it all!' In other words, if we challenge the existing
authority too quickly, it normally resists our efforts. However, if we
keep our view under our hat for a while and first concentrate on
establishing ourselves in the work and proving we can do it by the
old rules, we will be in a better position later to voice our opinions
and ideas for change. In this way we establish some credibility, and
there is a greater chance those in authority will respect some of the
changes we would like to see implemented.
If diplomacy and tact should fail and the existing system refuses to
give, we may have no alternative other than to challenge the status
quo directly and face the consequences. Sometimes we may have no
choice but to disrupt facets of our lives in order to get back on a path
which is more right or true for us. In addition to her role as the
goddess of love and beauty, Venus also served as a redresser of
imbalance or injustice. If we are involved in a relationship, for Uranian Crises 39 instance, which blocks our growing into what we could become, we
may have to disrupt or abandon that partnership in the name of
bringing our life more in line with what the core Self has in mind for
us. In this way, through conflict and turmoil, we remove an aspect
of our existence which is not in accord with the deeper truth of our
nature.
Choice or Coercion
If, under a Uranus transit, we are involved in something we have
outgrown or which is incongruous with what the deeper Self feels
we need, and if we are not altering this situation, disruption may be
forced on us by external events and contingencies. In other words,
we will meet the effects of a Uranus transit by choice or by coercion.
When a job or relationship we are in is blocking our evolution or
some further growth which the core Self requires of us, but we are
avoiding making any changes or facing what needs to be done, the
Self somehow will organize circumstances which compel us to
change. The other person in the relationship might walk out, or we
may find ourselves made redundant and forced to reconsider our
work. When this happens, our first reaction may be to blame other
people for what has happened to us. It may be true that our partner
turned out to be disloyal or that our boss treated us unfairly; and
yet, when viewed in terms of the core Selfs intention to awaken us
to new ways of being, we can find meaning and relevance in these
apparently unfortunate events.
I tried to make this point to a French woman who came for a
reading a number of years ago. She had a funnel-shaped chart with
Saturn in Aquarius as the handle. Saturn, a singleton by hemisphere,
also squared her Sun-Venus conjunction in Taurus. Altogether she
had six planets in earth. Usually, the people who have the most
difficulty with Uranus transits are those with an emphasis on earth
in their charts or those with a prominent Saturn. Saturn and earth
placements show the need for order, consolidation, security and
structure, and a strong desire to maintain and preserve the status
quo. Earthy types are more likely to deny or resist their own Uranian
urges to make changes in their lives. Frightened of the unknown, 40 Uranus Transits they don't enjoy taking risks, even if it offers the possibility of finding
something better than they have already. They don't have the same
faith in life which fiery people possess, the conviction that, come
what may, life will somehow look after them. This woman was no
exception to the rule.
At the time of our meeting, I didn't need a chart to tell me that she
was distressed. She had been married to her husband for 25 years,
and he had suddenly run off with a younger woman. The transits of
Uranus for that year (I978) revealed the whole story. Moving
slowly through the middle of Scorpio, Uranus had been stationary in
a close opposition to her Sun in I3° of Taurus (the Sun is often
associated with males in a woman's chart). When Uranus finally
moved forward, it immediately squared her Saturn in I 5 Aquarius
and opposed her Venus in I 7 Taurus. Poor woman, I thought,
Uranus bringing all this upheaval into her life. And that horrible ·
husband to do such a thing after all those years of marriage.
However, as we discussed her situation, additional factors came to
light. Yes, she had been a faithful wife for so many years, but she
confessed that for most of the time she had detested the marriage. It
was a marriage in name only, 'a loveless match', to use her words.
She was honest enough to admit maintaining the marriage out of a
sense of duty, and also because of her fear of losing the security it
offered. She dreaded the unknown, and was terrified of loneliness.
Who would she be if she wasn't this man's wife? What else could she
do? So she stayed with it. That is, until Uranus transiting through
Scorpio disrupted the marriage for her.
She had been unwilling to rectify the lie of her marriage, but by
the time Uranus reached mid-Scorpio, it was not prepared to let the
masquerade go on any longer. Uranus can't tolerate non-truth, and
when it finally came to oppose her Sun and Venus and square her
Saturn, her husband was the one to act on its urge to disrupt the
old, false and outworn. In denying her own Uranian impulses and
refusing to abandon her unfulfilled marriage, she had helped to
create a situation in which external forces had to do the job for her.
In other words, she was forced to come to terms with Uranus, not by
choice, but by coercion.
If you were in a job you couldn't stand and wanted to leave, but Uranian Crises 41 were afraid to take that step, your frustration with the work could
surface in various forms. You might repeatedly turn up late or find
reasons to be nasty to the boss. It will be only a matter of time before
your employer won't be able to tolerate your misdemeanours any
longer, and lo and behold you are fired. And then you think: 'Look
what that so-and-so did to me', when in actual fact you have
unconsciously provoked your boss to do something which you could
not bring yourself to do- namely, change your situation. I couldn't
help speculating that something similar had occurred in the case of
this woman's marriage. Her underlying unhappiness, her dislike of
her husband and their relationship, must have been manifested in a
hundred different ways, despite her attempts to be the dutiful wife
and make everything look all right. In the end, he acted out something she couldn't bring herself to do. Astrologically, all this
happened under a transiting Uranus opposition - it looked as if
Uranus were coming at her from the outside, but really she had just
met her own denied Uranian urges through the agency of another
person.
I tried to explain some of this way of thinking to her, but she
couldn't hear it. Still too caught up in the anger phase of crisis, she
wasn't ready to see that all those years of suppressing her own desire
to end the relationship had a connection with her husband's leaving.
Rather than understanding the dissolution of the marriage as a
release from a bad situation and as the possibility for her life to open
up to new or better relationships, she spent most of the session
complaining about her husband ('How could he do such a thing to
me?'), and sharing with me the most elaborate schemes of how she
would take her revenge and make life miserable for him. It became
obvious that what she needed most at that point in time was simply
the space to moan and complain. Later in the session, I attempted to
discuss with her what she might do with her life now, ways she
could find her own sense of self-worth and security independently of
the marriage. Despite some glimmers of emerging from the crisis
reborn, she was still too eaten up with rage (the Furies produced by
her castration of Uranus all those years) to be receptive to very
much of my explanations or suggestions. She couldn't see how the
break-up of the bad marriage ultimately could help to make her life 42 Uranus Transits more harmonious or truthful. Aphrodite had not yet risen out of the
foam. Prometheus and the Uranian Backlash
If we repress Uranian urges within ourselves, the Furies are born
inside us. However, if we act on our Uranian urges, there is a good
chance that those we are threatening or disrupting will unleash the
Furies at us. One way or another, we have to pay the consequences.
Even if we're sure we have done the right and noble thing, challenging the existing authority invites guilt and punishment. The story of
Prometheus illustrates this point.
Prometheus was one of the Titans, whose name meant foresight,
the ability to see before an event. When Zeus was engaged in battle
against the Titans, Prometheus foresaw him as the victor, and
decided to side with Zeus against his own race. In the beginning, he
and Zeus were firm allies, and they performed various favours for
one another. Prometheus assisted at the birth of Athene, who was
born from the head of Zeus; Athene, in return, offered to teach
Prometheus astronomy, mathematics, medicine, architecture and
other valuable subjects. As a result, Prometheus grew very wise.
But trouble was brewing. As time passed, Prometheus became
increasingly agitated at the injustice he perceived around him: why
should the gods have had a monopoly on knowledge and all the
good things in life? In an effort to improve the condition of ordinary
mortals, he passed on his learning to the race of humans. Zeus,
angered by Prometheus' attempt to make the gods and humans
more equal, punished these transgressions by denying humans the
gift of fire, at which point Prometheus, a rebel with a cause, stole fire
from the gods on Olympus and offered it to humankind. Zeus retaliated by having Prometheus chained to a rock on Mount Caucus,
where a vulture came every day to eat and tear at his liver.
Prometheus represents the Uranian urge in all of us to progress
and advance, to change our existing situation for the sake of something better~ Prometheus stands for that part of us which wants to
rise above our animal origins and purely instinctive natures, and
become something more than we already are. Zeus, in this story, Uranian Crises 43 symbolizes that part of the psyche which resists change, and which
exacts a price for our growth and development. Zeus doesn't want
his secrets and privileges given away, and punishes Prometheus for
trying to do so.
This dynamic applies to Uranus transits as well. Under a Uranus
transit, we may have a breakthrough in our awareness, a revelation
which changes the way we view ourselves or our life. However, the
immediate results of that revelation are not always pleasant: for
example, if you have always thought of yourself as kind and caring,
you could suddenly realize that beneath your positive disposition
you actually feel envious and resentful towards close friends who
seem happier or more successful than you are. The realization that
you are not the nice person you thought you were can come as a
disturbing shock, a kind of punishment for the awareness you have
gained.
Or you may suddenly see clearly how a hitherto unconscious
negative image you have had of yourself has hindered your enjoyment of life. You realize that for many years you have been walking
around with an unconscious belief that you are inferior to others,
and may now have to confront the pointless self-denial and missed
opportunities, the wasted years, as a result; or the many times your
low self-esteem interfered with or compromised your development.
Undeniably, becoming conscious of your negative self-image is a
good thing, since this awareness ultimately enables you to change
destructive patterns. But what about the fact that, had you come to
this insight sooner, your life might have been much happier and
more successful all along? Even a joyous breakthrough to a new
level of awareness may be accompanied by remorse, shame, guilt or
embarrassment about the way we have been before. Change has its
costs.
Whether or not others attack us for Uranian changes we make in
our lives, we still have to deal with our own inner guilt, and with
that part of us which expects to be punished for breaking with
established patterns. A woman came to me for a reading when
transiting Uranus was crossing her seventh house cusp. She decided
to end her present relationship for the sake of starting one with
another person she had recently met. Even though she was quite 44 Uranus Transits certain that this was the right action to take, she still felt guilty
about what she was doing, and expected to suffer in some way as a
result. She was worried that the man she was abandoning would
have a breakdown, become ill or even commit suicide because of her
actions. She imagined that the new relationship would not work,
and in the end she would be left totally on her own.
Sometimes our guilt and fear of punishment are unconscious -we
are not even aware that we expect reprisals. Unfortunately, whatever
we are unaware of has a way of sneaking up on us. Without
realizing what we are doing, we unwittingly set up or attract what
we unconsciously anticipate. For instance, if you disrupt an existing
relationship for a new one, your own unconscious belief that you
should suffer for what you have done can contribute to your acting
in ways which endanger the new relationship. However, if you are
conscious of that part of you which expects retribution for your
Uranian transgressions against the established order, then you can
keep an eye on yourself. You can examine and explore the guilt or
shame you feel. You can watch more closely to see that you are not
unconsciously setting yourself up to be punished for your Uranian
actions. The Divine Mind
We all have a core Self which guides, regulates, and oversees our
development. The Self sets up the kinds of situations and circumstances
we need for our growth and unfoldment, but most of the time we are
unconscious of this part of us. It does its job without our necessarily
knowing what it is up to. However, under a Uranus transit, it is
possible to glimpse the workings of the Self. A veil is lifted and a bigger
picture. of our life comes into view. With this perspective, we catch
sight of the true meaning behind what is happening in our lives at any
time, and the direction in which the Self intends for us to go. A Uranian
vision clarifies what steps we need to take, or what action we need to
perform in order to co-operate with what the core Self has in mind for
us. Even in the midst of crises and difficulties, if Uranus is involved by
transit, we are often better able to understand why we are attracting
such occurrences and what these are meant to show or teach us. Uranian Crises 45 For example, a man came to me for a reading when transiting
Uranus was conjuncting his Jupiter in the tenth house of career. The
company he was working for had just gone bankrupt, and he was
made redundant. And yet he clearly felt that his redundancy was
serving a definite purpose: he hadn't been very happy or fulfilled by
his job, and now he was forced to face this situation and look for
work which would be more in line with what he wanted. He was
experiencing the disruption often associated with Uranus, but at the
same time he could understand why it had to happen. Similarly, an
actor came for a reading when transiting Uranus in the eighth was
squaring his fifth house Sun. Previously he had enjoyed many years
of success and regular employment, but his 'luck' seemed to change
under this transit. He just couldn't land any acting work. However,
rather than sinking into a bitter depression, he told me that he knew
why this was happening to him. He had always wanted to try his
hand at writing, and this reversal of fortune gave him the opportunity to do so. Like the man who had been made redundant, the
actor was going through what many would call a rough patch, and
yet he was able to perceive these difficulties as serving some greater
purpose. By contrast, when we are undergoing crises which primarily correspond to the transits of Neptune or Pluto, we may
experience more difficulty perceiving the relevance or purpose of
what we are having to face.
Not only do we have a deeper or core Self which regulates our
development, but many astrologers and philosophers believe that
the entire cosmos also unfolds according to a certain grand plan or
design. In other words, there exists a higher organizing centre of
creative intelligence which guides and oversees the evolution of all
life. Along these lines, Dane Rudhyar equated Uranus with 'the
power of the universal mind'. By transit, Uranus sometimes connects
our awareness to-the workings of this higher intelligence, enabling
us to glimpse its purpose and intentions, and giving us insight into
what some call the mind of God. Under the influence of Uranus, we
think we know the Truth with a capital 'T'. Accordingly, we may
undertake actions which we believe are in line with the will of God
or the will of the cosmos. We feel that it's not just our personal will
that insists we follow a particular path or plan: it is God's will which 46 Uranus Transits demands we act in a certain way. Or as Rudhyar states, 'the transfigured individual has become a focal center for the release of the
power of the Universal Mind'. 1
Obviously, in some cases the belief that we are acting on behalf of
some all-knowing higher authority contributes to arrogance, hubris
and ego-inflation at the very least, and psychotic behaviour at the
very worst. History records numerous atrocities and injustices perpetrated by blindly self-righteous individuals and nations claiming to
be the agents of divine will. None the less, we shouldn't dismiss
altogether the concept of a universal mind. Mystics and mentors
from a diversity of civilizations and epochs have repeatedly claimed
the existence of a higher unifying element which pervades all life.
And, as recent research shows, many scientists wouldn't argue with
this point. The twentieth-century physicist Fritjof Capra (an Aquarius born with Uranus in Taurus in the twelfth conjunct the Ascendant) has this to say about the interconnectivity of all life:
modem physics· reveals the basic oneness of the universe. It
shows that we cannot decompose the world into independently
existing smallest units. As we penetrate into matter, nature does
not show us any isolated basic building blocks, but rather appears
as a complicated web of relations between the various parts of a
unified whole. As Heisenberg expresses it, 'The world thus appears
as a complicated tissue of events, in which connections of different
kinds alternate or overlap or combine and thereby determine the
texture of the whole.' 2
Capra's statement gives credence to the mystical concept of a universal mind which links the entire universe together in a complex
network of relationship. Nothing can be understood in isolation, but
only by its relationship to other things. On some deep level we are all
connected to one another; the minds and beings of everything in
existence are inextricably interwoven.
If our minds are linked together, it is not hard to appreciate an
idea put forth by the Jesuit priest and philosopher Pierre Teilhard de
Chardin: 'A truth once seen, even by a single mind, always ends up
Imposing itself on the totality of human consciousness.' 3 Rupert
Sheldrake, a British scientist, proposes something quite similar. Uranian Crises 47 He believes there are invisible organizing fields (what he calls
'morphogenetic fields') which connect members of a species to one
another. Whenever one member of a species learns something, the
morphogenetic field for that species changes, making it possible
for others of that class to follow suit- Júpiter Again, we arrive at the
concept of a group mind.
Uranus transits can activate our ability to connect with and
understand the workings of the universal mind, allowing us to
glimpse its intention and direction. When this happens, we may.
become the channel or agency through which some new idea or
trend circulating in the collective psyche can manifest. Obviously,
not everyone will be affected by Uranus in this way, but my case IDes
show a number of people who, while under a significant transit of
this type, have served as mediums through which new ideas are
disseminated. Two examples immediately come to mind. One is a
ffim director born with Venus in Libra trine Uranus in Gemini.
Transiting Uranus came to oppose his natal Uranus, and he began to
experiment with new techniques in music videos. Not only did he
win acclaim for his technical ingenuity, but he initiated a whole new
trend in this medium. Another example is that of a woman born
with Mercury conjunct Mars in Pisces squaring natal Uranus in
Gemini. When transiting Uranus in Sagittarius squared her
Mercury-Mars conjunction, she introduced certain new concepts into
the educational establishment which have since been taken up and
developed on a large scale.
Whether or not we believe in the concept of a universal mind or
group mind, there is no doubt that Uranus transits often stimulate
greater political consciousness. Certain individuals under important
Uranus transits envisage new systems or concepts which they believe
will alter or improve the existing order of things; or they find causes
and ideals to promote which challenge rigid and obsolete structures
in society. In this way, Uranus instigates not just personal or internal
growth and change, but also evolution on a social scale.
Having established some guidelines for interpreting Uranus transits, we can now look more closely at specific transits of Uranus to the
planets and through the houses. 5 The Transits of Uranus to the Planets and
Through the Houses Uranus-Sun
In itself, the transiting trine or sextile of Uranus to the Sun usually is not felt as an especially overpowering transit. None the less, it does
suggest a time when we are in accord with our own inner need to
develop and expand the self in ways we haven't done before. There is
a part of us which is in the mood to open up, explore and experiment
with life, and we can take advantage of harmonious Uranus-Sun
transits by following these urges. Opportunities to change could
come through people we meet, a new job, or a new course of study.
Transiting Uranus' house, the house the Sun is in, and the house
with Leo on the cusp or contained within it, will be the areas
through which expansion is possible. As with any Uranus-Sun
transit, some of the existing structures in our life may have to go in
order to make room for new things. How much disruption this
entails depends to a large degree on how our natal Sun was aspected
at birth. Provided the Sun doesn't have too many stressful natal
aspects to Saturn or the outer planets, the process of integrating
change in our lives under harmonious Uranus-Sun transits
shouldn't be too difficult.
However, transiting Uranus conjuncting, squaring or opposing
the Sun often brings more upheaval. If we are the kind of person
who enjoys the excitement of change, these transits will be easier to
handle. But if we fear the unknown or untried - if we would do
everything possible to maintain an existing situation even if we are
unhappy with it - then the hard transits of Uranus to the Sun will
not feel very comfortable. To the Planets and Through the Houses 49 Feelings of restlessness usually accompany these transits. We
might feel bored or trapped by circumstances in our life. We may
want to blame others for our dissatisfaction: 'If my husband/wife/
boss/parents were different, then I wouldn't feel this way.' To some
extent this might be true, but it is not necessarily the people around
us who have to change, but ourselves. We need to pay attention to
that part of us which is restless and dissatisfied, and make room in
our lives for new things to happen. The core Self wants us to change
at this time, and if we deny these inclinations, we are more likely to
attract disruption from the outside which forces us into it. Or,
because we are using so much of our energy to hold back that part
of us which needs to make some changes, we could end up feeling
tired, ill or depressed. Difficult Uranus-Sun transits do not require
overthrowing every structure in our lives, but we will probably have
to make some important adjustments or alterations in order to
respect the new growth these transits signal. Again, the house
placements involved will provide clues to the areas of our life in
which this needs to happen.
The Sun is also a symbol of father, and Uranus-Sun transits
sometimes indicate changes in our relationship with him. Again,
much depends on how the Sun is aspected natally: if the Sun has
stressful natal aspects, a transiting Uranus trine or sextile can provide
the opportunity for a positive breakthrough with the father. Communications improve, and previous negative patterns of relating
make way for new understanding and openness. However, transiting
Uranus conjunct, square or opposing a difficulty aspected natal Sun
tends to expose the inherent problems between our father and
ourselves. Some of my clients with these transits felt the need to take
a stand against the father, challenging his authority over them or
his expectations of them; the time had come to separate from him,
and to find out who they were in their own right.
Transiting Uranus aspecting the Sun is also symbolic of finding
'the father inside us' - that is, the ability to take charge and direct
our own lives. This is a period when it will be difficult to adapt
easily to what other people want, especially if it is not in line with
what we feel we need for ourselves. Rather than adjusting to
others, we may find ourselves demanding that others adjust to us. so Uranus Transits Uranus-Sun transits awaken us to our own power, and this could
manifest itself in fights with authority figures, and our standing
up to people whom we previously allowed control and influence
over us.
If a woman has not already contacted her own power or developed her assertive side, this is the time to do so. Besides using
this transit to strengthen her own identity and expression, she
also may experience its effects through the men she knows or
meets during this period. For instance, she might encounter a man
with Uranus strong in his natal chart, or someone who is undergoing a major Uranus transit himself. He may be bold and dynamic,
and bring a whole new energy into her life, or a new perspective
on the world. In this way, she imports Uranus into her sphere via
his influence on her. In some cases, a woman may find that a man
she is involved with goes through major changes or disruption when
Uranus is transiting her Sun. As a result of what is )lappening to
him, her own life alters.
Regardless of gender, under the more difficult transits of Uranus
to the Sun, we may not be the most peaceful person to live with.
We are excitable, 'wired', unpredictable and restless. We want to
remove what we feel is stifling, and break free of the restrictions
of tradition or past conditioning. We are 'buzzing' with new ideas
and ways of looking at life. If we can accept this new influx of
energy, and make necessary changes as diplomatically as possible,
these transits - while not the easiest - signify a major step forward
in self-unfoldment.
Uranus-Moon While the Sun points to how we express our individuality and
power, the Moon is concerned with our emotions and feelings - the
manner in which we instinctively respond or ·react to others. The
Moon also describes something about the conditions of our home
life, anything related to mother or mothering, and our relationship
to women in general. When transiting Uranus comes to make an
aspect with the natal Moon, it is in these areas that Uranus signals
change or disruption. To the Planets and Through the Houses sI With transiting Uranus trine or sextile the Moon, we usually find
it easier to deal with the kinds of changes associated with Uranus,
that is, our feelings may be aroused or heightened, and we are
receptive to new experiences of an emotional nature. Both men and
women have the opportunity during this time to experience a wider
range of emotional responses within themselves. For men, this sometimes happens through meeting a woman who awakens them in
this way. In a woman's chart, the harmonious transits of Uranus to
the Moon indicate a further unfolding of her identity as a woman.
For instance, in a number of cases I have seen, women become
mothers for the first time when Uranus was trining or sextiling their
Moon.
Likewise, if we move home while transiting Uranus is making a
harmonious aspect to our Moon, the change is likely for the better,
even if at first the move seems disruptive and uncomfortable. The
trine or sextile also could manifest as a positive breakthrough in
terms of our relationship to our mother. The ability to understand
one another improves, and we find we can be with her without
feeling invaded or overwhelmed. We are better able to detach and
separate ourselves from her, and therefore see her more clearly.
However, with the difficult transits of Uranus to the Moon, we might
experience problems with mother. If our identity has been too
enmeshed with hers, we now may have to stand up against her in
order to establish a clearer separate identity. Transiting Uranus
conjunct, square or opposing the Moon also could describe a time
when our mother is experiencing a disruption or change in her own
life.
Some young mothers under difficult Uranus-Moon transits could
feel frustrated with the confinements and limitations of mothering,
and they may benefit by seeking outlets through which they can
express other aspects of themselves. For older women, these transits
sometimes correspond to menopausal changes, signifying a time to
explore new ways of expressing the lunar urge to care for or nurture
others. Men with Uranus-Moon transits may attract women of a
Uranian nature who alter their experience or view of life, or they
may be in close contact with a woman who is going through a
major change or self-reappraisal which directly affects their own 52 Uranus Transits lives. Children with Uranus-Moon transits will normally experience
its influence in terms of their relationship with their mother, who
may be having a challenging or disruptive time herself.
With the transiting conjunction, square or opposition of Uranus
to the Moon, we are likely to be experiencing some fairly jarring or
disturbing emotional states. If you have been the kind of person who
never cried easily, you suddenly may find yourself breaking down
and weeping at the slightest provocation. You not only surprise
others, but you surprise yourself with the feelings you have at this
time. Some people with difficult Uranus-Moon transits are so distressed by the kinds of emotions which surface that they fear they're
having a nervous breakdown, or that they are losing all control over
themselves. Feelings previously kept in check erupt into consciousness and shatter the hold they have had on themselves. If transiting
Uranus contacts a difficultly aspected natal Moon, it might be necessary to seek some advice or counselling during this period- someone
with whom we can explore such volatile feelings. For instance, a
woman came to see me with transiting Uranus conjuncting her
Moon, which natally was in square to Pluto. She had recently given
birth to her second child, and found herself suffering from severe
post-natal depression. The natal Moon square Pluto is an aspect
which describes feelings of a dark or intense nature, which transiting
Uranus to the Moon had activated. She felt guilty about the destructive fantasies she was having, both towards herself and the new
baby, but talking through these feelings helped her towards gaining
a greater understanding and objectivity about what she was going
through.
The Moon reveals a great deal about our early experience of
mother and the environment, and when Uranus transits the Moon,
some of these patterns could resurface in the guise of a current
situation. A man came to see me for a reading when transiting
Uranus was bringing out a natal Moon square Saturn aspect in his
chart. He had been brought up by a strict, conventional mother who
didn't find it easy to respond to his emotional needs, and, when
transiting Uranus triggered this aspect, he found himself again in a
relationship with a woman whom he felt didn't understand and
relate to him in the way he needed. Through the present partnership, To the Planets and Through the Houses 53 Uranus exposed the earlier problems which had begun in childhood.
The time had come for him to explore not only his immediate
feelings with his current partner, but also the unresolved emotional
issues he had with his mother.
When Uranus makes a difficult transit to the Moon, we are likely
to feel restless and uneasy in the area or areas of life shown by the
houses involved (the natal Moon's house placement, the house
position of transiting Uranus, and the house with Cancer on the
cusp or contafued within it). We may want to break out of whatever
circumstances we believe are limiting or constricting us. While it is
appropriate to examine our feelings of frustration and discontent, it
may not always be wise to act too quickly on these urges -especially
if our past pattern has been one of readily disrupting the status quo
whenever we feel trapped or ill at ease. Before making any major
changes, we need to take time to examine our desire to run away
from or destroy existing relationships and structures in our life. If
our evolution or growth truly is blocked by the circumstances we
are in, we may have to act on our Uranian urges and break free.
However, we may discover that the external situation isn't really
what is deterring us; we may discover that the block is an internal
one, and that we have projected on to the environment our own
inner fears or apprehensions about moving forward in our lives. We
accuse others of restricting us, when in actual fact we are hesitant
or frightened about developing ourself in new ways. In this case, it
isn't the outer circumstances which are at fault and need to be
altered; it is our inner resistance which has to be faced. Urges to
disrupt the status quo at this time also could arise from a deep
fear of commitment, which in itself is something that deserves
close examination.
We might experience a difficult Uranus-Moon transit through
outer events, apparently out of our control, which shake up our
world or threaten our security. A relationship could suddenly end,
or we may be forced to move homes, or both. Again, even if these
appear to be totally the work of fate, we should take time to assess
whether feelings we have been having prior to this disruption are
connected in any way with what we have attracted into our life. Our
own unacknowledged desires for change, projected outwardly and 54 Uranus Transits coming back to us through an external agency, could have something to do with the upheaval we find happening around us. Should
we examine the situation and still find no relation between these
events and concealed urges in ourselves, it is likely that the core Self
deems the upheaval necessary in order for us to develop certain
qualities which we wouldn't have developed if life had remained the
same.
Uranus-Mercury If we are hoping for a time of mental calm and serenity, transiting Uranus aspecting Mercury is not it; even with transiting Uranus
trine or sextile Mercury, our thinking is meant to change. Our minds
will be more receptive to new ideas coming our way. Learning or
studying new subjects is a good use of these transits. Old modes of
thinking and habitual thought-patterns are replaced by fresh attitudes, insights, and the ability to look at life from a different perspective than before. Intuition works well under this transit and we may
find inspired solutions to certain problems or difficulties which have
stifled or dogged us for a long time. Answers and resolutions 'pop'
into our head in unexpected ways and at unexpected moments.
When Uranus trines or sextiles Mercury, we will benefit from
exploring the city, town or country in which we live. In the process,
we are likely to discover people, places, groups, societies and activities
which stimulate our mind and interest. We may be attracted to
'Uranian' subjects at this time - anything from astrology, metaphysics and ecological concerns to science and computer technology.
We are open to new ideas and trends circulating in the atmosphere,
and could act as a spokesperson to promote and spread these. The
· environment is ready to receive what we have to say, and these are
favourable transits for launching new schemes, proposals or campaigns. If we are involved in writing, or any form of public speaking
or teaching at this time, our mind will be working well, alive with
insights and new ideas.
Transiting Uranus conjunct or in difficult aspect to Mercury is a
period of mental stimulation, but can bring more problems than the
trine or sextile. Our mind could be hyperactive or erratic during this To the Planets and Through the Houses 55 period; we feel nervous and restless, unable to settle easily into any
situation. If we have been placid and well organized, accustomed to
plodding along at a comfortable pace, the difficult transits of Uranus
to Mercury could cause us some concern. Without our normal
mental poise and stability, we feel as if we have lost control of
ourselves: some people even develop twitches, convulsions or nervous ailments under these transits. It will be helpful to find a
constructive outlet for heightened mental energy - something into
which to channel the increased tempo of our mind. A sensible
programme of physical exercise, sports, or yoga could also siphon off
excess mental activity and help us to relax.
Ideas and insights come with such power and force that there is a
danger we will be knocked off-balance by them, and although some
of these ideas may be quite valid, we may also be carried away with
them; caution and restraint is therefore needed, as may be discussing
our thoughts and feelings with someone we trust to help us sort out
what is useful in our way of thinking from what is extreme or
imbalanced. Even so, some of us with these transits may latch on to
and become obsessed by notions and beliefs of an overpowering and
uncontrollable force. We believe we have glimpsed the Truth and
must act on it. Later, after the transit passes, we may look back and
wonder what exactly got into us, what 'possessed' us. Sometimes we
learn only by making 'mistakes'.
Some of our thinking may be of a radical or unconventional
nature. These ideas could be inspired and worthwhile, but it is the
intensity with which they are felt and acted upon that needs to be
examined and sometimes checked. Provided that we proceed with
some caution and common sense, we will be able to fight hard and
well during this period for any cause or principle we believe in.
Our thoughts and how we express them are not meant to stay the
same during these transits. When Uranus trines or sextiles Mercury,
we are ready to receive new ideas; and the environment, in turn, is
generally open to our new insights and ideas. This may not be the
case, however, when transiting Uranus squares, opposes or conjuncts a difficultly aspected natal Mercury: in these instances, other
people or external forces appear determined to challenge or change
what we think or believe at a time when we don't feel ready or able 56 Uranus Transits to make such adjustments. Especially with the opposition, we feel as
if Uranus is comi.p. Vênus at us from the outside, trying to disrupt frameworks and structures in our life. However, if we are attracting this
kind of situation under these transits, it is likely that the core Self is
working through other people and external agencies to shake us up
in some way which is needed for further growth and development.
Conversely, this could be a period when we have many original
insights and intuitions which other people do not understand or
accept. They may find our ideas too controversial, impractical, odd,
or ahead of the times.
Mercury is associated with brothers and sisters and our relationship with relatives in general. When transiting Uranus trines or
sextiles Mercury, a positive change or influence could come to us
through siblings or relatives. A new interest, project or study in
which they have become involved might be something that arouses
or excites us as well. However, when transiting Uranus forms a
difficult aspect to Mercury, arguments, disruptions and partings
could occur. Some form of compromise or adjustment is asked for,
although it may take a while before either side is ready to be more
flexible. If we have been too closely identified with a sibling or
relative at the expense of developing our own thinking and view of
life, a break or struggle with them may be necessary to help us
separate our identity from theirs.
Any contact between transiting Uranus and Mercury indicates a
time when our mind and thinking is more powerful than usual, and
can exert a strong influence both on our self and others. During this
period, we can use our mental powers and imagination constructively by forming positive images rather than negative ones. An
old adage says that energy follows thought. It's true.
Uranus-Venus Transiting Uranus aspecting Venus brings change or disruption in
the area of love, relationships and creativity. Our values could shift:
wl;mt we find beautiful, attractive or desirable is not likely to remain
the same as before. The way in which we express ourselves creatively
also could alter or open up during this period. To the Planets and Through the Houses 57 When transiting Uranus trines or sextiles Venus, these changes
usually occur in a more gentle or flowing fashion. This is a good
time to revitalize existing relationships which have become boring or
repetitive. Break up your old routines, go to new places with your
partner, try things you haven't done before. If we have been too
dependent on someone else, we could use this transit to find out who
we are in our own right, making the time to explore and develop our
own interests and identity separate from the relationship. Whether
we are already attached or not, we might meet another person we
find stimulating and exciting, someone who introduces us to new
ideas and interests, and a new way of looking at life. The new
relationship may be a sexual one, although when Uranus is involved
it's possible to enjoy a meeting of two minds, which does not
necessarily need sexual expression; physical attraction might be there,
but extenuating circumstances could inhibit exploring the relationship on that level.
In my experience, any Uranus-Venus transit favours creative
expression. If we haven't been in touch with our creativity, these
transits mark a good time to explore this side of ourselves. If we are
already involved in some kind of artistic activity, this is a period to
experiment with new techniques, media or avenues of expression.
However, with the hard transits, it's possible that our creative
endeavours may be considered too shocking, extreme, unconventional
or ahead of their time.
The conjunction, square, or opposition of transiting Uranus to
Venus can be just as exciting as the trine or sextile, but they also
tend to be more disruptive, jarring or challenging. If we have been
sitting on feelings of restlessness and frustration within an existing
relationship, and have done little or nothing to improve the situation,
the difficult transits could signify a separation or parting of the ways.
As the transit takes effect, pressure builds up to such a point that we
finally voice or act on our growing frustration. If we don't do
something to change the situation, external circumstances probably
will do the job for us, and it may be our partner who disrupts or ends
the relationship. We tend to associate Uranus with unexpected
events which come out of the blue; and yet I believe that, although
transiting Uranus may correlate with an apparently sudden ending 58 Uranus Transits to a relationship, it is likely there have been unresolved problems
and difficulties brewing under the surface for a number of years
which then manifest themselves in dramatic or decisive actions
when Uranus eventually 'hits' the Venus.
All this sounds messy and unpleasant, and it often is. However, it is
also possible to understand and deal with these transits in a more
constructive and creative way. When frustration comes to the surface
and seriously challenges an existing relationship, Uranus provides
the opportunity to examine what isn't working properly or isn't being
expressed in the present situation, and may act as a spur to explore
other ways of relating which breathe new life into the partnership. If
we or our partner have been living in each other's pocket, Uranus
doesn't necessarily want the relationship to end, but it does ask that
one or both of us establish greater separateness and independence.
Uranus flips us over. If we've been too dependent, it asks we
become more autonomous. However, if our pattern has been to
avoid commitment, depth or fidelity in a relationship, a UranusVenus could mark a time when we discover a need and desire in us
for monogamy. Uranus encourages us to try what we haven't yet
tried, and to learn how to relate to others in new ways.
/Even given the best will and intention, the difficult transits of
Uranus to Venus could mean the end of a relationship. In many
cases I've seen, when endings occur under these transits, one or
both of the parties involved have registered the 'rightness' or necessity of the separation. We deeply sense that the partnership needs to
finish or change in order to open our life in a way which couldn't
...happen if the relationship stayed as it is. We will still need to mourn
what is passing, but Uranus helps the adjustment because it activates
that part of our psyche which can 'see' the necessity of one phase
ending so that another can begin. I did the chart for a couple who
had been together for seven years. The man had transiting Uranus
opposing his natal Venus, and the woman had transiting Uranus
square her natal Venus at the same time. Tension had been building
for a number of years, and the Uranus transit brought their joint
restlessness and frustration to the surface. They had tried various
ways to breathe new life into the relationship and keep it going, but
none of these attempts succeeded. One day in the middle of their To the Planets and Through the Houses 59 respective Uranus transits, they looked at each other and said 'Well,
it's time to part.' The Uranus transit to Venus in both their charts
signified a time when they were able to acknowledge the need to
separate. Neither of them knew where they were going next, and
they were both aware they would have to mourn and grieve for
what they were leaving behind, and yet there were no doubts about
what had to be done.
Of course, it isn't always the case that both parties are under a
Uranus-Venus transit at the same time. The person having the transit
may want to end or change the relationship, but his or her partner
may not feel the same way. It may even happen in reverse: you are
having a Uranus-Venus transit, but it is your partner who leaves or
demands changes in the relationship. Should this be the case, if you
honestly examine yourself, you may find that your partner has acted
on the frustration or restlessness you have been denying or suppressing over a long period of time. The disruption these transits
bring may only be temporary. You or your partner has an affair or
wants to be independent, perhaps even solitary, for a while; but
when the transit passes, these feelings pass, and you reunite to reestablish the relationship on a new footing.
Transiting Uranus in hard aspect to Venus doesn't always mean
the end of a relationship. If you have not been involved for a while,
this transit could signify a relationship coming into your life, although given the 'unpredictability' ofthe Uranian influence, whether
it lasts beyond the duration of the transit is not always assured.
Uranus-Mars
Uranus arouses and intensifies whatever planet it touches by transit,
and when it trines or sextiles Mars, we can expect a period in which
we feel more alive or energetic than usual. This is not a time just to
sit around and watch television. Go out and find constructive outlets
and projects into which you can channel your increased energy and
life-force. Take up an exercise routine, look for a cause to fight for,
enrol in a course which interests you, or find a mountain to climb,
for by challenging or stretching yourself you can use these harmonious Uranus-Mars transits to your greatest advantage. 6o Uranus Transits When Uranus conjuncts Mars by transit, or makes a square,
inconjunct or opposition aspect to it, the increased energy and
excitement could be more difficult to handle. We may be more
restless, anxious, angrier and more impatient than usual, and little
things we normally let pass become the focus for battles and confrontation. We are more inclined to stand up for ourselves, and
fervently resent others intruding into or blocking what we are doing.
Anger is related to blocked movement: if we want to move forward
in our life, but something from the outside stops us, or something
from within holds us back, we become angry. This dynamic will be
operating powerfully during these transits. If we need to be asserting
ourselves and moving ahead in our life and we are not respecting
these urges, Mars turns back on itself and attacks the body in the
form of illness or physical dysfunctions. Also, if most of our energy is
invested in holding back changes or moves we need to make, there
will be less energy available with which to direct our life. If we suffer
from depression during a Uranus-Mars transit, it may be that we are
reluctant to begin something we need to be getting on with and
doing.
We need something to be obsessed with during this period- a
project or outlet which grips and excites us, and into which we can
siphon our excess Mars energy. Mars represents the desire to assert
the self. When Uranus activates Mars, the need to make an impact
on life is increased. Provided that we can find ways to direct Mars
into constructive or creative outlets, even the most difficult UranusMars transits will indicate a time when our growth and unfoldment
speeds up and takes a major step forward.
Hard Uranus-Mars transits have been linked with accidents and
mishaps, and there are a variety of reasons why this might be true.
The combination of Uranus and Mars can be quite impulsive or rash:
we rush into things with too much force and wind up tripping over
our own feet in the process. And if we are hauling around a load of
anger, anxiety and frustration, we attract more accidents than
when we are truly calm and tranquil. We may be able to avoid
certain mishaps if we take the time to confront and examine our
angry feelings before they build up to a dangerous degree.
A wide variety of feelings and moods accompany the difficult To the Planets and Through the Houses 6I transits of Uranus to Mars. On the positive side, we will be overflowing with excitement and enthusiasm for life. Negatively, we could
feel angry much of the time, or ill, off~balance and depressed. Most
likely we'll fluctuate between these two extremes. However, these
transits do offer the opportuniry to contact more of our will, authority, power and vitality. The house placement of transiting Uranus,
the house position of natal Mars, and the house or houses with Aries
or Scorpio on the cusp or contained within them, will show the
areas of life where we could come alive in a new way.
Uranus-Jupiter
Our view of the world and our philosophy in life are not likely to
remain the same while Uranus transits in aspect to Jupiter. We feel
new possibilities, and an exciting sense of what the future could hold
in store for us. Some of these visions might come true, and others
may prove unrealistic or too pie-in-the-sky. And yet, by the time a
Uranus-Jupiter transit finishes, our perspective on life is bound to
have changed considerably.
Transiting Uranus trine or sextile to natal Jupiter often denotes a
phase of growth and expansion, with new opportunities or breakthroughs coming our way. G<;>ad fortune comes in the form of sudden
monetary windfalls, excellent work or business offers, beneficial new
friendships, and the discovery of interests or philosophies which give
greater meaning to our life. Travel can be exciting and worthwhile
during this period as well. The whole chart would need to be
considered, but whether we stay close to home or roam farther
afield, these harmonious Uranus-Jupiter transits often signal the
right time to try new ventures, take a few risks, follow our hunches,
and stretch ourselves beyond our normal boundaries. We can use
these transits constructively by reaching for the best and highest in
ourselves, and by believing in what we are capable of accomplishing.
We wastethe possibilities of transiting Uranus trine or sextile Jupiter
if we sell ourselves too short, or doubt our ability to achieve what is
actually within our reach.
Transiting Uranus conjunct or in difficult aspect to natal Jupiter
also indicates the possibility of change and expansion, but there 62 Uranus Transits could be more problems and hitches than with the trine or sextile.
Intellectual restlessness is not uncommon at this time, and we may
feel the need to challenge or break free of any restrictive or liiniting
philosophies we believe are holding us back. This is a most iconoclastic aspect, and, if in such a state of mind, we might be ready to jump
into anything which promises instant riches or fulfilment or to give
our allegiance to anything which we think holds the key to the
meaning of existence. Uranus activates the Jupiterian urge to expand
and reach for more in life, but the difficult transits bring opportunities
which may be too extreme, unreliable or dubious. Someone offers
you an exciting new proposition, and it falls through a few weeks
later, but even before you have a chance to get depressed about this,
another new, perhaps equally dubious, venture comes your way.
Without taking the entire chart into coHsideration, it is not easy to
predict the outcome of these transits.
However, we should be wary of rushing into something too rashly
or impulsively. We might formulate a new plan or business venture
we believe will change our life and give us everything we've ever
dreamed of. There probably are some worthwhile elements in this
vision, but somehow we go too far with it. We overshoot or aim too
high too quickly. While not totally stifling our faith and imagination
during this period, we will benefit from taking the time to listen to
the advice or suggestions of trusted friends who could help us gain a
more balanced or clearer perspective.
As with transiting Uranus trine or sextile Jupiter, our philosophy
in life could change radically under the transiting conjunction,
square or opposition. In general, it is a good time to undertake a
course of study which would broaden and enrich us in some way.
However, with the hard transits, we could be drawn to extreme
religious sects or unusual cults which take over our entire existence.
It's difficult to do anything by halves when transiting Uranus is
aspecting Jupiter: we give up everything and take off for India, or we
go overboard and believe that we now have the answer to everything
for everybody. Some of our new ideas and beliefs could be valid, but
again we go too far with them. The intense way we pursue or
promote our beliefs could put other people off, and they naturally
back away, worried that we have lost our balance altogether. If To the Planets and Through the Houses 63 possible, the force of these transits should be tempered by restraint
and common sense; if not, we may discover that our enthusiasm has
been misguided and our dedication misplaced.
We might be drawn to travelling when Uranus conjuncts, squares
or opposes Jupiter, although we shouldn't expect a prearranged
timetable to work out as planned: an exciting time could be in store
for us, but anything could happen. Travel during this period will
inspire us, or we may be drawn to unusual places 'off the beaten
track'; either way, we won't come back the same person- if we
come back at all.
Uranus-Saturn When transiting Uranus aspects Saturn, the new and the old meet,
and the nature of the aspect suggests how friendly or fraught the
meeting will be. Transiting Uranus trine or sextile Saturn generally
indicates that we are ready and prepared to integrate new things
into our life. We can keep the best of the old, but gradually and
gently make room for new ideas, beliefs, goals, objectives, people and
interests, and although we may try to keep chap.ge at bay, we would
only be cheating ourselves of the growth and unfoldment that is
meant for us during this period. What is old and established is open
to change, and the time is right to coerce authority figures into new
ways of thinking. We could act as a bridge between entrenched
conventional attitudes and original, new or untried approaches to
any situation.
Transiting Uranus conjunct, square or opposing Saturn also suggests
a time when the new meets the old, but in a way that usually proves
more problematic and disruptive, possibly even explosive (especially if
Mars is involved). In many cases, we will feel so restless and fed up with
certain spheres of our life that we have little choice but to make drastic
changes in these areas. If we've stayed in a relationship or a job for
Saturnian reasons, that is, for the sake of security, loyalty, a sense of
duty or a need for status, we will be swayed by- or pushed by- the force
of Uranus to alter these circumstances. Our allegiance switches from
the old to the new, and we are willing to take risks and disrupt what is
known in order to explore different possibilities in our life. 64 Uranus Transits Even if the old structures in our life have not been that wonderful
or satisfying, some of us may still find it difficult under hard UranusSaturn transits to chance letting go of what is familiar and established.
We cling to the known and existing, even though another part of us
wants to break loose. In the end, however, transiting Uranus in hard
angle to Saturn won't let us get away with keeping everything the
same, and we can only try to avert total disruption by maintaining
the best of the old while making space for the new, or we can try to
salvage what has been spoiled, and improve unsatisfactory situations.
But should we fail at these attempts to make things better, we may
have no choice but to clear away what is old and stifling in order to
create room for the kinds of changes Uranus wants to bring.
A Uranus transit can feel particularly cruel if Satirrn is involved,
because it threatens those aspects of our existence which provide us
with our greatest sense of security or safety. This happens most
frequently with transiting Uranus opposing Saturn, but it can also
occur under the conjunction or the square. Like an earthquake, the
structures in our life collapse and the very ground under our feet
gives way. We may be a true victim of fate. Something from the
outside happens to us which we couldn't have avoided and which,
apparently at least, we have had no part in attracting. However, if
we understand Uranus to be an agent of the core Self, the upheaval
must have occurred for a reason. Even if we don't believe in the
concept of a deeper Self guiding our unfoldment, we can deal with
the situation more creatively and successfully if we find some sort of
meaning in it. Eventually we may discover that a difficult UranusSaturn transit was the catalyst for our developing ourselves in ways
which we would not have done otherwise.
In a majority of cases, honest self-analysis will reveal the role we
played in inviting a disaster or upheaval into our life. If transiting
Uranus hitting Saturn does bring these kinds of external disturbances, we may benefit from taking time to examine what really was
going on in our mind during the years leading up to the event. If we
have been bored, restless and frustrated, but haven't acknowledged
these feelings or done anything to act on them, we unconsciously
may have prompted a disruption our way. We would love to blame
others for what has happened to us, but we will use these transits To the Planets and Through the Houses 65 most constructively if we can eventually understand what part we
have played in setting up facets of our life falling apart.
Uranus-Saturn transits challenge areas in which we are too
defended, rigid and restrained. I did the chart of a man with natal
Saturn in the eleventh house of groups who had been terrified all his
life of speaking up in any group situation. He would have things to
say, but he would just sit there and hold himself back. Transiting
Uranus conjuncted his eleventh house Saturn, and he finally gained
the nerve to break out of his old pattern and stand up in front of a
group he was attending. In like manner, we can use these transits
constructively by exploring new ways of being in different situations.
If in the past we've been the kind of person who has always said
'No', then we can try saying 'Yes'. If our pattern always has been to
say 'Yes', then we can try saying 'No' and see what happens. With
Uranus, however, we can't always predict which we'll say.
As Uranus moves closer to making a conjunction, square or
opposition to natal Saturn, we could find ourselves engaged in some
kind of battle with an authority figure (father, mother, teacher, boss
or governmental official). Our vision of how things should be will
differ from theirs, and we will have more difficulty than usual
keeping our opinions to ourselves or standing by and allowing to .
continue something with which we disagree or don't approve. However, confronting others too directly at this time may not be the
wisest way to handle the situation - they are likely to defend their
position with a staunch determination equal to our own.
The battle between Ouranus and Cronus (Saturn) led to the birth
of Aphrodite (Venus). With difficult Uranus-Saturn transits, we may
need to find ways to communicate our ideas and beliefs in a manner
that doesn't threaten or put off those we are trying to convince. It
could help to bring in a little Venus - some diplomacy and tact when challenging authority figures at this time. Should we do so
and the situation still doesn't improve, we may resort to ultimatums,
since we feel our principles very strongly under hard Uranus-8atum
transits and are disinclined to make allowances. If diplomacy doesn't
work, and our ultimata fail to produce the desired result, we may
have no choice but to take the more drastic step of packing our bags
and going elsewhere. 66 Uranus Transits Uranus-Uranus In considering Uranus aspecting itself by transit, we are looking at
what is known as 'the Uranus cycle'. Uranus takes approximately
84 years to circle back to its natal position, and during this period it
will form various aspects to its natal placement. As it moves towards
the opposition, it will make, among other aspects, a sextile, square
and trine to its natal position; after transiting Uranus opposes natal
Uranus, it will then trine, square, and sextile natal Uranus once
again before returning to its original degree and sign.
The Uranus cycle symbolizes patterns of development which all
people go through around certain ages or phases in their lives what Gail Sheehy, in her book Passages, calls 'the predictable crises
of adult life'. 1 Beginning with the transiting sextile and ending with
the transiting conjunction, we will examine the kinds of challenges
and crises associated with the major transits of Uranus to its own
place. In all cases, the areas of life most directly affected will be
shown by the house position of natal Uranus, the house position of
transiting Uranus, and the house or houses with Aquarius on the
cusp or contained within it. Transiting Uranus sextile natal Uranus
' Transiting Uranus sextiles its own place twice: first around the age
of 14, and then again near the age of 70. We'll start with a
discussion of the first occurrence, which also coincides with the first
opposition of Saturn to its own place. Both these transits come at the
onset of adolescence, the phase of life when we emerge out of the
womb of the family into a larger social sphere.
Adolescence is akin to another birth. One dies as a child eventually
to be reborn a young adult. In accord with natal Uranus touching offits
own place, striking physical and psychological changes hail the arrival
of puberty. In girls, menstruation has begun or is about to begin, the
pelvic area enlarges, pubic hair shows, and the breasts enlarge. In
boys, the presence of sperm can be traced in the urine, the shoulders
broaden, hair grows on the face and pubic region, the testes and
scrotum descend, the penis enlarges in size, and the voice gets lower. To the Planets and Through the Houses 67 Puberty is marked not only by a physical transformation, but also
by changes in one's social and cultural roles. The time is coming
when we will have to stand on our own feet in the world, when our
support system shifts from parents to peers, and we explore different
ways of behaving with others. In search of an identity, we might
gaze for hours at ourselves in the mirror, and try to figure out who we
are and what we are to be. We may see ourselves as the wave of the
future, challenging the values and morals of an older authority. And
yet we are caught in that uncomfortable gap between physiological
maturity and social immaturity. Our body can now perform the
functions of an adult, but very few people really would consider us
ready to play a complete productive part in society.
The freeing and liberating effects of transiting Uranus sextiling its
own place is reflected in the possibilities adolescence gives us to work
through negative patterns from childhood. During adolescence, old
issues come to the surface again. For instance, if in the formative
years just after birth we weren't provided with a sense of safety and
trust in life, these deep fears and insecurities will come to the
foreground in adolescence, when we begin to venture out into the
world on our own. But now that we are older, we have a chance to
come to terms with patterns left over from infancy. Forming a
positive bond with a teacher who extends to us the kind of understanding and care we didn't receive as a child may be exactly what is
needed to help heal developmental wounds, making up for what we
missed or weren't allowed earlier in life. As we grow older we
acquire more skills and abilities which enable us to feel the kind of
power and faith in ourselves which parents, inadvertently or not,
might have quashed in us during childhood.
Transiting Uranus sextiles natal Uranus again around the age of
70. Gail Sheehy calls this era 'The Thoughtful Seventies'; and according to her studies, the most happy and healthy septuagenarians
share two basic similarities, both of which reflect a positive use of the
Uranus transit which occurs at this time: (r) they are engaged in
activities ,and outlets which they can pursue independently of others
and yet which entail some sort of work or involvement with the
community; and (2) they are still planning for the future, at least
five years ahead. 2 The first condition is Uranian in that it involves 68 Uranus Transits being part of a group in which each member, while still a person in
their own right, has his or her own particular function to serve. The
second finding is in accord with the sense of vision and possibility
that attends most of the flowing aspects Uranus makes by transit.
Even at 70, we can still change.
Old age is a time to do what we want to do, rather than what we
or others think we should be doing. We have probably spent much of
our life focusing on outer or external achievements, but now we
have a chance to pause and take stock. Through evaluating, reflecting on and digesting what we have accomplished or not accomplished so far, we will be able to reassess and reformulate the
values, goals and objectives which are important to us now. Our
obligations and commitments to the world no longer paramount,
this is an appropriate time in our lives to reconsider what is personally meaningful to us. What are our own individual needs and
desires? What is the purpose of our existence? What do we want to
do with the years we have left? With transiting Uranus sextile its
own place, even as a septuagenarian, it is possible for us to clear the
old to make way for the new. Transiting Uranus square natal Uranus
This transit also occurs twice in life: first in our early twenties and
then again in our early sixties. And true to the nature of Uranus and
the square aspect, these are times of major changes in orientation
and values.
The first transit of Uranus in sextile to natal Uranus heralds the
beginning of adolescence; but the first square of Uranus to its own
place marks the end of adolescence and the full entry into young
adulthood. Around 14 and the time of the Uranus sextile, we felt the
urge for greater autonomy, but there was only so much we could do
about it. We might have confronted and challenged our parents, but
chances are we still went on living with them. When Uranus squares
Uranus in our early twenties, we also feel (consciously or unconsciously) a drive towards autonomy, but now we can take it a step further.
Probably the most common manifestation of this transit is what To the Planets and Through the Houses 69 Sheehy calls 'pulling up roots', or leaving the parental home. 3 The
task of separating from the family and finding out who we are in our
own right (which began in early adolescence) becomes more pressing
and urgent. Even if we aren't wildly rebellious during this period, it
is still a time of significant growth and rapid change. More than ever
before, we are expected to locate ourselves in a peer group, to
establish a clear sexual identity, and to find some sort of work or
occupation which will serve to define us. In short, we are expected to
be more responsible for ourselves than ever before.
Uranus is associated with ideologies and '-isms', and when it
squares our natal Uranus in our early twenties, the desire to find
something to believe in is also activated. At this time many of us
look for a group or cause to attach ourselves to, something to give
meaning and direction to our life. Uranus stimulates an urge to
greater independence and autonomy, and the particular attraction
of one group or another may be the fact that its ideals or values differ
significantly from those of our parents. Finding a world view which
differs from that of our family is part and parcel of finding our own
identity.
Some of us might not rebel or strike out on our own in this way at
all. We may go along with our parents' values and expectations, and
slot into the kind of lifestyle they have had in mind for us. The
positive thing about passively accepting our parents' view of the
world is that we avoid a crisis; the negative thing is that we forgo an
opportunity to explore our own identity and find out who we are
independently of them. But more likely than not, the crisis we have
managed to elude at this stage will erupt later in our life, probably
between the ages of thirty-five and forty-two, when Uranus comes to
oppose its own place. Just as well, because sooner or later we'll have
to confront the fact that going through an identity crisis of this sort
is a prerequisite to self-discovery.
The second Uranus square occurs in our early sixties, not far from
the second Saturn return. The obvious concern is ageing. Some
people give up growing around this time, nail their coffin lid down
and slip into an 'is that all there is?' state of mind, obsessed with the
past, with loss, and with opportunities they have missed. Fortunately,
however, not everyone reacts this way. Studies show that many 70 Uranus Transits people who were worried about getting older in their mid-forties and
fifties stop worrying so much about it in their sixties. Júpiter They accept
the fact they are older, and get on with the task at hand, making the
most of the time they have left.
In the early twenties, the first Uranus-Uranus square entailed
separating from one's family and discovering one's self in one's own
right. In the early sixties, the second Uranus-Uranus square is also
about separation, but of a different sort. The task at hand is to
separate what really matters to us from what doesn't. We may begin
to feel detached from (or not so bothered about) issues or concerns
which previously meant a great deal to us, but this doesn't mean we
are slipping into a state of indifference where nothing matters. On
the contrary, those things we still find important become even more
important. Having discriminated between what is of significance to
us and what isn't, we can now find ourselves feeling even more
intensely about and revitalized by those things we deem worthwhile
to focus on.
For most people at this time, disengaging from what mattered in
the past takes its most obvious form in retirement from full-time
employment. Issues to do with career and personal success in the
world are no longer so primary. For many of us, stopping or slowing
down work leaves a frightening gap, and we are forced to confront
one of the main existential fears in life - the loss of structure. Faced
with hours of free time and less responsibility than ever before, we
are left with the task of giving new meaning to our life.
Those people who cope best with retirement are the ones who
have rehearsed and planned for it well before the actual time. Even
while we are still employed, we can use our spare time to develop a
skill, craft or resource which will later help to fill the gap retirement
creates. Women and men in their early sixties need to find something
that engages them. We are more likely to use the second UranusUranus square most constructively if we plan ahead for it. We don't
have to wait until Uranus squares our Uranus to start looking for
interesting activities and projects outside our line of work or separate
from the domestic sphere. If we anticipate the gap left by retirement
or a fully grown-up family, we can prepare ourselves for it.
In accord with the Uranian nature of this period, those outlets To the Planets and Through the Houses 71 which could prove most rewarding are ones that we can pursue
independently of other people, and yet which serve the community
in some way. We can find things to do that we want to do. What's
more, these don't necessarily need to involve our spouse. Social or
humanitarian clubs and organizations, or anything from bird-watching groups to the church and politics, can provide the kind of
fulfilment and involvement which were previously the domain of
family or career. Transiting Uranus trine natal Uranus
This transit happens twice in our life: first around the age of 28
(coinciding with the first Saturn return) and then again near the age
of 56. At the time of the first Uranus-Uranus trine, we have a
chance to reappraise and reconsider choices we have made up to
now. What we've built and established may have been appropriate
for earlier stages of our development, but is it in accord with our
present state of mind? If we feel too restricted by our lifestyle or by
decisions we have made in the past, this is the time to make
necessary adjustments. Usually this stage is accompanied by a feeling
of wanting to be something more than we already are, a sense that,
we have outgrown what is there in front of us. For many people, this
means taking an entirely new direction in life; for others, the changes
will not be so drastic, but there will still be the need to renew or
deepen one's commitment to earlier choices.
The combined effects of transiting Uranus trine natal Uranus,
along with the Saturn return around this age, show up clearly in
clients coming for readings. Married people are having doubts about
whether the marriage is really what they want. Single people decide
they no longer wish to go solo, and their main concern is whether
the chart indicates a marriage coming up. Women without children
start thinking about having them. Mothers who have already spent
years looking after children feel the itch to make something of
themselves in other ways- going back to college or finding a career.
Men have doubts about their professional choice and want to know
what other kinds of jobs the chart suggests.
When transiting Uranus squared natal Uranus in our early 72 Uranus Transits twenties, we may have rebelled in toto against our parents' values
and expectations. Now, however, as transiting Uranus trines our
natal Uranus at the same time as our Saturn return, and we turn the
corner into 30, our view of the world may be changing. To our
surprise and possible dismay, we could find that some of our parents'
beliefs about what was worthy or good for us actually make a bit
more sense now. Could it be that in the process of separating from
our family background, we threw away too much? Maybe they
weren't totally wrong after all? The process of sorting out what to
keep from our parental inheritance and what to discard and replace
with our own truths, is undertaken again in earnest at this stage.
We start to look at aspects of ourselves which we have never
wanted to admit to before - aspects which uncannily resemble
qualities we have identified previously in our mother or father, but
certainly not in us!
Such questioning and soul-searching can yield fruitful results. We
are more in touch with ourselves than ever before, and the choices and
adjustments we make now in our life are likely to be more enduring and
lasting as a result. But if we somehow let things ride during this period,
and shun the kind ofinner probing the Saturn and Uranus transits are
prompting us to do, we won't be let off the hook, for very long at least. A
number of years later we'll be hit even harder by the kinds of issues
Uranus stirs when it comes to oppose its own place in our birthchart.
The second transiting Uranus-Uranus trine occurs around the age
of 56. Ideally, this is the time to give ourselves permission to be who
we are -to do what we want to do, not just what we think we should
be doing. And if we have successfully managed to pass through
some of the dangers of early mid-life, this period could be one of the
happiest we know. In keeping with the promise of freedom and
expansion symbolized by Uranus trilling its own place, this transit
may coincide with certain positive changes in outlook and character.
We feel freer to say what we think. Men are more able easily to
express their needs and admit to their feelings. Women are more
confident about owning their power and asserting themselves. We
all generally have more time and space for ourselves, having been
around long enough to learn quite a bit about who we actually are,
what we need and want, and how to go about getting it. To the Planets and Through the Houses 73 Just sticking in one place, trying to derive identity and satisfaction
from a single well-worn track, is not the most creative way to use
this transit: it's time to diverge, experiment and expand. If you're an
older woman still trying to play mother to a grown-up family, you're
not diverging; you're staying in the same place working at a situation
that has outlived much of its truth and usefulness.
Men and women in careers need to wake up to the fact that
eventually they will retire. Prepare for that time under this transit start developing buried or neglected resources and talents, look
around for interests and activities which will be there to replace the
vacuum created by retirement. It's up to you to make the most of
this passage. If you find yourself falling into a hole of passive
resignation, you can at least try to stop and dig yourself out, for your
life is far from over- that-is, if you are prepared to take a few risks
and make a leap or two into the unknown. Don't be afraid to try
those things you've been wanting to do, but haven't had the courage.
If for years you've been toying with the idea of starting your own
small business, this may be your last chance to do so. If you're bored
with where you are, but your inclination is to stay within the same
career, you could look into the possibility of moving into a new
department or finding another aspect of the work which interests
you more. Uranus also opens us up to concerns extending beyond
those of personal advancement, and we may find our greatest sense
of well-being and purpose working for the community, engaged in
activities which serve others. The second Uranus-Uranus trine, like
the first, is much more than just a passive period of reflection: it may
be time to look back and review life, but it's a time to plan ahead as
well. Transiting Uranus opposing natal Uranus
Transiting Uranus opposes its own place any time from age 3 8 to
45· People born in the 1930s, 40s or sos will have this transit at the
earlier end of the scale, between the ages of 38 and 41. People born
in the first two decades of the rgoos and in the rg6os, 70s and 8os
will experience it a little later, between the ages of 41 and 45· Saturn
also comes to oppose its own place around the age of 42. This means 74 Uranus Transits that both Uranus and Saturn are activated during this period. And
in some cases, these transits also coincide with transiting Neptune in
square to natal Neptune, and transiting Pluto squaring its own
place! No wonder this period is considered one of the most crucial
turning-points in life.
This phase of life has been dubbed 'the mid-life crisis'. Besides
providing the theme for numerous television stories and film scripts,
the mid-life crisis has been covered fairly extensively in some astrological texts, as well as in academic and popular psychology
books. In a nutshell, it's a time for disassembling ourselves and then
putting the pieces back together again, but in a different way. Parts
of our nature we haven't integrated yet into our conscious awareness, and which we have been ignoring or not looking at, demand to
be acknowledged and examined. Facing the conflicts and crisis of
this period increases the likelihood of a fulfilling second half of life.
Avoiding the kind of self-examination asked for during this phase
spells trouble later on. The problems don't go away: they hide and
wait for other Uranus or Saturn transits and then resurface. It's
generally easier to have your mid-life crisis at 42 than at 56 or 6o.
A wide spectrum of psychological issues occur during this stage.
The stark realization that we're not getting any younger sets us
thinking about what we have or haven't achieved so far. In our late
teens and early twenties (at the time of our first Uranus-Uranus
square) we probably had a vision of what we hoped we would be like
as a fully mature adult. Now we have the chance to compare this
vision with what we have actually achieved. If our current reality
falls short of what we imagined it would be, we could find ourselves
on the downhill slide into a depression. If there is a discrepancy
between our ~arlier hopes and ideals and our present reality, it is a
signal that the time has come to adjust our goals and make them
more realistic. Maybe we won't make it to the top of a large corporation, as we might have hoped. Maybe our dreams need to be scaled
down. Even so, this transit is an opportunity to find our second
wind, and to get on with doing the most we can with the resources
we have.
Even if we have manifested our early life vision and ideals, we
may now be asking ourselves 'So what?' The happiness and fulfil- To the Planets and Through the Houses 75 ment we thought would be ours has somehow eluded us all the
same. The time has come to review our situation and make some
changes. Our success frees us to take up other interests or endeavours
which we have had to put aside to arrive where we are now. We can
throw ourselves into new projects or outlets which will fulfil parts of
us that our present achievements, no matter how great, don't
satisfy.
Our youth is over, our physical prowess isn't what it was when
we were 2 r. Regardless of whether we've fulfilled or failed to achieve
our dreams, we're still left feeling incomplete and aware that something is missing. This situation could drive us into an intense and
restless search for anything that will fill the gap. Perhaps losing
ourselves in a new relationship, or an affair with someone younger,
will pull us out of the pit? Maybe if we keep as busy as possible, we
won't have time to feel the pain or emptiness that's there? Maybe
jogging three more miles a day will do the trick? These ploys may
help, but only for a while. If we try to run away from what we are
feeling now, these same feelings will just come back again at a later
time, and hit us even harder. If we avoid the necessary changes
called for by any stage or passage of development, we create psychic
congestion: we end up stuck on the same track, cramped with old,
rigidly defined borders. Having affairs or cramming our life with
things to do may temporarily delay or deter 'the mid-life blues', but
such tactics alone won't resolve anything. A more creative solution
to the crisis involves going down into it - facing the pain and the
darkness. Let go: let the crisis happen and see where it leads.
As with any transition, phase one is to grieve for the old you that
is dying, for the identities and roles that have taken you this far, but
which must be shed so that a new you can develop. The next step is
to look at those parts of yourself which you have not been in touch
with -those aspects of your nature you have denied or kept hidden.
We may have to look at emotions and qualities in ourselves which
we don't like very much- our jealousy, envy, greed or the side of us
which is fearful, dependent or competitive. Owning these parts of
our nature means expanding our existing self-definition to include
more of what is actually there. Instead of believing in an edited
edition of the self, cut to fit into conventional norms and acceptable 76 Uranus Transits standards, we look at the full version of who we are, complete with
the good parts as well as the bad. This does not mean unleashing
our 'darker side' out on to the world, but it does mean reconnecting
to more of what is there in us, and becoming more whole and
authentic in the process.
Looking into ourselves will also put us in touch with positive
aspects of our nature which have yet to be developed and integrated
into our conscious personality. If previously we have lived in a very
one-sided way, it is during the mid-life passage that those parts of us
which we have ignored or neglected have a chance to be explored
and worked on. For instance, if you have lived the first half of your
life in a very down-to-earth manner, concerned primarily with
practical issues of earning a living or establishing yourself in the
world, the mid-life crisis could open you to values of a more spiritual
or esoteric nature. Conversely, if you have spent your twenties and
thirties meditating all day in an effort to achieve nirvana or spiritual
enlightenment, you could find that transiting Uranus opposing natal
Uranus awakens in you an interest in earning money and making
something of yourself in the material sphere of life. In short, those
parts of our nature we haven't favoured or encouraged- those parts
which haven't been a major source of motivation - are the very
areas which become important, and form the focus of our new
aspirations. Although the process of expanding our identity to include previously undeveloped qualities can begin in earnest now,
this task is not over when Uranus finishes opposing its own place.
Becoming more whole and authentic is the work ahead for the
entire duration of the second half of life.
Personality changes which take place in middle age generally
involve what are known in psychology as 'cross-sex' issues. This
means that men start exploring qualities in themselves which are
traditibnally associated with 'feminine' urges; and women turn to
spheres and issues which are more conventionally classed under
'masculine' drives. Exactly what this entails is worth exploring in a
little more detail.
Men who have devoted the first half of their lives to achieving in
the outer world may begin to question the amount of time and
energy they're investing in that direction. Focusing on external To the Planets and Through the Houses 77 deeds and worldly accomplishments usually means that the inner
world of feelings, and the need for real intimacy, closeness and
fulfilment in relationships, have been relegated to second place.
Taking a greater interest in his marriage, and spending more time
with his children, is one way a man can further develop his capacity
for relationship and intimacy. However, the obvious course of turning towards his wife and family is not always the way he first
chooses to awaken his feeling side. Sometimes, it takes the external
agency of a mistress to draw his attention to the realm of passion
and feeling. Or his wife is the one to run off or have an affair, and in
this way he is shocked into examining and questioning his ability to
form relationships.
During the mid-life crisis (or middlescence as it is sometimes called),
a man's attention also could turn inward to the creative and imaginative realms of the psyche. He may realize that the job or work
which takes up so much of his time is not fully satisfying his need for
creativity and self-expression. One solution to this problem is to look
for another kind of work altogether, or to try adjusting his schedule
so that he has more space and energy to devote to the development
·of new interests and forms of creative expression.
A woman may experience her mid-life crisis in a diametrically
opposed way. If her attention has been focused primarily on relationships and the needs of her partner and children, she is stirred by
new drives and urges which involve fulfilling herself in her own
right, in a way not related only to attending to the well-being of
those close to her. What about her own need to assert her power in
the world and achieve recognition in a concrete way? What about
her own development and growth? Her child-bearing days are drawing to a close; her children are getting older and won't need her so
much in the future . . . where does that leave her? It's at this
juncture that she could take important steps which will alter the rest
of her life. What about going back to college to develop her mind or
skills further? What about the possibility of re-entering the job
market and seeing what she could do there? Neither of these steps
may be easy, or executed without strain. But rather than running
away from these issues, if she faces herself and others now and risks
making some changes in her life, she has a much greater chance of 78 Uranus Transits happiness and fulfilment in her later years. And in doing so, she
becomes what Gail Sheehy calls a pathfinder. Of course, the choice
(apparently at least) may not be hers, but it may be forced on to her
if her marriage or relationship falls apart, and she may have no
alternative but to become a more complete and autonomous person
in her own right. By contrast, other women may have accomplished
a great deal in the world during their twenties and thirties; for them,
the mid-life crisis may mean refocusing their attention away from
career and achievement, and making more time in their lives for
relationships and intimacy.
Whatever one's specific circumstances are, transiting Uranus opposing its own place signals the need to pause and consider how we
have organized our life so far. If we've veered too much in one
direction at the expense of other avenues of expression or fulfilment,
now is the time to make some changes and restore the balance. Transiting Uranus conjuncting natal Uranus
It's possible for transiting Uranus to conjunct natal Uranus shortly
after birth. If we were born with Uranus retrograde, for instance,
then within a number of months it will turn direct and pass over
where it was at birth. Or we may have been born with Uranus
direct, and then it moved backward over our natal Uranus and
forward over it once more within the first year of our life. In either
case, this early conjunction of Uranus to its own place could signify
some sort of disruption or upheaval which makes an impression
deep within our psyche. We are left with an underlying belief that
life is unpredictable; or somewhere buried inside us is the expectation
that whenever we settle into something - a job, a relationship, a
home, etc.- disruption is just around the corner. Early experiences
cut very deeply, and even though we don't remember consciously
what happens in the first few months or years of life, what occurs
then contributes to the formation of beliefs and patterns we carry
around inside us far into adulthood.
However, when astrologers refer to Uranus conjuncting natal
Uranus, they usually mean what is known as the Uranus return,
which occurs roughly around the age of 84 and marks a complete To the Planets and Through the Houses 79 cycle of Uranus around the chart. Hopefully our health and state
of mind still allow us to experience some of the most positive
changes symbolized by this transit. The full circle of Uranus means
that a major cycle or phase of our life is completed and something
new can begin. We've met most of our responsibilities to society,
we've worked for and served the collective in some way; perhaps
we've raised a family, or passed on some of our knowledge and
experience to later generations. In any case, we are no longer
expected to be doing any of these kinds of tasks. If anything, this is
our time to be looked after. Friends, family or the government will
help tend to our daily needs and mundane concerns, leaving us free
for other things.
But free for what? This is a good time to ponder both the meaning
of our existence and the meaning of life in general. In other words, it
is partly a period of contemplation. What have we learned? How
would we have done it differently? What's wrong with the world
today? And of course, there is the subject of death to think about.
What lies beyond? Will we go on living in some other form? Death
requires not only thought and speculation, but also preparation. If
we haven't prepared properly for our death, this is the time to put
our life in order so that we can die in peace. This doesn't necessarily
mean we are going to die tomorrow. We may have a number of
good years left and we can be planning for these as well. After all, we
are under a major Uranus transit- there is still time to try a few
more things. Johann von Goethe, the German literary genius, continued writing into his eighties as transiting Uranus was approaching
his third house Uranus in Aquarius; Michelimgelo was working on
St Peter's during his Uranus return in Scorpio in his tenth house;
and socialite Alice Roosevelt Longworth was still at the hub of
Washington society at the time transiting Uranus conjuncted its
natal placement in Virgo in her eleventh house.
Uranus-Neptune
Because Neptune spends around 14 years in each sign, large numbers of people will experience Uranus-Neptune transits at roughly
the same time. For example, Neptune was in Libra during 1942-56, 8o Uranus Transits and everyone born then has that placement. In I968 Uranus moved
into Libra and, by transit, a seven-year period began during which
Uranus eventually would conjunct Neptune in the charts· of all those
people born with it in Libra. The placement of Neptune in the
Venusian sign of Libra describes a tendency to idealize love, and to
view the Libran qualities of peace, justice and harmony as something
numinous or divine. Uranus' awakening effect on Neptune in Libra
was obvious: a wave of idealism spread throughout the world - a
vision of life on earth -inspired by the Neptune in Libra principles of
peace and love. Aided by such Neptunian accoutrements as drugs
and music, Uranus activated Neptune in Libra on a collective scale.
Uranus also politicized Neptune, elevating an emotional yearning for
peace and love into an ideology. By I974, Uranus completed its
transit of Libra, and the love and peace movement began to lose its
initial force. (In the meantime Pluto had entered Libra and, by
transit, began conjuncting Neptune in the charts of everyone with it
there; the ideals and dreams of the Neptune in Libra generation were
about to be affected in yet another way.)
Uranus-Neptune transits relate quite clearly to trends taking place
on a collective scale, which influence large numbers of people.
However, these transits also affect each of us personally, especially if
we are sensitive to the new movements and fashions that periodically
pervade the atmosphere. The house position of transiting Uranus,
the bouse placement of natal Neptune, and the bouse with Pisces on
the cusp or contained within it, show the areas of life where we will
be most affected.
Any Uranus-Neptune transit will arouse and enliven what Neptune symbolizes. Since Neptune can operate on so many different
levels, the exact way in which it is stimulated will vary from person
to person. For some, Uranus-Neptune transits trigger creative inspiration and spiritual awakening, and gives rise to new and vivifying
dreams and aspirations. For others, these transits signify the onset of
strange and inexplicable illnesses, various degrees of eXperimentation
with drugs, and an irresistible fascination for magic, the occult, or
any 'way-out' notions and beliefs. Which way it will go depends not
only on how Neptune is aspected in the natal chart, but also on the
individual's level of consciousness and psychological maturity. In To the Planets and Through the Houses 8r general transiting Uranus trine or sextile Neptune is easier to handle
and more gentle than the conjunction, square or opposition.
Neptune has the capacity to alter our ordinary perception of
everyday reality and expose us to other dimensions of experience.
When transiting Uranus aspects Neptune, this capacity is activated.
Uranus-Neptune transits can coincide with 'peak experiences', times
when our usual ego-boundaries dissolve, and we feel a unity and
empathy with those around us or with all of creation. Our heart
opens up and love pours out. This is a positive experience in itself,
but there is the danger of being swept away by Neptune and losing a
healthy sense of one's individuality or personal boundaries. In extreme cases, we might believe we are God's chosen messenger, here
to redeem the world. In such an inflated state, we make choices or
decisions which later we realize were extreme or misguided.
Transiting Uranus conjunct, square or opposition Neptune can
activate Neptune with such force that we are taken over by powerful
emotional yearnings. Physical exercises will help ground us during
this period, and enable the body to contain and direct Neptunian
upsurges of feeling, but before committing ourselves to any drastic
actions or changes in life, it might be wise to discuss our plans with
friends and associates (preferably of another generation) whose guidance we trust.
By nature, Uranus jolts us into awareness, shifting us quickly
from one state of mind to another. Under Uranus-Neptune transits,
some people may turn to drugs as a means of escape from ordinary
life, or as a way of gaining entry to elevated states of consciousness.
When transiting Uranus conjuncted Neptune in Libra in the late
1960s and early 70s, experimentation with drugs increased. Under
the influence of Uranus, we stand adamantly for what we believe
regardless of established conventions and mores, and some members
of this generation openly defied the law, and proclaimed the positive
value of psychedelic drugs: they were going to do it their way. In
many cases, the nervous system was not sufficiently strong to withstand the kinds of physiological and psychological changes produced
by such drugs, and some people simply ended up with their minds
'blown' as a result.
The result of that era still stands today as a reminder to anyone 82 Uranus Transits undergoing a Uranus transit to Neptune: certain drugs (be they
psychedelics, heroin, cocaine, or valium) may be a quick and apparently easy way to escape from where we are and to alter our state of
awareness, but in the long term it's safer to find more natural ways
of doing this. Meditation, therapy or other forms of self-exploration
and self-development are more effective agencies for change and
growth during Uranus-Neptune transits.
Also, under these transits, we may be gripped by an urge to escape
from what is dull, routine and ordinary. Creative people may experience a change from their usual form of artistic expression. Uranus
activates the Neptunian compulsion to be swept away by something,
whether an intense love which transports us to new heights of
ecstasy, a sudden upsurge of religious or mystical feeling, or an
overwhelming attraction to a new idea or philosophy which promises
to open heaven's door_Some people become fascinated by magic or
the occult during this period. Again, some discrimination and
common sense is needed to use these transits most constructively.
Falling in love can be wonderful, but we will be disappointed if we
expect our beloved to give us everything we need for total fulfilment in
life. The exploration of religious, spiritual and mystical urges is a
natural part of life, but we need to make sure that the groups and
philosophies we become involved with are sound. It is also worth
remembering that under this Uranian influence such feelings may
also 'turn off, and in general there can be an unpredictable and
agitated urgency to many of our emotional responses.
However, standing back and being objective in the middle of a
hard Uranus-Neptune transit is much easier said than done: our
feelings may be too overwhelming to allow room for much detachment or self-observation. In such cases, we might have no choice
but to go fully into the experience, giving ourselves to the new love
which is going to make our life happy-ever-after, absolutely believing
in that philosophy or technique which promises enlightenment
within a year, or delving into magic and the supernatural. In the
end, we may find ourselves disillusioned, let down, imbalanced or
even psychotic, and yet, properly assimilated, it's possible for these
kinds of experiences to teach us something we wouldn't have learned
if we had acted safely and sensibly all along. To the Planets and Through the Houses 83 Uranus-Pluto Pluto moves very slowly through the heavens; therefore those people
born in the same year (or two or three years before or after) will
experience Uranus transits to Pluto at roughly the same time. When
this happens, friends and people around us will be facing similar
kinds of issues and challenges as ·those we ourselves are going
through.
When a planet as powerful as Uranus touches off Pluto, change in
some form is inevitable. If we insist on clinging to the old, and refuse
to acknowledge what needs to be altered in our life during this
period, Uranus-Pluto transits have a way of forcing us to change
regardless of our conscious desires. The house position of transiting
Uranus, the natal house of Pluto, and the house with Scorpio on the
cusp· or contained within it, will show the areas of life most clearly
affected. Transiting Uranus trine or sextile Pluto generally is more
gentle and easier to handle than the transiting conjunction, square
or opposition. However, in order to assess Uranus-Pluto transits, the
natal aspects to Pluto need to be considered carefully. When Uranus
contacts Pluto by transit, it will activate any natal configurations
involving Pluto.
Uranus-Pluto transits also signify social, economic or political
forces that affect our life and from which we cannot escape. We can
try to fight the effects of these transits, but chances are we won't
have too much success. Some sort of change of our social and
economic status or our political beliefs needs to happen, although a
number of years may pass before we honestly can admit there was
anything valuable or positive about what we went through at the
time.
In the case of the transiting opposition and square, we may feel
that external forces are provoking such change: people we meet or
ideas we come across disrupt and disturb the status quo. However,
Uranus-Pluto transits are felt not only through outside influences.
Uranus is a planet which brings insight and illumination, and when
it interacts with Pluto - the planet of renewal and transformation we may be overtaken from within by a sudden urge to move forward
in life: obstacles which hold us back from further groWth and 84 Uranus Transits development are seen for what they are and can be cleared away.
We have probably been sensing the need to confront certain issues
in our lives and to make some changes for some time now. Uranus
.acts as a catalyst to bring these feelings to the surface and translate
them into action.
This illuminating quality of Uranus also serves to make us aware
of personality traits and deep-seated inner complexes that trap us
in negative, repetitive patterns. Pluto is associated with emotional
complexes left over from childhood, those which still affect us
deeply; for instance, if your mother abandoned you at an early
age, you may form a belief or expectation that anyone you become
close to or dependent upon will also leave. Life has a way of obliging
deep-seated beliefs: later on you may find yourself unconsciously
drawn to people who fulfil your negative expectations. You might
repeatedly choose the kind of person who does eventually end
up walking out or abandoning you. Or you could be so frightened of someone leaving you (like mother did) that you attempt
to control or manipulate the relationship in a manner which
ultimately drives that person away. When Uranus transits Pluto, we
have an opportunity to discover and to explore more fully some of
the inner images and patterns we have harboured since childhood.
Uranus-Pluto transits thus give us new insight into our own
unconscious.
Pluto can also be linked to anger and destructive rage, often
stemming from childhood. In infancy, our life depends on other
people looking after us and providing for our needs; should they fail
to do this adequately, we not only feel depressed and frightened
about our survival, we also feel angry at those who are letting us
down. We may suppress these feelings at the time, but they remain
buried within us. When Uranus transits Pluto (especially with the
conjunction, square or opposition), the earlier infantile rage is reactivated and could be unleashed on anyone around who is not giving us
exactly what we want. Although it isn't very pleasant to feel such
emotions, under this transit we are being provided with an opportunity to rediscover parts of the self we have previously denied.
When we cut off from our early anger and rage, we also alienate
ourselves from reserves of energy and power inside us. Reowning To the Planets and Through the Houses 85 buried infantile anger is a way of reconnecting to the energy contained within those feelings.* ,In doing so, we can free the energy
that has been trapped in suppressed infantile emotions and reintegrate it back into the psyche. It can be more constructively
directed into our life, and as a result, we will not only feel more
whole, but also more vital and alive. Uranus-Pluto transits can also
lead to the discovery of buried treasure inside us - the reclaiming of
unexpressed positive traits and resources.
Transiting Uranus aspecting Pluto not only stirs unconscious
patterns, early wounds and anger, but it can sometimes manifest in
the body in the form of illness. A disease or ailment which has
hitherto been hidden or 'under the surface' could manifest itself
during these transits, or an illness we have had in the past which
hasn't been completely resolved might reappear. Although this may
seem a very unwelcome occurrence, it is only when a malady or
weakness is apparent that something can be done to heal it. Under
this transit, too, we may discover 'inspired' cures, remedies or solutions to a chronic complaint.
Uranus-Pluto transits can affect our sexual expression, and if we
have been repressing feelings or desires, Uranus could arouse passions in us which we never knew existed. We may feel overwhelmed
by such eruptions, and yet Uranus is doing nothing more than
revealing what has been buried in us all along. On the other hand, if
we have been very sexually active, these transits could have the
effect of transmuting or sublimating our sexual drive into other outlets.
Finally, we should remember that in Greek mythology Pluto was
the god of death. Whenever Pluto is activated by transit, we may
have to face death in some form: someone we know may die, or we
might have a near-death experience. t Such events are not pleasant
in themselves, but they may provoke us to think more seriously *For a further discussion of dealing with infantile complexes, see pp. 226-33 and
pp. 242-5.
tSee Suggested Reading (p. 386) for a list of books dealing with death and the
grieving process. 86 Uranus Transits about the meaning of existence, and precisely what it is that we are
doing with our life. Whether we like it or not, any Uranus-Pluto
transit offers the opportunity to go deeper into ourselves. By taking
the plunge, we use these periods most constructively. Transiting Uranus Through the Houses
First House The ascendant is the point in the chart associated with birth and
new beginnings, and when Uranus crosses the ascendant and moves
into the first house it's almost like being born again. One's whole
approach to life- sometimes even one's physical appearance or style
of dress - can change. If we have not been in touch with the
qualities of our rising sign, Uranus will bring these aspects of our
nature to the surface now. If we have already been expressing our
ascendant, Uranus asks that we explore other possible manifestations
of that sign; a man with Sagittarius rising, for instance, who has
travelled a great deal and expressed his ascendant in that way, could
discover other facets associated with Sagittarius such as writing or
studying philosophy.
At this time, parts of the self which have been suppressed or
undeveloped insist on inclusion into conscious awareness. Shy people
discover a confidence they never knew they had, while previously
down-to-earth and practically minded individuals awaken to values
and aspirations of a very different nature: they are willing (or forced
by external events) to forgo their need for security and stability, and
branch out in new directions. People who have been predominantly
'thinking-types' suddenly discover a vast new realm of feeling, while
those who have been dominated by emotions and sentiment find
themselves better able to stand back and be more objective and
detached. Whatever sign is on the ascendant, this transit often
reverses our sense of self, and gives us the opportunity to explore
new ways o( meeting life.
When aspects of the self which have been held in check or ignored
for a long time eventually erupt into consciousness, they may at first To the Planets and Through the Houses 87 be unleashed in a rather awkward, imbalanced or uncontrollable
manner. For example, if your tendency in the past has always been
to put yourself aside for the sake of others, you could swing too far
the opposite way when Uranus crosses the ascendant. No longer
willing to take a back seat in life, you temporarily go wild with your
_new-found assertiveness: it's your turn to call the shots, and no one is
going to stop you. You cast off anything which you find restricting
or limiting, and demand that everyone else adjust to you. Gradually,
however, as Uranus moves away from the ascendant and further
into the first house, you calm down, and begin to learn how to use
your assertive energy more wisely and skilfully. Equally, if you have
been a pragmatic, cautious person, you might throw caution and
practicality to the winds during this transit, as you discover an
inner, spiritual dimension to life, and give up your job in order to
meditate 20 hours a day. It may take a little time before you can
begin to integrate the qualities Uranus brings to the fore with other
aspects of your being.
This transit brings out restlessness and impatience, no matter
what sign is on the ascendant. We wake up in the middle of the
night 'buzzing' with ideas and revelations; bolts of energy hit us
out of the blue; we feel 'wired', excited, changeable and frenetic.
We act in ways that surprise us as well as others. Obviously, this
degree of intensity doesn't last the entire transit, but comes in
spurts, first when Uranus crosses the ascendant, and then whenever, in its movement through the first, it makes an aspect to
another planet in the chart. We will also clearly feel its effects
when another transiting planet in the heaven (or a progressed
planet or angle) makes an aspect to transiting Uranus: for example,
transiting Mars conjuncting, squaring or opposing transiting
Uranus will act as a trigger releasing the impact of the Uranus
transit. We also will notice a sudden resurgence of Uranian energy
just as it is about to leave the first and enter the second, as if
Uranus is determined to have one last chance to change our personality and our way of meeting life before moving on to influence
a new domain of our chart.
When interpreting this transit, as with all transits, we must take
age into consideration: a young child, for example, with Uranus 88 Uranus Transits transiting the first is more likely to experience the effects of Uranus
from the outside, usually via the actions of his parents who may
move house, get divorced, or produce another child - all of which
serve to disrupt existing structures and routines. Older children and
teenagers might display even more than the usual degree of wilful
rebellion and obstinacy under the influence of this transit. Young
adults often face major junctures at this time: they leave home, start
or finish college, get married, have children, or discover a new
philosophy or political system which revolutionizes their life. Later
in life, this transit could correlate with divorce, changing jobs, or the
awakening of undiscovered aspects of the personality or those traits
uniquely 'ours'. For elderly people, Uranus crossing the ascendant
and moving into the first house will help them break free from old
patterns of thought or behaviour. In some cases it augurs death the release from an old form into a new dimension of being although other transits in the chart would have to support this
interpretation as well. At any age, this transit could indicate an
external or collective influence which dramatically alters the course
of life, such as the outbreak of war or a change of government.
Whatever the time or phase of life at which we experience this
transit, one thing is certain: we see the world and relate to it in a
radically different way afterwards.
Second House The most obvious effect of this transit is to change our financial
situation and the way we relate to the world of money and matter in
general. In other words, our values change. There could be an
increase in income, a sudden windfall, or money coming to us
through unexpected sources. Sometimes the reversal of fortune
works the other way, and our income takes a drop. A number of ·
people who have come to me for readings while transiting Uranus
was moving through their second house had left jobs they didn't find
interesting or meaningful in order to begin something new which
promised greater stimulation and satisfaction - even if this shift had
meant a lower salary. How we earn a living is likely to change at
this time. Many people become dissatisfied working for others, and To the Planets and Through the Houses 89 start their own business. Or they are fed up with the nine-to-five
routine and go freelance, or take up employment with unusual
hours. If we have been financially dependent on another person, this
transit often activates a desire to earn money and support ourselves
in our own right.
In whatever house it transits, we experience Uranus by choice or
by coercion. In the second house, although consciously we may
w~nt to maintain the status quo, something external can come
along to undermine our financial security or compel us to change
jobs. Of course this is not always easy to accept, especially if we
derive our sense of self-worth and security from our job and financial
position; disruptions in this sphere will then activate much fear and
anxiety. And yet something positive can be born out of these upheavals. Perhaps our core Self is asking that we grow and develop in
new ways through this area of life: we may begin to see that there
are other ways of feeling self-esteem that are not related to our
earning capacity, or we may be forced to develop new skills and
abilities which we wouldn't have bothered to explore if there hadn't
been a crisis. Take the case of a woman who was raised in a wealthy
family and later married a successful businessman: when Uranus
transited her second house, her husband's business ran into severe
difficulties and she was compelled to find work for the first time in
her life. In the end, she not only re-evaluated her previous attitude
towards money and status, but she also gained a new sense of her
own identity and value in the process.
If we have never bothered too much about money, security or
possessions, we may now find ourselves wanting these things. Conversely, if we have lived our life in the pursuit of financial security
and well-being, this transit may coincide with the emergence of a
different value system, one in which money and security are not the
prime focus. We base our lives on what we value. If we value
security, we make choices for security. If we value freedom, we make
choices for freedom. Up to its usual tricks, Uranus moves through
the second house and disrupts one value system for another, altering
our whole basis for making choices.
The second house also describes innate skills and resources. When
Uranus enters the second, it is a time to take stock of our potential 90 Uranus Transits talents and abilities, to see if there are any we have neglected or
previously put aside, which now might be worth exploring or developing further. We might feel restless or bored with the work we have
been doing, and look for more interesting ways to make money.
However, in any house, through which Uranus is transiting, we are
inclined to make dramatic or extravagant gestures and sweeping
changes, and when it moves through the second we may find
ourselves so frustrated with our work or the way the office or firm is
run that we impulsively give notice there and then. On the whole, I
would usually advise restraint - at least at first. Before picking up
and leaving, look for ways to make an existing job more interesting
or exciting. Obviously, if this can't be done, it may be necessary to
make a clean break and to search for a new line of work, either
within the same field or in another one. None the less it makes sense
to hold on to an old job, if possible, until another is found, rather
than putting ourselves in the position of being without any work
at all. Also, we should remember that every case of Uranus transiting
the second is slightly different, and before advising or passing
judgement in this respect, the whole chart must be taken into consideration.
Third House Uranus brings new experiences to whatever house it transits, and in
the third this means new learning and knowledge. What we learn or
study during this period will have a profound effect on us. A lecture
we hear, a book we read, a conversation with a friend or associate,
not only could suddenly and radically alter our views on particular
issues, but could end up changing our life as well.
We will be receptive to new ideas, trends or currents circulating in
the environment. We wake up in the middle of the night, our head
reeling with new insights and revelations. Or at any time of day,
sudden intuitions or flashes of understanding come to us. Some of
these may be valid and useful, while others will need further reflection and analysis. There are a few pitfalls to watch out for with
Uranus moving through the third. Our thinking might be too radical,
ahead of its time, or (especially) out of touch with practical reality. To the Planets and Through the Houses 91 Uranus enables us to glimpse things which other people cannot or
are not ready to see; we may try to explain our new concepts or
insights to friends, teachers, parents or associates only to receive
back blank stares, while others may be shocked or feel threatened by
what we have to say. If we take time to shift through or to write
down and refine our ideas, we may be more successful in imparting
them to others. Younger people with this transit could experience
some disruption to their education - for instance, they might change
schools and have to adjust to new classmates and new surroundings.
Or they may feel unusually restless and reb~llious with the educational system or with conventional forms of learning. Children or
adolescents having these kinds of difficulties often benefit from discussing and sharing what they are experiencing with an older
person whom they trust.
Because Uranus can make us rather obstinate, during this transit
we might think we have discovered the truth about someone or
something. Absolutely certain that the way we are seeing it is the
only right way, we don't leave much room for compromise, and
adamantly defend our views, no matter how many people disagree
with us. However, Uranus makes us not only obstinate, but also
unpredictable and erratic: a few weeks later we wake up in the
middle of the night with a new realization that drastically alters or
reverses our previous standpoint, and we will now passionately defend
this new point of view, until Uranus revolutionizes our thinking
again.
This transit alters our perception of life around us. We might grow
bored or dissatisfied with where we are living, and believe that
moving to a different part of town, or moving to another area of the
country, or even a different country, will resolve our restlessness.
Before uprooting, however, it makes sense to try to make better use
of our present environment - to search out aspects of it we haven't
yet taken advantage of or explored, to make an effort to meet new
people or expand our existing circle of friends, groups or interests in
the present location. If this doesn't prove possible or satisfactory, a
change of environment could be exactly in line with what Uranus
transiting the third house has in mind for us. In some cases, however,
this kind of move is not undertaken by choice, butby coercion: our 92 Uranus Transits family moves and we have to go with them, or we have to move
because of our work, or our spouse changes employment or is
transferred. If such a situation occurs under this transit, it may mean
that a disruption of this sort is needed for our next stage of growth or
development, or that some experiences await us in a new environment
that couldn't transpire where we are now. Alternatively, Uranus may
be asking that we take a stand, and refuse to be forced into a move.
The kinds of aspects transiting Uranus is making to other planets in
the chart may help to clarify the best way to handle the situation.
In a number of charts I have seen, Uranus transiting the third
coincides with a phase when relatives, siblings or neighbours are
experiencing significant changes or upheaval in their lives, and
something they are going through at this time may directly affect us.
Fourth House
We might experience Uranus crossing the IC and moving into the
fourth house as a bolt of energy emanating from the depths of our
being, or as an inner explosion of energy which releases hidden or
repressed aspects of our personality. Changes of a deep nature are
occurring. This is not a time to inhibit or sacrifice our own inner
needs and desires for the sake of keeping the peace or making other
people happy. We need to listen to and respect what is happening
inside us, make space for ourselves, and wake up to who we are.
Other people may not like this, especially if they have grown
accustomed to our behaving in set or predictable patterns, but there
is no way around the fact that during this transit we need room to
grow and change. I have done many charts for people with Uranus
transiting in this position, and in most cases they have expressed a
powerful need to act on what they were feeling. One person even
compared the transit to internal fireworks. Inner urges exert such a
strong pressure now that we may have no option but to respond to
them. Those people with this transit who didn't feel or respect this
inner pressure did not escape untouched, but were those who had
change thrust upon them. Although they didn't chose to recognize
or act on their own urges to alter facets of their life or behaviour,
external influences chose this time to invoke disruption. To the Planets and Through the Houses 93 The fourth house is associated with our home base. Uranus transiting this house doesn't want to leave these aspects of our life the
same. In its most simplistic expression, Uranus here could indicate
the time to redecorate our home - to change the colour scheme,
rearrange the furniture, replace old, familiar fittings with new ones,
etc. We could even take this a step further and consider a move to a
new home altogether. Most people are quite happy to change residences when Uranus is transiting this area of the chart, since they
feel restless and bored with the known, or they have outgrown
existing circumstances. The present home is too small or too big or
not in the right area, and moving is the obvious thing to do.
However, there are some instances where Uranus might force a
move. If this is the case, we will need to grieve for the loss of what
we have known. Given time, we will come to see that the change
was necessary to bring out qualities in ourselves which would have
remained undeveloped in the old situation.
With Uranus in the fourth, domestic disruption can come in other
forms: someone new isborn or brought into the home, a grown-up
child leaves the nest, a flatmate goes through a major change or
upheaval, the family breaks up, etc. Compared with the transits of
Neptune and Pluto, we are usually able to discern more readily a
deeper meaning or purpose in negative events under Uranus transits:
Uranus may bring upheaval, but it also stimulates the intuition and
that part of the brain which can perceive relevance in what we have
to face or endure. Whereas Neptune or Pluto transiting the fourth
sometimes coincides with experiences which can be quite devastating, we noqnally are able to adjust to Uranian changes more quickly.
After the necessary period of mourning, the intuitive resourcefulness
naturally associated with Uranus helps us to pick up the pieces and
to build a new life for ourselves.
The fourth house shows the influence of our family of origin on
us, our early childhood conditioning and our inborn predisposition.
From these factors, we form 'scripts', patterns or beliefs about what
kind of person we are and what to expect in life. For instance, natal
Saturn in the fourth could indicate unhappiness, pain or difficulty in
the growing-up years which leaves a psychic wound or scar; because
of these early experiences, we form the opinion that we are not good 94 Uranus Transits enough to be loved, or we harbour a conscious or unconscious fear
that our later life will bear the same bitter fruits. When Uranus
transits the fourth, these old scripts and patterns are activated: we
attract situations which bring them to the surface, and we catch
ourselves reliving childhood issues in our present home situation. At
the very least, Uranus transiting the fourth marks the time to begin
to work more constructively with issues from childhood. The intuitive insights attending a Uranus transit enable us to look more
objectively at our patterns and scripts - we can better understand
how they were formed and how they have been influencing us.
Uranus can liberate us from the bondage of repetition. ·Bringing
these patterns to light and exploring their origins are the first steps
towards sorting through them and ultimately gaining a greater
degree of freedom from their less pleasant ramifications.
The fourth house also describes our experience of mother or
father, depending on which parent 'fits' best with the placements in
this house. 5 If we take the fourth to indicate father, Uranus transits
to this area of the chart could show a change in his circumstances or
situation, or we may find that, at this time, we are able to perceive or
to interact with him in a new way, breaking through old patterns or
boundaries that have previously defined our relationship to him.
Transiting Uranus in the fourth house is an opportunity to find
the power from within ourselves to direct our own lives. We discover
an inner strength, an inner sense of independence which may have
been missing in our personality up to now, and then gain a new
sense of direction or purpose. This transit has the potential to rock
the foundations of our being in a way no other transit can. Fifth House
When Uranus moves through the fourth, the place 'where we are
coming from' changes. Now, as Uranus enters and transits the fifth,
our newly freed spirit has the chance to reveal itself more fully. The
underlying impulse behind the fifth house is to express that part of
us which is unique and individual. Transiting Uranus steps up the
tempo of this house, making this a time to explore our new sense of
self. If we are too cautious or too held back during this period, we To the Planets and Through the Houses 95 will miss opportunities to discover more about who we are and what
we are capable of doing.
Uranus hates boredom, and its transit of our fifth house kindles
our enthusiasm and involvement in life. During this period, we
discover or gravitate towards new hobbies or interests which excite
us, and, in general, I would encourage people to follow any impulses
they have to become involved in spare:time or recreational pursuits
while under this transit. Th~§e outlets not only stimulate our enjoyment of life, but also provide the medium through which our inner
nature can express itself. However, should we become too obsessed
with a hobby or interest, we may need to exercise some restraint:
staying up all night playing with a new computer or avidly reading
about astrology can be both stimulating and fulfilling, but what
about the job we have to go to the next morning? Are we so engaged
in a hobby or recreation that those around us are beginning to feel
neglected? And, above all, is the hobby safe? I wouldn't feel too
comfortable encouraging (beyond a certain point) a new-found interest in gambling or fast cars. As usual with Uranus, discretion and
caution are needed.
Those of us already involved in artistic activities could experience
breakthroughs in this area. Or we may wake up to previously
undeveloped creative potential. If we are bored with the kinds of
creative outlets in which we normally engage, we might want to
experiment with different media and techniques. Some of these
attempts could fail miserably, while others could open new avenues
of expression we never thought possible. We won't know unless we
try.
Romance comes under the umbrella of the fifth house, and if we are
restless or dissatisfied with an existing liaison, Uranus will bring these
feelings to the surface. Unless we can find some way of breathing new
life into our old relationships, we are in the right frame of mind to be
receptive to something else coming along. We may meet someone who
serves as a catalyst to reawaken our emotional or sexual.life, or who
introduces us to things we've never tried before, marking a new
chapter in our life. Under a transit of Uranus, however, whether the
new relationship lasts is a moot point; it may pull us out of a rut, but
once this purpose has been achieved, it could disappear from the scene. 96 Uranus Transits We might become involved with someone different from the kind
of person we have been attracted to in the past, or there may be
something unusual or unconventional about the relationship itself.
Wherever· Uranus is transiting, there we find ourselves acting in
ways not in accord with conventional values, or not in line with
how we have behaved in the past. We surprise not only others, but
ourselves as well.
The fifth house - the house of creativ§ self-expression - describes
something about our offspring and our relationships with them.
When Uranus transits here, our lives could be changed by becoming
a parent for the first time. (This can sometimes happen unexpectedly,
so precautions will need to be taken if we don't wish to become a
parent at this time.) The existing relationships between ourselves
and our children could alter in some way, and a child may leave
home or go through an unusually rebellious or disruptive phase.
Uranus may be asking us to relinquish the hold we have tried to
maintain on our children, so that they can be free to find their own
identities. The challenge is to find the right balance between allowing
them greater autonomy, while still being there for them and setting
the limits they need.
Sixth House Uranus moving through this house can bring change or disruption
in the areas of work and health. If our present employment is boring
or doesn't challenge us enough, Uranus will want to alter these
circumstances. This does not necessarily mean changing our line of
work altogether. We can first look for ways to enliven our present
job by introducing new projects, schemes or incentives, or by moving
to another department or branch of the same place of employment.
If innovations of this kind are not possible, then it probably is the
appropriate time to seek work somewhere else.
In some cases, Uranus moving through the 6th corresponds to
pursuing an entirely new vocation, which intrigues or interests us.
This is a good time to undertake any training which would equip us
with fresh skills. Wherever Uranus is transiting, we are meant to be
adventurous and willing to experiment, although it may be wise to To the Planets and Through the Houses 97 keep our old job until we find something with which to replace it, or
until we have sufficient training to embark on new ventures. We
might undertake work considered unusual by conventional standards, or a job of a 'Uranian' nature, such as a career in science,
technology or the field of computers. Some people become involved
in ventures which are communal or co-operative. Whatever the job,
we need to be free to express our own style and originality.
We might be forced into a change of work when Uranus is
transiting the sixth house: we may be fired or made redundant, or
the company that employs us could go bankrupt or through a major
reshuffle. Should this be the· case, there is likely to be some hidden
meaning or purpose in these occurrences. If we have been finding
our work dull and uninteresting, but haven't bothered to do anything
to alter these circumstances, it may be that we have attracted this
external disruption (through the promptings of the core Self) in
order to confront needed changes. If we have been too attached to or
identified with our work, and have neglected other areas of our life
as a result, the disruption could serve to redress this imbalance.
While long-term unemployment can turn into a gruelling ordeal, a
period off work could give us a chance to reassess our priorities and
reconsider what kind of job would best suit our nature.
Uranus transiting the sixth can affect our health and the relationship we have to our own body. We are motivated to change our
diet, take up an exercise routine, or to try some form of healing or
therapy which would enhance our physical or psychological wellbeing. I've met a number ofpeople with transiting Uranus in the sixth
who developed - some for the first time in their lives - an interest in
health and healing. Also, because this house describes the connection
between body and mind, emotional problems and psychological
distress can manifest themselves in illness and disease; obviously, the
state of our health will also affect our mind and feelings. If we fall ill
during this time, it may be a sign that our body is trying to tell us of
adjustments we need to make in the way we are leading our lives.
Seventh House
Uranus transiting the seventh signals change in the area of rela- 98 Uranus Transits tionships and, most obviously, we may want to disrupt an existing
partnership. An urge like this doesn't just appear overnight - it has
probably been gaining momentum for a while. When Uranus crosses
- the descendant and moves into the seventh, we can no longer easily
contain our grumblings and frustrations with an unsatisfying relationship, and, more than likely, these feelings erupt and compel us to
act. We might want to end the relationship entirely, hoping or
knowing that there is something better 'out there' for us. Or we feel
that bei.Iig on our own would be preferable to keeping to the status
quo. One way or another, we believe our relationship is no longer
what is meant for us. That part of us which is willing to act for
change takes the upper hand, gaining supremacy over our desire to
maintain and preserve what we already have and know.
In some cases, it may be possible to stay with our partner and
work on improving the relationship. This will take a certain amount
of courage: we will have to stand up to the other person and voice
our restlessness or frustration. If we have been doing most of the
adjusting and compromising, now is the time for the other person to
adapt to us for a change. However, if we always have been the one
in control, Uranus may be asking that we allow a partner more
power, and learn how to be more co-operative and flexible.
With transiting Uranus in the seventh, we may need more space
and -freedom to explore who we are independently of an existing
relationship. This transit could bring a new person into our lives
who excites or arouses our passions; there is something powerful
about the meeting, as if we have 'known' that person before. If we
are already in a relatively happy relationship, this new attraction
will present a dilemma. Do we keep what we have or risk giving it up
in order to pursue this new relationship? If we are in a relationship
which is unstable and unfulfilling, the new person will seem like the
answer to our dreams, and serve as a catalyst to bring about needed
changes.
As with a Uranus-Venus transit or p. transit of Uranus through
the fifth house, whether this new relationship will last is debatable:
its purpose may be solely to provoke us out of a rut and to 'inspire'
us to find new ways of relating to others. There is no precise way to
determine the outcome, although we may glean some clues through To the Planets and Through the Houses 99 examining the nature of the aspects transiting Uranus will be making
in the coming years. Let's say that Uranus crosses your seventh
house cusp and you break up your existing relationship for the sake
of something new. If, in three or four years' time, Uranus will be
making a square to your natal Venus in the fourth, the new
relationship may not survive that transit. However, if Uranus doesn't
make too many stressful aspects in its journey through the seventh,
any new relationship formed during that period may have a better
chance of enduring.
On the whole, what's been discussed so far makes it sound as if
transiting Uranus in the seventh is likely to destroy any relationship
we are already in. This is not necessarily the case, but Uranus does
demand that we re-examine existing partnerships and work on what
needs to be improved. Uranus doesn't want us to stay in something
solely from a sense of duty or obligation, or from a fear of the
unknown. Uranus wants truth, not pretence. If, with Uranus transiting this house, we want to preserve an unfulfilled or floundering
relationship, we had better find some way of breathing new life into
it. However, if we aren't in a relationship, this transit could bring
one to us. People we meet now can have the effect of changing our
lives dramatically, and this is a good time to circulate and go to
places we've never been to before.
Sometimes under this transit another person leaves or walks out on
us. In other words, change is forced on us through this area of life. It
would be wise to examine what role we might have played in bringing
·this almut. Have we been feeling restless and unhappy for some time,
but not doing anything about it? Have we unconsciously provoked
the other person to leave in order to gain the freedom or space we
want for ourselves? If one part of us was feeling imprisoned or trapped
by the relationship and we haven't been attending to these feelings,
it's possible our core Self provoked the other person to carry out what·
we have been afraid or unwilling to do. We may need to experience
this kind of disruption in order to develop parts of ourselves we would
have neglected otherwise. We still need to mourn the loss of the
existing relationship, and accept the reactions of anger and betrayal
caused by the other person leaving, but in time we will probably be
able to find meaning or relevance in what we have had to go through. 100 Uranus Transits The descendant suggests aspects of our nature to which we are
blind. As a result, we usually identify more readily with the ascendant,
and attract the descendant through others. For instance, if we have
Aries rising and Libra on the seventh house cusp, we will probably be
more in touch with our need for independence, assertion and power
{Aries), and less at home with that part of ourselves which must learn
to compromise, blend and balance with others {Libra). We often attract
a partner who in some way reflects our descendant sign: in this case,
we look for someone with obvious Lib ran traits, rather than ex~ressing
these in ourselves. However, Uranus crossing the descendant can
awaken the qualities ofour descendant in us. Developing the characteristics associated with this sign will help to balance out any tendency we
have had to go overboard in the expression of our ascendant, and we
thus become more whole and complete in ourselves.
The seventh house also describes how we relate to the public and
society in general. When Uranus is moving through this area of the
chart, we can act as an agent of change for other people, introducing
them to new ideas or new ways of looking at life. In some cases, our
activities may be considered shocking or condemned as too radical
by the more conventional elements of society.
Eighth House
The urge for closeness and intimacy with another person is one of
our primary drives. As a child, our lives depend on another person
loving, feeding and looking after us. Later, as an adult, we can
probably ..Survive on our own, but we still seek fulfilment through
love and relationships. The seventh house describes quite a bit about
what we meet in partnership, but the eighth house goes a step
further and depicts what we are like in situations of intimacy -what
happens behind closed doors. The eighth indicates the kinds of exchanges that go on between ourselves and another: what we give
and receive in a relationship. This can mean money, joint finances
and resources, but it can also mean the kinds of emotions and
feelings that pass between ourselves and those with whom we are
closely involved. When Uranus transits the eighth, we will experience
change and disruption in this sphere of life. To the Planets and Through the Houses I oI Our partner's financial situation could alter under this transit. His
or her business might suddenly take off, or she or he could receive
an unexpected windfall in the post, but equally our partner might
suffer financial setbacks, and our own security could be shaken in
the process. Which way it goes would depend not only on the kind of
aspects transiting Uranus in the eighth makes to other planets in our
chart, but also on what was happening in our partner's chart as
well.
This transit could also indicate our embarking on a new business
partnership, or changes within existing business relationships (again,
the aspects of transiting Uranus will have to be taken into consideration). If Uranus is making harmonious aspects to other planets in
our chart, changes in our business relationships are probably favourable. But if transiting Uranus makes difficult aspects to the chart,
changes which occur at this time could be more fraught and disturbing, and the positive consequences less certain.
Money and material resources, however, are not the only things
shared between people. Under this transit, our lives can be affected
strongly by emotional. and psychological changes which we or a
partner are experiencing. A woman came to me for a reading when
Uranus was moving through her eighth house. During this period,
her actor husband faced a long spell out of work, and consequently
spent much more time at home than was usual. He grew increasingly
restless, moody, depressed and more difficult to live with - qualities
she had never experienced in him before. Uranus transiting her
eighth reflected changes in her husband's situation, and stirred
issues which challenged and tested their relationship.·
Reminiscent of Uranus transiting the fourth, transiting Uranus in
the eighth also asks that we examine hidden sides of ourselves.
Problems that arise between us and others at this time reveal deep
patterns and complexes rooted in childhood (or from past lives, if
you believe in the theory of karma and reincarnation). If, as a child,
your mother repeatedly pushed you away when you reached out for
her, you will form certain opinions of beliefs about life and yourself.
You might think you are unlovable and unworthy. You might form
the opinion that whenever you ask for something you need, you will
be rejected. At the time, you might have tried to cushion the pain of 102 Uranus Transits rejection by telling yourself that you didn't really need anyone
anyway. But later in life you throw a childish tantrum whenever
another person can't meet a demand. Uranus transiting the eighth
works to expose these kinds of deep-seated complexes, scripts or lifestatements.
The eighth house is the area of the chart in which we learn how
to merge more closely with another person - where we die as an 'I'
to be reborn as 'we'. The sexual act is the physical expression and
the closest approximation oftwo people coming together and uniting.
When Uranus transits the eighth, we have a chance to open to
others in ways we have never done before. If, for example, we've had
difficulty expressing ourselves sexually or fully letting go with another person, this could be a time of breakthrough. Married people
may be able to breathe new life into their sexual relationship.
Whatever our situation, married or single, we might meet someone
new who expands our sexual horizons.
The eighth is concerned not only with other people's values, but
also with death, and our mortality might become an issue for us
when Uranus moves through this house. In some cases, we might
experience the death (perhaps sudden or unexpected) of someone
close to us, and this could awaken an awareness of our own finitude,
or of the precious brevity of lilfe. * Our attention may turn t{) a study
of death or the philosophy of karma and reincarnation. Or, motivated
by a desire to understand the hidden laws and forces operating in
life, our interest could move in more unconventional directions
towards the occult or magic, but, as always with Uranus, anything
extreme or eccentric should be guarded against. It's also possible
that during this transit we suddenly come into money via an inheritance.
Ninth House The ninth house is where we look for guidelines and goals which
will help us steer the course of our lives. It describes our quest for
*See Suggested Reading (p. 396) for a list of books dealing with death and the
grieving process.
\- To the Planets and Through the Houses 103 meaning, and the search for ideals and precepts upon which we can
base the choices we have to make in daily existence. When Uranus
transits this house, our world view and perspective on life isn't
meant to stay the same, and our philosophy in life and our religious
attitudes and beliefs could alter radically under this transit. Devout
Christians might begin to question some of the basic doctrines of
their religion, experiencing a crisis of faith for the first time, which
may manifest itself as Uranian 'rebelliousness', an inability to accept
the authority of the Church any more. Staunch atheists could
discover God, or experience sudden mystical revelations or illuminating insights about the meaning of life. One way or another, our
prevailing belief system will be challenged by new ideas and concepts
which don't fit comfortably into the old framework. It may all
happen suddenly: we wake up in the middle of the night with a
vision, or attend a lecture or read a book which revolutionizes our
thinking, or more precisely, our faith. A chance encounter or meeting
with a wise person leaves us reeling, and although we may not see
the world the same way as before, we may (as Blake said) 'see the
world in a grain of sand'. Changes in one's philosophy are not to be
taken lightly. When our belief system alters, our values also change.
And when our values change, the kinds of choices we make about
how to lead our life will not remain the same. For this reason, with
Uranus moving through the ninth, the direction we have been
taking in life could radically alter.
Consonant with these interests is higher education, another
ninth-house concern. I've met a number of clients who altered their
course of study during this transit: some changed from the sciences
to the arts, others from the arts to the sciences. We could start out as
a philosophy student and end up with a degree in computer science.
Under this transit, we may choose to pursue our education in
unconventional ways, or undertake a course of study which is
unusual in some respect. We could become the campus rebel, fighting
for changes in the educational or political system of our university
or college. We may have new ideas, concepts and insights to contribute to our chosen branch of knowledge or to the field of education
itself.
Travel also comes under the ninth house, and a Uranus transit 104 Uranus Transits could bring unexpected or unusual experiences on long journeys.
We visit a country intending to stay for a week, and end up living
there, or we meet people or encounter situations while travelling
that dramatically change our lives. Travel plans could be disrupted:
we head for one destination and wind up in another, or the places
we visit may themselves be unusual or out of the way. In any event,
we don't come back the same person as when we left.
Because the influence of Uranus is unpredictable and generates
erratic behaviour, when it transits this house our plans for the
future 'chop and change': we start out with certain goals but finish
up with entirely different ones. At any moment, we could receive an
intuitive flash - a picture or insight that tells us what we are 'meant'
to be doing with our lives, and the direction we need to take to arrive
there. Some of these inspirations or visions may be useful and
profound, but others may prove misguided or off the mark. The
aspects transiting Uranus in the ninth makes to the rest of the chart
could help clarify how reliable our revelations are. If transiting
Uranus is forming a difficult aspect to Mercury, Jupiter or Neptune, it
may be wise to reflect very carefully on ideas which come to us 'out
of the blue'. However, under this transit, our convictions and beliefs
often are felt so strongly that nobody will be able to talk us out of
them. It's worth remembering that there are many different ways of
finding truth and of giving meaning to life, each contributing to the
good of the collective. Should we turn our own particular view of the
truth into an absolute, we box ourselves into a very tight corner.
Fortunately, with Uranus around, we are unlikely to be allowed to
remain fixed in one belief system for very long before something
happens that seriously challenges our rigid position. Don't forget Uranus may be stubborn, but it's also changeable.
Tenth House While Uranus moves through the ninth, our overall world view and
the way we find meaning in life alter significantly. When Uranus
enters the tenth, the consequences of these changes become outwardly apparent, especially in terms of our social role. Because the
ways we give meaning or value to our lives have changed, we may To the Planets and Through the Houses I o5 not want to remain in the same line of work as before. We feel a
'calling', a need for a 'vocation', and are motivated to find work
which will be in accord with our current interests.
Some people with this transit will set up businesses of their own at
this time, while others may become involved with unusual careers
and enterprises. Sometimes an offer of new work comes unexpectedly, and it is too intriguing or inviting to turn down. Generally, if clients with Uranus transiting the tenth speak about their
desire to change professions, I wouldn't argue with them. Uranus is
a forceful planet, and the time probably is appropriate to make a
change. However, I will explore with them the possibility of staying
in their work, but making room within it for something new to
happen. Could they introduce new projects or incentives which
would enliven their existing duties? Could they convince a boss to
give them the freedom to pursue their work in a way which would
be more satisfying? Perhaps extra responsibilities, as well as greater
freedom and autonomy (the Uranian watchwords) to act upon
them, would assuage our professional restlessness.
If we haven't acknowledged our need for some sort of change in
our work situation at this time, we may be forced into changing. In
some cases, this transit coincides with redundancy or the folding of a
business, but through these contingencies we are coerced into another direction or into a new field. Or we may be restless and bored
with our job, but hesitant to do anything concrete about these
feelings: we grow increasingly intolerant towards those in charge,
and increasingly resentful of being told what to do. Pressure builds
until a confrontation is inevitable, and we either hand in our notice
and storm out of the office, or we are fired.
In whatever house Uranus is transiting, we want to break free of
restrictions and old, outworn patterns. In the tenth house of social
conventions and norms, this could express itself in a desire to act in
ways which challenge the existing values and expectations of society.
We don't mind shocking others during this period. We could end up
fighting the establishment, or battling against outdated or unfair
laws and mores, or we may be the agent or catalyst for helping to
bring new ideas or trends to the collective.
Parental issues also arise with Uranus transiting the tenth. 106 Uranus Transits Whether the tenth is associated with mother or father, Uranus
transiting here usually manifests as an urge to break free of their
domination or influence. We might stand up to them in a way we've
never dared to before, rebelling against their views, and following
our own inclinations whether they like it or not. In order to separate
our own identity from others, we may have to challenge the image
and expectations they have of us. We also could have breakthroughs
in how we relate to a parent. We may have had difficulty communicating or connecting with our mother, for instance, but under
this transit we see her in a new light, and the relationship improves.
Finally, in some cases, Uranus through the tenth is synchronous
with one or both of the parents experiencing a major change or
disruption - positive or negative - which somehow directly affects
our own life.
Eleventh House Our goals and objectives in life (especially those concerning our
sense of belonging to or contributing to society and something larger
than ourselves) are likely to change significantly under this transit.
Our former goals no longer seem relevant or feel too limited and
restricting, and we find ourselves with aims and ambitions we never
believed would be important to us. People who haven't thought
much about money or security look for ways to increase their
material well-being, while those who have always been predominantly practical or down-to-earth may suddenly discover an interest
in other, less tangible dimensions of life.
As with Uranus transiting the ninth, we discover new ideologies
and belief systems· which challenge or expand our usual ways of
looking at life. This may coincide (in true eleventh-house fashion)
with the discovery of groups or organizations that previously didn't
interest us, or we knew nothing about. This is usually a good time
for involvement with groups, and I would generally encourage a
person with Uranus transiting the eleventh to explore different
group activities. We might align ourselves with 'Uranian' groups:
humanitarian or political organizations which promote changes in
society. In the past we may not have given much thought to social To the Planets and Through the Houses 107 issues, but now we ardently feel the need to be inyolved in these
matters. However, groups which are too radical or extreme in their
views or purpose could lead us into some difficulties under this
transit - especially if transiting Uranus in the eleventh is making
stressful aspects to other planets in the chart.
With Uranus moving through the eleventh, the initial enthusiasm
and excitement we feel when we first discover a new organization or
direction in life is bound to ebb slightly away after a while. We may
think we have discovered a group, cause or formula which will be
the answer to everything, but if our expectations are too high,
'inflated' or unrealistic, we will eventually be disappointed. On the
other hand, if we are already involved with a group when this
transit first begins, we could become disenchanted with how it is run
or find ourselves increasingly at odds with the aims it espouses.
Other group members may find us too refractory, too challenging,
and we end up battling with them over certain principles - possibly
to the point where we feel the need to break with the group altogether.
Uranus brings disruption wherever it transits, and in the eleventh
this occurs not only in the area of goals and groups, but also in the
sphere of friendship. During this period, we replace some of our old
friends with new ones, whose thinking and ways of life are more in
accord with our present way of seeing things. A friend may be the
vehicle or catalyst for bringing to us new ideas or insights that alter
our life. Provided that we aren't being wildly unrealistic or extreme
in our behaviour, attitude or choice of groups and friends at this
time, we can generally trust the kinds of changes, insights and
revelations Uranus brings at this time.
Twelfth House
Traditionally, the twelfth house describes patterns, drives, urges and
compulsions which operate unconsciously and yet significantly influence our choices, attitudes and directions in life. What the conscious
mind isn't in touch with or doesn't choose to acknowledge is 'stored'
- even 'imprisoned' - in the twelfth. Uranus transiting here has the
effect of forcing some of these unconscious complexes and com- ro8 Uranus Transits pulsions into conscious awareness. For instance, if you have an
unconscious fear of being rejected, when Uranus transits the twelfth,
you somehow attract situations which compel you to confront and
learn about that fear. In short, during this period. Uranus changes
us by exposing more of what is hidden or lurking in the recesses of
our psyche.
Some of what we discover about ourselves when Uranus transits
the twelfth may be frightening and disconcerting, but this transit
can also serve to connect us to parts of ourselves which are positive
and beneficial. The unconscious, as shown by the twelfth house, is
not just the storehouse of negative patterns or feelings from the past:
it is also the reservoir of untapped positive potential we have yet to
develop. This is a good period to undertake some inner psychological
exploration, some 'deep diving' in this watery house, either through
psychotherapy or other related avenues and techniques. In this way,
we co-operate with Uranus in its effort to reveal and illuminate what
previously has been undifferentiated or inaccessible in us.
Under this transit - often in unexpected and unusual ways people and circumstances from our past (and this may mean past
lives) will reappear, giving us an opportunity to resolve unfinished
issues with them. They might literally turn up on our doorstep, or .
they come to us more indirectly in our dreams or fantasies. Irr any
case, our past returns to greet or haunt us. There may be unfinished
business to resolve, or the joy of rediscovering someone we once
knew and loved. Meeting the past and settling old scores can be both
cleansing and healing, preparing the way for the rebirth which will
occur when Uranus crosses over our ascendant and into our first
house.
When Uranus moves through the twelfth, the ordinary boundaries
between ourselves and others break down. This could mark a period
of psychic insights and revelations, a time when we are unusually
attuned to the feeiings of others. A friend might be a thousand miles
away, but somehow we sense accurately what he or she is going
through. Or we dream about someone and that person rings up or
knocks on our door the next day. Some of our psychic insights might
be disturbing; others could be of a more positive or revelatory
nature. How much these should be trusted is hard to say, although To the Planets and Through the Houses 109 (once again) some indication of their validity or truth could be
gleaned by analysing the kinds of aspects transiting Uranus in the
twelfth is making to other planets in our chart. We will also be more
sensitive to collective trends or currents in the atmosphere. We may
have sudden precognitions about what trouble spots in the world
will flare up next, or uncanny foresight into what new styles,
fashions or movements are about to burst on to the scene. Some of
us may serve as channels to bring change and new ideas to the collective.
The twelfth house is associated with institutions - hospitals,
prisons, museums, libraries or organizations of a charitable nature.
If we have been aligned with an institution for some time, Uranus
transiting the twelfth could indicate a phase of feeling dissatisfied
with our role there, or increasingly unhappy about how the place is
run. We may want to promote change or reform within an institution, and it's possible we will run into conflicts with authority
figures in this respect. If institutions have not played much of a part
in our life, this could change with Uranus in the twelfth, and we
may want to devote some of our time to serving or caring for others
less fortunate than ourselves ..
Many people describe Uranus in the twelfth as a time when they
both feel more restless and more hamstrung than usual: they want
to make changes in their lives, and yet they are not yet able to carry
these out, or they can't quite put their finger on how or where to
start. Change is brewing, to be sure, but it may not be ready to take
shape fully until Uranus finally crosses the ascendant and moves
into the first house. In the meantime, we can prepare the groundwork by tying up the loose ends of the phase of life which is about to
finish. PART THREE Neptune Transits 6
Neptunian Crises
Our destiny, our being's heart and home
Is with infinitude, and only there.
WORDSWORTH These words, written by a great English Romantic poet, encapsulate
the essence of Neptune: the desire to go beyond the sense of being a
separate self and to merge with something greater. Although we
often speak of 'finding ourselves', that is, of discovering our unique
identity or defining ourselves through self-chosen attributes and
achievements, Neptune is the opposite: it is the urge to lose ourselves,
to dissolve or transcend the boundaries of the isolated ego. But
before we can fully comprehend what dissolving or transcending the
ego means or entails, we should first recall what is meant by ego.
Briefly defined, ego is the sense of ourselves as a separate individual: in other words, our sense of 'I'. Being an 'I' means we can
define ourselves: we are this but not that, we end somewhere and
other people begin somewhere else. However, we are not born with
an ego or sense of 'I', and in the womb, we are unaware of ourselves
as separate: we are at one with mother, and mother is the whole
world to us. Therefore, we think we are the whole world; we think
we are everything, and experience what Freud called an 'oceanic'
sense of reality. Gradually after birth, however, we begin to differentiate and distinguish ourselves not only from mothei, but also
from the environment as well. We grow to recognize that we are
distinct or separate from other people and things around us. There is
self and there is not-self.
Not only do we distinguish ourselves from other people, but we
also come to identify ourselves with certain parts of our personality
and nature, at the same time as denying or splitting off from other
parts of our own psyche. In other words, in addition to the self/others II3 II4 Neptune Transits split, a boundary or division also exists between our ego (our sense
of who we are) and other facets of our nature which we won't
acknowledge as belonging to ourselves or which we don't even
know are there. For instance, we might identify with that part of us
which is kind and loving, and deny or repress that part which is
negative and destructive. In this way, the I/not-I split involves not
only drawing a line between ourselves and others; it is also dividing
our own wholeness into two parts - what we are conscious of and
willing to identify as being in us versus what we are unconscious of
or unwilling to admit as part of us.
Neptune is a boundary-dissolver, and by transit, Neptune blurs or
dissolves the boundary between ourselves and others. Neptune transiting the Sun, for instance, could be a time when we 'lose' ourselves
in another person, or have experiences of our oneness with all life.
But Neptune also breaks down the internal boundary between conscious and unconscious, flooding or overwhelming our existing egoidentity with contents from our conscious. If we have mainly identified ourselves as strong, confident and capable, then under a Neptune
transit to our Sun, we could discover a confused, weak or helpless
side to our nature. Neptune is like a solvent, diluting the strength of
a previously concentrated energy, whether this is a carefully structured career plan or relationship, or a tenaciously held conviction or
an inner attitude towards ourselves or the world. Neptune undermines boundaries, whether those between ourselves and others,
or those between our ego and unconscious.
Oneness and Separateness The boundary-eroding effect of transiting Neptune can enhance our
awareness of the oneness of all life, and increase our empathy and
feeling of connectedness to everything else in existence. Grasping the
concept of the essential unity of all life is not easy. It's even more
difficult for those of us in Western society who have been thoroughly
inculcated to believe that 'I' end in one place and 'You' begin
somewhere else- what Alan Watts called the 'me-in-here' versus
'you-out-there' reality. 1 However, both Eastern and Western mystics
have always spoken of another dimension of reality in which nothing Neptunian Crises I I 5 exists in isolation. The Buddhists have a saying, 'All in one and one
in All', an idea echoed by Meister Eckhart, a thirteenth-century
Christian mystic who wrote: 'All that man has here externally in
multiplicity is intrinsically One.' Although on the surface 'I' may .
appear different from 'You', and a table is not the same thing as a
chair, at our deepest levels we all share the same basic Beingness or
Is-ness. Neptune symbolizes the urge to dissolve a rigid sense of
individuality and separateness in order to rediscover and reconnect
to the underlying unity of all life.
Some twentieth-century physicists have come to the conclusion
that such mystical revelations about the essential oneness of life are
not devoid of scientific truth. Nineteenth-century physicists viewed
the universe as a collection of different parts, each part separate and
isolated in space and time from other parts. On this assumption, they
then proceeded to measure, define and number all the various bits
and pieces that together made up the universe. Everything could be
labelled and put in its proper place. But with the advent of more
advanced scientific methods and equipment, it was only a matter of
time before physicists ran into problems with the old Newtonian
concept of the world as a mechanism or machine with separate parts
reducible to pieces like a clock.
The trouble started when scientists began to investigate the nature
of subatomic particles, the ultra-microscopic particles which constitute the atom. To their astonishment, they found that the electron
couldn't be located specifically in time or space. If the particles
which comprise the atom refused to be pinned down to one place,
how could the atom be said to be concrete or measurable? And if the
atom was not behaving like a discrete entity, how could people or
objects who are made up of atoms be defined as separate or isolated
from one another?
What was considered to be a single, isolated particle now appeared
to be more like a wave pattern spreading out infinitely across the
universe in all directions. A British physicist, Richard Prosser,
believes that these waves cancel each other out except in one very
small region, in which is found the particle. 'Everything is in a sense
everywhere, but only appears, or manifests, at one particular point.' 2
Another British scientist, David Bohm, theorizes that the universe I I 6 Neptune Transits must be understood as 'a single undivided whole in which separate
and independent parts have no fundamental status'. 3
The transpersonal psychologist Ken Wilber succinctly sums up
the results of major developments in twentieth-century physics:
In short quantum physicists discovered that reality could no longer be viewed as a complex of distinct things and boundaries.
Rather, what we once thought to be bounded 'things' turned out
to be interwoven aspects of each other. For some strange reason,
every thing and every other thing and event in the universe
seemed to be interconnected with every other thing and event in
the universe. The world, the real territory, began to look not like
a collection of billiard balls but more like a single, giant, universal
field, which Whitehead called the 'seamless coat of the universe' . Júpiter Even physics, then, is reaffirming an insight previously ascribed only
to mystics and artists: that at the deepest level of our existence we
are all interconnected.
Neptune represents that part of us which yearns, in the heart of
our being, to dissolve those boundaries and divisions that prevent us
experiencing our essential oneness with the rest of life. In order to do
this, we have. to some degree, to let go of our ego - our separate-self
sense. Transiting Neptune can bring the kind of spiritual or peak
experiences in which we temporarily transcend our normal 'me-inhere versus you-out-there' reality and glimpse that part of us which
is universal and unbounded. When Neptune is active in our chart,
these breakthroughs in consciousness could happen spontaneously,
anywhere and at any time, although they are often associated with
certain feelings or activities - quiet moments communing with
nature, listening to a particular piece of music, meditating on our
own or with a group of people, etc.
The desire to expand and grow spiritually is always there within
us, but will be activated more strongly during certain periods of our
life. Under Neptune transits, the religious or mystical urge could be
triggered by a growing dissatisfaction or unhappiness with our
present life and accomplishments: we might have succeeded admirably on a material or external level, and yet we are left thinking 'So
what? Is that all there is?' Unfulfilled by our search for happiness in Neptunian Crises I I 7 outer things and by our external accomplishments, we may find that
our attention turns inward, and we now look for meaning and
fulfilment in the inner world of spirit. Gurus or religious groups can
guide us on this inward journey, but as the poet Kabir reminds us,
even these can be a trap if we are not careful:
I laugh when I hear that the fish in the water is thirsty.
You don't grasp the fact that what is most alive of all is inside your
own house;
And so you walk from one holy city to the next with a confused look.
Kabir will tell we the truth: go wherever you like, to Calcutta or
Tibet;
If you can't find where your soul is hidden, for you the world will
never be reall 5
Losing the Self
The dissolution of the ego doesn't automatically mean an ecstatic
experience of our infinite and unbounded nature. Losing our existing
ego-boundaries can sometimes feel like coming apart at the seams: we
lose control over what is allowed into conscious awareness and what
is kept out, and as a result, our existing identity is likely to be invaded
by parts of ourselves we previously have managed to keep at bay.
Confused about who we really are, we no longer know what we
want in life. Neptune's yearning to return to a state of primal bliss
can also lead to escapism, suicidal urges and the temptation to lose
the self in drugs, alcohol, or in anything or anyone that comes along.
The defeat of the ego is a humbling experience. As Neptune makes
important transits to our chart, we often find ourselves in situations
we don't want to be in but can do nothing about. We might get
angry at God for bringing such troubles on us, or we might pray to
him for help. Some of us may blame the existing government as the
source of our problems. But, whether we vilify the government or
appeal to the Lord, Neptune transits often compel us to acknowledge
forces 'out there' which are greater and more powerful than we are.
We discover that our ego isn't really running the show at all, and
that it sometimes has to bow to a higher will. n8 Neptune Transits Neptune transits often ask that we sacrifice or let go of aspects of
our life and identify which have been important to us. There may be
people or things we desperately want or feel we need, but the
cosmos, fate or our 'higher Self - however we wish to call it - isn't
willing to provide us with what we so urgently desire. Learning to let
go is a Neptunian lesson. Under certain Neptune transits, we could
find our world crumbling. The rug is taken out from beneath us:
structures and supports we relied on or took for granted fall apart or
are taken away. We feel powerless and at the mercy of life. While
this is happening, it's hard to imagine anything positive could come
out of the dissolution we are experiencing. It feels more like a curse
than some higher force at work serving our life or furthering our
growth. We want to hold on, to turn back the clock and keep things
the way they were. And yet no matter how hard we try, our
attempts to maintain the status quo fail.- It is only when we finally do
give up and let go that we create the possibility for something to come
along to help us through our difficulties and into our next step or phase of
life. The Greek hero Orpheus had to learn this lesson, and the story of
·his love for Eurydice is an example of what can happen when
Neptune makes important transits to our chart.
The Plight of Orpheus Orpheus is a Neptunian hero, a musician and a poet, whose beautiful
songs make trees weep and rocks melt. Through his music, he uplifts
others, expands their awareness, and opens them to feelings and
emotions of a universal or eternal nature. His myth begins on his
wedding day, the day he has married Eurydice, the woman of his
dreams. By rights, he should be overflowing with bliss - but an
accident has occurred: after taking the wedding vows, Eurydice went
for a walk with some friends, stepped on a snake, was bitten and
died. What should have been a time of great joy suddenly turned into
a tragedy. People under Neptune transits may recognize this kind of
experience; for what promises to be wonderful may turn into a
disaster, while what looks to be awful could reveal itself as a blessing
in disguise. Neptune is a boundary-dissolver, and under its influence
even the distinction between ecstasy and pain can become blurred. I Neptunian Crises I I Mercúrio Unable to accept his tragic situation, Orpheus denies the finality of
his beloved's death and employs the tactic of bargaining to try to
win her back. Like most people whose lives are disrupted by a tragic
fate, he wants to turn back the clock, to have things the way they
were before the tragedy happened. By playing a song which puts
Cerberus (the dog who guards the gates to the underworld) to sleep,
he manages to enter the domain of Pluto and Persephone and pleads
with them to allow Eurydice to return with him to the upper world
again. Pluto and Persephone are tough administrators - whoever
dies and goes to the underworld is not usually allowed out again.
But Orpheus, with his poignant words and songs, pleads his case so
convincingly that he manages to influence the king and queen of the
underworld to bend their rules - another example of the way the
force of Neptune can melt rigidity and hardness.
Pluto and Persephone give Orpheus permission to take Eurydice
back to the land of the living, with the stipulation that he doesn't
tum around to look at her until she has arrived in the upper world
again. His hand in hers, he leads Eurydice out of the underworld,
but just as they are about to step into the light of the upper world,
Orpheus can't resist looking back at her. He turns around to gaze
into the eyes of his beloved and she dissolves, along with his hopes
for happiness and fulfilment, into thin air. What promised redemption and renewal disappears before his very eyes, and what promised
fulfilment is tragically lost.
What made Orpheus look back? He was duly warned not to, and
he was so close to achieving his heart's desire. Perhaps he had a
moment of mistrust: 'what if they are fooling me and this isn't
Eurydice behind me, but someone else they have put in her place?'
He doesn't trust; he starts to question and analyse the situation and
this leads him into trouble. Very often, under Neptune transits, we
have an urge or inclination to pursue a certain path: we begin to
move that way, then something stops us and we interrupt the
process. We may want sure-fire guarantees about where the direction we are taking will ultimately lead, but Neptune offers no such
guarantees, requiring what we give of ourselves without knowing
what we will get back in return.
Orpheus is alone again. His bargaining tactic has failed, and he 120 Neptune Transits can no longer deny Eurydice's death. Having exhausted whatever
resources he had to deal with her demise, all that is left to him is to
accept the inevitability of what has happened. Now he has no choice
but to do what he so far has not given himself the chance to do - to
sit down and properly mourn her loss. He has been so busy trying to
fight the situation, he hasn't yet fully surrendered himself to his
sadness and pain.
It happens that he chooses to do his mourning in the vicinity of a
Dionysian orgy, which is just getting into full swing. Here again, we
are faced with the two extremes of Neptune- the bliss and ecstasy of
the revellers compared to the deep grief of Orpheus. The partymakers, seeing Orpheus sitting there so depressed, implore him to
join the fun. We often do the same with our depressed friends,
urging them to come out of the state they're in, inviting. them to
come to this or that party, meet some new people, etc. 'It will do you
good,' we say; 'It will help you get out of yourself.' Seeing them so
unhappy makes us uncomfortable, partly because it reminds us of
the pain we feel for things we have lost in our lives. But Orpheus
refuses to join the party. He wants to stay where he is, not only
physically, but psychologically. The revellers get angry - they're
trying to enjoy themselves and they certainly don't want to listen to
his moaning and to be reminded of all the suffering in the world. So
they decide to kill him. One by one, they hurl their spears towards
him, but the songs and laments he is singing are so mournful and
touching that the javelins stop before actually hitting him. Finally,
the revellers realize that if they scream as loudly as possible the
javelins won't hear his music and be halted in their path. They do
this; the spears hit their mark and Orpheus dies.
And we think: 'Poor Orpheus, what a fate!' But what looks, in this
case, to be such a terrible fate is actually the reverse. His death
means that he will be reunited in the underworld with his lost
Eurydice. They can roam hand in hand through the fields of Hades,
and gaze into each other's eyes as much as they want. Orpheus'
sacrificial death, which at first appears to be yet another tragedy in
his life, turns out to be a blessing in disguise. Bliss turns into pain,
but pain turns into bliss. Under the influence of Neptune, such
dissimulation confounds the certainty of our judgements. ' Neptunian Crises I2I Orpheus' death can be taken literally, but it also can be understood
as symbolic of a major personality change. Fighting to regain Eurydice got him nowhere, but letting go and accepting her loss, even
though it was not what he wanted, brought about a transformation
which enabled him to find peace and reconciliation. In the process,
Orpheus learned one of the lessons that Neptune teaches by transit:
a solution to a problem can sometimes only be found by giving up
trying to find an answer. Likewise, there are times when the ego
exhausts its own resources, and our normal ways of dealing with
problems don't work. But it is only then that a situation is created
which allows us to discover new ways of resolving or coming to
terms with our difficulties - ways we never would have considered
unless. our usual tactics had failed. Jung had this to say about such
times in our lives:
the unconscious always tries to produce an impossible situation in
order to force the individual to bring out his very best. Otherwise
one stops short of one's best, one is not complete, one does not
realize oneself. What is needed is an impossible situation where one
has to renounce one's own will and one's own wit and do nothing
but trust to the impersonal power of growth and developments. 6
Only when the ego has no more power - when our normal ways of
trying to make things better fail - can something else appear to
redeem us. Under a Neptune transit, we may have to remain stuck
for a while in an unpleasant situation until a solution or answer
comes. Our old tricks don't work. We just have to wait:
The faith and the love and the hope are all in the waiting ...
So the darkness shall be the light and the stillness the dancing. 7
An Orphean Client
Acting, a suitably Neptunian profession, was the career choice of a
Pisces man who came to see me for a reading a number of years ago.
At the time of our meeting transiting Neptune was in Sagittarius
and had just finished making its final square to his natal Sun. His
story typifies one way slippery Neptune operates by transit. 122 Neptune Transits Because of the slow, direct and retrograde motion of the outer
planets, a Neptune transit can last a number of years- it moves
forward, backward and then forward again while making an· aspect
to a natal planet. In the case of Joe, the first time transiting Neptune
squared his Pisces Sun, things went rather well. He wasn't long out
of drama school when a prestigious director took him under his
wing, offering him good parts in productions which received a great
deal of public attention. Joe's considerable talent was obvious, and
when transiting Neptune first squared his Sun he won a number of
acting awards. It looked as if his career was made, but, as Joe
discovered, we can't be too sure of anything under a Neptune
transit.
Neptune retrograded to square his Sun again, and for no apparent
reason his career went dead on him. Months went by without the
offer of a good part. Even when he found a role he wanted to play,
situations and events beyond his control seemed to collude to thwart
his ambitions and rob him of what looked like reliable opportunities.
(Neptune often undermines our conscious goals and directions
through the agency of mysterious external circumstances.) The first
square of transiting Neptune to his Sun offered a taste of success and
recognition; the retrograding second square took it away. It's hard
to keep a secure hold on anything when Neptune is around.
Retrograding Neptune turned around and began to move forward
to make the third square to his Sun, and he landed an important
television role. Soon his name was in the air again, and his picture
appeared on the front of various media magazines. Later, however,
when Neptune turned around once more and retrograded nearly
back to the degree of his Sun, he found himself in yet another empty
patch.
Like the fate of The Hanged Man in the Tarot, Neptune kept Joe
dangling, settling on neither success nor failure. If he was hoping to
derive his identity, value or self-worth (the Sun) from the outside
world at this time, he was out of luck. Neptune was teaching him
that he couldn'trely on anything external to give him his sense of
identity: if he was to find it at all, it would have to be from within himself.
In fact, the whole experience had the effect of turning his attention Neptunian Crises 123 inward, rather than outward, in his search for fulfilment. Synchronously Joe met a guru who helped open this kind of awareness for
him through meditation and other spiritual practices. During the
periods when he was out of work, Joe took on the job of his guru's
chauffeur, and generally served him in any way he could. Meditation,
gurus, service, opening to the inner world - these are all the hallmarks of Neptune. Even though the transit of this planet was causing
chaos in the area of career, in other spheres of his life, Joe was
discovering dimensions of his being he never knew existed. Then,
near the end of the duration of this transit, Joe learned that his guru,
the man who had guided him to these new heights of consciousness
and spiritual growth, suffered from a severe drink problem!
Like Orpheus, Joe's fortunes went up and down, from promise to
betrayal and back again. He couldn't rely on his public or even his
guru, and yet through it all he managed to forge an inner sense of
his own worth and identity. His story is reminiscent of the initiation
rites of certain primitive tribes: the initiate is forced to spend a night
alone in a dark cave or wood with nothing from the outside to
support him. He has to face the terrible loneliness of being forsaken.
But if he survives the experience, he discovers what supports him
when everything else he thought supported him isn't there anymore.
Outer things can be taken away, but what you find from within is
yours to keep: this was Neptune's gift to Joe. The Rites of Dionysus
Transiting Neptune can feel 'Dionysian'. Dionysus, the Greek god of
wine and poetry, would gather together a group of followers and get
them drunk. The intoxicating and loosening effects of wine made it
easy for them to abandon themselves - swept away by rapturous
feelings, by ecstasy, ·they let. go of the boundaries and rules that
marked the parameters of their more sober selves. They didn't stop
to think whether their cars were parked on a yellow line or if they
had to be home at a certain time to cook dinner. Neptune, the
boundary-dissolver, loosens the tight hold we have over ourselves,
allowing parts of the psyche into conscious awareness which have
previously been kept underground. In this sense, Neptune is the 124 Neptune Transits antithesis to Saturn because it disintegrates the boundaries which
Saturn creates. Those people with a strong Saturn or Capricorn
element in their charts are usually the ones most frightened of
Neptune: they don't like to relinquish what is known, safe or established, and are afraid that if they let go, they won't be able to put
themselves back together again.
Pentheus, the rational, conservative king of Thebes who wanted
above all to maintain law and order in his domain, couldn't see that
Dionysus was a god. To him, Dionysus looked like a wild man in
animal skins with a bunch of raving women chasing after him,
certainly not the image of divinity. Under stressful Neptunian transits, we may find our world falling apart - structures, props and
supports we used to anchor our sense of self slip away. And, like
Pentheus, we may find it hard to recognize this kind of dissolution as
serving the aims of our deeper, core Self, or ultimately acting in
favour of our evolution. It feels more like a curse than something
positive at work.
Dionysus himself suffered dismemberment when he was torn to
pieces by the Titans, the race to which Saturn belonged. In one
version of the. story, his sister Athene rescues his dismembered heart
and gives it to Zeus. Zeus swallows the heart, mates with mortal
Semele, and Dionysus is born again. (Interestingly, in this mythologem Athene, the goddess of rational wisdom - as distinct from
Dionysian rapturous wisdom - is the god's sister, suggesting a
profound link between them, a necessary complement). Like Dionysus, the twice-born, we die and are reborn many times in our life.
Under difficult Neptune transits, we too may fall to pieces and lose
those things that give us a sense of identity, and yet our heart - our
essence - remains. As long as our essence remains, we can be born
again. Falling apart means dying as we know ourselves, but it also
creates the possibility of putting ourselves back together again in a
new way.
The Blurring of Boundaries: Pros and Cons
Neptune transits loosen the hold we have over what comes into
consciousness and what stays out. Negatively, this means our imagin- Neptunian Crises I 25 ation might run wild - we start to see things that are not really
there, and we believe events are happening which actually aren't.
We could become lost in daydreams and fantasies, out of touch with
concrete reality. Our ability to concentrate or focus suffers, and
consequently we become less efficient at activities which we once
executed with great ease. We can also lose all sense of proportion
with regard to the planet Neptune is contacting by transit. For
instance, when transiting Neptune aspects the Moon, our feelings
might run amok and get us into trouble; when Neptune triggers
Mars, we could act in reckless and foolhardy ways.
Deception and dishonesty are other Neptunian problems, spawned
by Neptune's tendency to blur distinctions and confuse definition.
Under a Neptune transit, we could be the one deceiving others. A
woman with Neptune transiting her Venus entered a marriage of
convenience with a man in order to emigrate to his country. To the
immigration authorities, the marriage looked real- in actuality, it
was a favade. A man with transiting Neptune aspecting his Mercury
made it appear as if he worked for a certain company run by a friend
in order to persuade the bank to give him a mortgage. However, a
Neptune transit (especially the opposition) could mean we are the
victim of someone else's fraud or dishonesty. A woman with Neptune
opposing her Sun discovered that her fiance had been lying to her
about his status at work. A man with Neptune opposing his Moon
had no idea his wife was having an affair with a neighbour.
More positively, Neptune's tendency to diffuse existing ego-boundaries also has the effect of stimulating our creative imagination. We
become more receptive to what is known as the 'imaginal realm' or
'mythic realm', the plane of existence on which archetypal and
universal images, ideas and feelings circulate. Through some kind of
creative outlet, we could become the medium through which these
images are communicated to others. Mystics and modern-day prophets also tap into this realm, and receive 'messages' or visions
which they impart to the world. Under a Neptune transit, the
reliability of these messages does depend on how 'pure' a channel
the medium is. Personal biases and unresolved emotional complexes
(such as an infantile desire for omnipotence) could obscure or distort
the truth of what supposedly is being channelled. 126 Neptune Transits Neptune softens the ego and dissolves separateness, which means
we are more sensitive to what other people are feeling. Our heightened empathy could incline us towards work or activities which
involve caring for others less fortunate than ourselves. This can be a
constructive use or'a Neptune transit, but we also should be aware of
the personal gains we might be accruing through service of an
apparently 'selfless' nature. Similarly, under a Neptune transit, we
may be asked to put our needs aside for the sake of what others want
or require. While this kind of giving and compromising can be the
hallmark of maturity, it sometimes indicates a weakness in character,
and could be used to manipulate others covertly. Many supposed
'martyrs' carry a great deal of hidden resentment around with them.
The psychological benefits and dangers of selfless behaviour and of
Neptune transits in general are discussed in the next chapter, in
which we examine specific Neptune transits to the planets and
through the houses. 7 The Transits of Neptune to the Planets and
Through the Houses Neptune-Sun The Sun represents the sense we have of ourselves as a separate
individual. When Neptune transits in aspect to the Sun, it dissolves
the borders of our ego-identity, and asks us to give up or let go of our
existing sense of self in order to make room for something new. The
transiting trine or sextile usually does this in a gentle way, offering
us a new version of ourselves which is more loving, expansive or
creative than before. Under these transits, however, we should be
cautious of false optimism: if we start believing that we have discovered a sense of peace and happiness which no one or nothing
could ever shatter, we will be in for a rude awakening when, sooner
or later, that bubble bursts.
Transiting Neptune conjunct, square or opposing the Sun could
bring similar delusions, but they more often denote a period of
confusion and self-doubt. Previously we might have confidently
marched into life and action, but now we aren't so sure about our
power, worth or identity. External events could trigger off these
feelings- someone else getting a promotion we hoped for, or the loss
of a job or relationship that meant a great deal to us. Illness or other
circumstances could force us to give up work, or rob us of our
normal level of energy. In many cases, however, nothing obvious or
external seems to be the cause of our psychological malaise, but
inside ourselves we feel lost and unable to carry on as usual.
Health problems could be difficult to analyse under hard
Neptune-Sun transits: we feel bone tired, anaemic, listless and down,
127 I 28 Neptune Transits and yet doctors cannot find anything medically wrong to account
for our state. It might help to rest more, to take more vitamins, or
increase the amount we exercise. But no matter what we do to try to
make ourselves feel better, we still may not be able to avoid falling
apart during this period. Hard Neptune-Sun transits undermine our
confidence, clarity and strength and can paralyse our old self and
our normal ways of being. And yet Neptune is doing this for a
purpose -in order that we can eventually rebuild ourselves in a new
way. Something has to die for something new to be born. Understanding this may not alleviate the pain, frustration and disillusionment
we feel at this time, but looking at these transits in this way can help
us find meaning in what we are going through. If we can find
meaning in our suffering, we are more likely to find ways to make
constructive use of it.
All this is easier said than done, especially so because one of the
manifestations of stressful Neptune-Sun transits can be the loss of
hope - we don't believe we can pull ourselves through and we
lose our faith that life will look after us. The intellectual understanding that faith and hope sometimes evaporate under these transits could help us achieve some degree of objectivity about what
we are going through. In other words, accepting that we might
fall apart when transiting Neptune aspects our Sun - accepting
that we might lose our belief in life and ourselves at this time - is
one way to work with this transit. We see it for what it is. It may
last for a number of years, but it won't last forever. Co-operating
with Neptune's dissolving effect also entails allowing ourselves to
die as we have known ourselves, so that we can re-emerge with a
new sense of who we are. Obviously this isn't easy or pleasant. It
will help if we take time to grieve for the old self that is dying.
Eventually the transit will pass and we will come out of it a
changed person.
Any significant Neptune transit can arouse feelings of 'divine
homesickness' - the desire to return to the blissful state we experienced before birth, where there was no sense of isolation, separateness or fragmentation. When Neptune transits the Sun, such
longings can be very strong. Drugs or alcohol might tempt us at this
time as a means of transcending the isolated self, and escaping from To the Planets and Through the Houses 129 our pain, frustration, and the harsh realities and limitations of life in
the physical body. Under Neptune transits, there is a1ways the danger
of abusing these substan~es, and caution should be exercised.
Confusion, uncertainty and self-destructive urges are not the only
effects of Neptune transiting in aspect to the Sun. Because we are
not so rigidly encased in the shell of our own ego, this transit
increases our empathy for others and enhances our openness to any
environment we are in. Negatively, this means we could be overwhelmed or 'taken over' by feelings and emotions which are not
even our own. (This also applies to the physical level of our being.
During a Neptune-Sun transit, we are more susceptible to germs or
disease in the atmosphere, and more sensitive to alcohol or drugs even prescribed medicine could have a stronger effect than usual.)
Our heightened empathy could prompt us to take up a work, cause
or activity that involves helping people who are going through
difficulties or who are less fortunate than ourselves. Serving or
caring for others can be a positive way to use this transit; but we
should be conscious of what kind of personal gains we are accruing
through supposedly 'selfless' behaviour. Is being needed a way of
getting others to love us? Are we unconsciously seeking power by
trying to help other people?
Even if our motives are mixed, this transit often does enable us to
put our own ego-needs aside in order to attend or adjust to what
others require. In fact, we may feel we have little choice but to adapt
to the needs or wants of others now, even if this entails doing or
accepting things which are contrary to how we personally would
like them to be. In order to avoid falling into the trap of martyrdom,
we should acknowledge those parts of ourselves which are angry at
being coerced into relinquishing our personal wants. We need to
recognize our resentment and frustration. If we aren't honest about
that part of us which really doesn't want to adjust or make sacrifices,
we will harbour rage and resentment towards the situation or the
other people involved, and over the years this could turn to bitterness
and give rise to problems of a physical or emotional nature.
Two examples will help to clarify what I mean. When transiting
Neptune in the twelfth house came to square Clara's ninth-house
Sun, her husband was offered a job abroad. Accepting the new post I 30 Neptune Transits meant they would have to leave London, where Clara had built up a
successful career as a freelance designer. As usual with Neptune,
something had to be sacrificed. In order to move abroad with her
husband, Clara would have to give up her career in London. Or she
could sacrifice being with her husband and stay in England to
continue her work. The other alternative was her husband turning
down the new job, which would mean he would be the one doing
the sacrificing. She spent weeks agonizing over the different possibilities. The marriage was good and she wanted to be with him, but
why should she have to sacrifice her career for his sake? In the end,
she decided to give up her work in England for the sake of her
husband's promotion. She openly acknowledged the part of her
which felt resentful towards him because of what she had to give up,
and yet she still decided to make the move. Hers was a conscious
sacrifice with the aim of preserving her marriage.
Was she acting like a martyr? To some degree, yes. But she made
the choice consciously, well aware of her anger and resentment.
Had she just agreed to go without fully examining her reluctance,
her unresolved feelings of wrath would have accumulated and
sooner or later found some sort of destructive expression. Compare
Clara's case with that of Emma. Transiting Neptune in the fourth
was squaring Emma's first house Sun. She loved living in London,
but her husband wanted to move back to where he came from in
Scotland to be closer to his family. She immediately decided that her
place was with her husband, and although she wasn't happy about
moving, she quickly dismissed her negative feelings without fully
analysing them. Emma didn't feel right about causing any trouble or
going against her husband's wishes. Six months after they moved,
her anger and resentment were expressed in physical exhaustion,
accompanied by a severe emotional depression. When transiting
Neptune- transits our Sun we may be asked to sacrifice our own
needs and wants for the sake of other people or the larger situation
we are in. It may be 'right' at this time in our lives to do so, but we
also ought to recognize and work through that part of us which
resents giving up what we personally desire.
Neptune-Sun transits affect the expression of the 'masculine' or To the Planets and Through the Houses I 3I 'animus' side of our nature (our will and assertiveness). We might
feel inert, disoriented and more apathetic than normal. One reason
for this is that our libido or life-force has turned inward, and is being
used by the unconscious to promote needed psychological changes.
Therefore, even though we have little energy at our disposal to
function as productively as usual in the outer world, our dream or
fantasy life could be very active now. To facilitate inner changes that
need to take place, we should allow ourselves time for meditation or
other contemplative pursuits. It is also a good period for psychotherapy or any form of psychological self-exploration.
Since the Sun is a 'masculine principle', this transit is sometimes
experienced in relation to men in our lives. We may be asked to
make sacrifices or adjustments for the sake of a husband, boyfriend,
son, or male boss. Men we are close to may be going through some
kind of Neptunian phase- problems with alcohol or drugs, a debilitating illness, or a feeling of being lost in life. Without becoming a
martyr or a doormat, we probably need to be unusually sensitive to
what they are experiencing. In some cases these transits could
coincide with the loss (the giving up) of a male close to us - a
husband or son who leaves home, or a father who dies.* Or we may
meet men at this time who have Neptune or Pisces strongly emphasized in their charts.
Neptune transits to the Sun also coincide with periods of heightened inspiration of a creative, emotional or spiritual nature, although
such experiences could have a manic quality to them. Because this
transit works to dissolve ego-boundaries, we may find it quite easy to
'let go' of ourselves and serve as a channel through which creative
expression can flow. Musicians, dancers, actors, writers and other
artists could actually feel more inspired or creative than usual.
There is something paradoxkal about Neptune-Sun transits. Some
of us, as explained earlier, lose all hope and faith in life while under
these transits, and feel devoid of any meaning or purpose (this is
often the case with transiting Neptune in hard angle to the Sun). *Seep. 261 for more on issues raised by the death of a parent. See also Suggested
Reading (p. 386) for a list of books dealing with death and the grieving process. 132 Neptune Transits And yet others under either the hard or easy aspects of transiting
Neptune to the Sun, actually become more susceptible to any kind of
inspiration coming from a supposedly 'higher' force. Again, this has
to do with the softening of our ego-boundaries. Transiting Neptune
to the Sun makes us less rigid and tight - we loosen up and are
therefore more easily swept away by powerful emotions and feelings,
especially those which have a 'divinely inspired' feel to them. Religious inspiration is not uncommon under these transits, where, sometimes for the first time, a person discovers a connection to God or a
sense of unity with the rest of creation. Such peak experiences can
be very positive and transformative, dramatically altering our way
of being in the world.
However, there is a danger of being too gullible and open to other
people's influence, and if possible we should be wary of encounters
with any extreme cults, sects or individuals who promise us the keys
to heaven if we follow them. I have met many people who have been
swept away under these transits by the teachings of a charismatic
figure, only to find themselves let down or disappointed later. Some
spiritual growth may come from these involvements, but in a number
of cases, more harm than good is done. Doctrine and beliefs we
swallow whole at this time may have to be regurgitated or unlearned
at a later date.
Under these transits (and this applies to the hard angles as well as
the trine or sextile of transiting Neptune to the Sun), we also should
be cautious about believing we have some sort of divine mission or
message to impart to the world. When Neptune aspects the Sun we
are prone to psychological or spiritual inflation, what some people
call 'higher side-tracking'. We need to be careful not to allow our
personal ego-identity (the Sun) to be swamped or totally overtaken
by qualities that rightfully belong to the transpersonal or superconscious levels of existence. During these transits, we may feel more love,
compassion or 'higher' understanding flowing through us, but it is
psychologically dangerous and immature actually to believe that we
personally are the living embodiment of Love or Truth. As a channel
of superconscious qualities, we may have a lot to give to others at
this time - but we shouldn't forget we're still human. There is
nothing wrong in enjoying the higher inspiration we receive now. To the Planets and Through the Houses I 33 Indeed, others would benefit through what we have to give or teach.
But if we don't keep our feet on the ground, we are setting ourselves
up for a mighty crash. Should this happen, hopefully we can pick
ourselves up again, having learned a thing or two in the process.
Neptune-Moon
The Moon and Neptune both symbolize the urge to blend, unite and
fuse with those around us. When transiting Neptune makes any
aspect to the Moon, these planets combine to heighten our receptivity
to the environment and those around us. We feel what others are
going through, and this enhances our ability to be caring or comforting. People in pain or conflict, sensing our capacity for compassion
and understanding, find their way to our doorsteps. As a result, we
are in danger of being drained by the demands people make on us at
this time. While Neptune transiting the Moon may be asking that we
learn to put our needs aside for the sake of others, we also need to set
limits and learn to say 'no' now and then, rather than always
bending over backwards to please. If we persist in playing the
martyr, we run the risk of unconsciously storing up a great deal of
resentment. Drawing our boundaries when appropriate will help to
avert this.
It's advisable to examine why we are attracted to the role of
martyr or saviour at the time of these transits. We may be motivated
by a true· compassion for our fellow human beings, but it also is
possible we are accruing what psychologists call 'secondary gains' in
the process. If we are honest with ourselves now, we may come to
see that serving others is partially a way of winning love and
compensating for our own narcissistic wounds, or we might have to
admit to enjoying the sense of power which saving others gives us.
Acknowledging how we are personally benefiting from our supposedly 'selfless' behaviour doesn't necessarily negate the value of
what we are doing. In the end, recognizing what we are gaining
from these kinds of relationships will enable us to care for others in a
more honest fashion.
The role of saviour or martyr is not the only one we might assume
under these transits. We also could play the victim. Landing our- 134 Neptune Transits selves in problems and dramatizing our plight is a way of getting
people to notice us, or it could be an underhanded attempt to
manipulate others. Emotional honesty is probably not the first thing
one associates with a Neptune-Moon transit, and yet being as
truthful as possible with ourselves and others during these periods is
the best antidote to their negative manifestations.
Neptune always benefits from a little Saturn. Because we are more
open than usual to other people, they could easily take advantage of
us unless we exercise greater caution and discrimination. However,
exercising discrimination is easier said than done under a Neptune
transit. Down-to-earth friends whose opinions we usually trust may
try to warn us that somebody else is taking advantage of us, but we
are so swept away by our feelings that we don't listen to their
admonitions. It is only after we've been deceived or betrayed that we
realize our friends were right all along. Under Neptune transits, we
may have to learn our lessons the hard way.
When Neptune transits the Moon, we are ready to embrace any of
the qualities associated with Neptune, especially the notion of romantic love. We will probably fare better in these matters when transiting
Neptune is making a trine or sextile to the Moon; there are more
problems with the transiting conjunction, square or opposition.
Neptune intensifies the Moon's urge to blend and merge with others,
at the same tinie as it opens us to deception - the ideal recipe for
complex and difficult relationships. With Neptune influencing our
emotions, we see what we want to see, not what is actually there. So
we fall in love with someone who later turns out to be not at all as
we first imagined. In time, we will have to face the fact we have
deceived ourselves. Or we might discover that the other person has
been the one doing the deceiving, lying to us about his or her
background, marital status or true motives. After we realize this
'divine' human being isn't as perfect as we thought, the Neptunian
backlash of pain, disillusionment and outrage sets in. And yet it is
only when our beloved has fallen off his or her pedestal that we can
begin the slow task of rebuilding the relationship with the 'real'
person, rather than with our projected image or fantasy of who that
person is.
Under Neptune-Moon transits, we could unconsciously set up To the Planets and Through the Houses 135 situations in which we are asked to make major adjustments or
sacrifices for the sake of others. We might fall in love with someone
who is already married, or who cannot, for whatever reason, love us
back in the way we would like. The keynote of Neptune-Moon
transits is one of sacrifice and acceptance - pushing the other person
to get divorced or to change his or her nature will probably not
succeed. If the relationship is going to exist at all, we will have to
adapt to and accept its various limitations and conditions. Such
sacrifices and adjustments could be interpreted as a noble display of
selfless love. It could also be described as a masochistic denial of our
own needs. With Neptune transits, it may be hard to tell which is
which. Don't we think we are worthy enough to have our needs
fulfilled? Are we so attached to suffering that we persist in staying in
an unsatisfying or incomplete relationship? What do we gain by
being in love with someone who isn't free to love us back? Is the pain
worth it because of the sympathy it attracts from others? Would we
really want to sit across from her every morning at breakfast, or
have to be the one to wash his dirty socks? Asking ourselves these
kinds of questions under a Neptune-Moon transit will help clarify
the part we have played in attracting a difficult or complicated
relationship into our lives.
The Moon relates not only to our own 'anima' or feeling nature,
but also to women in our lives - wives, girlfriends, mothers, daugh.,;
ters, etc. Women we meet or know at this time may be going
through a Neptunian phase, or have a strong Pisces, Neptune or
twelfth-house emphasis in their natal charts. They may be undergoing emotional or physical troubles, or drug and alcohol problems. Or
they might be experiencing a time of enhanced creative, religious or
spiritual inspiration. We may have to make sacrifices or adjustments
for women now - looking after an ailing mother or standing by a
wife in the middle of a breakdown. One man with transiting Neptune
squaring his Moon was in agony because he was powerless to stop
his daughter embarking on a romantic encounter which he thought
was doomed to end in disaster. He had to stand back and let her go
through a painful experience - but one which would ultimately
contribute to her psychological growth.
The Moon is associated with our home environment, and sacrifices 136 Neptune Transits or adjustments may need to be made within this area as well. People
we live with may be experiencing problems of a 'Neptunian' nature
when we are under these transits. Or we may be compelled to move
house or give up a home we love, and in such cases we will need to
grieve and mourn for what we are leaving behind. Disappointments
and setbacks could plague us if we are trying to buy a house at the
time of a difficult Neptune-Moon transit. These transits also describe
the kind of confusion that takes place when we are redecorating or
restoring our home in order to make it closer to our ideal.
Issues around mothering could arise with any Neptune-Moon
transit. It may describe having to let go of our children - they grow
old enough to leave home or they get married, and we need to find
other ways to express our nurturing urges. For some women, it
relates to the menopause, a time to relinquish their child-bearing
capacity. Women who have any Neptune-Moon transit approaching
are advised to go for regular medical check-ups to ensure nothing is
surreptitiously growing in the breast or womb. When Neptune is
around, things sneak up on us without our knowing, and it makes
sense to take precautions and look for any potential problems before
it is too late and drastic measures have to be taken. Also for both
men and women under these transits, the nervous system is more
susceptible than usual to prescribed medicine, recreational drugs
and alcohol. We could be attracted to such substances now as a way
of escaping from difficulties we are going through, and there is the
danger of addiction at this time.
Hard Neptune-Moon transits can play havoc with our emotions:
we are soaring one day, and down in the pit the next. Meditation,
music and any chance to commune with nature will have a restorative effect on the soul buffeted by the vagaries of life at this time.
Even with the most difficult transits between these two planets,
many people discover depths of feeling, and a capacity for compassion, understanding and forgiveness they never knew existed in
them. Neptune-Mercury
When transiting Neptune aspects Mercury, the way we think, To the Planets and Through the Houses I 37 reason, communicate and gather information from the environment
will be affected by the qualities of Neptune. Neptune feels, Mercury
thinks: transiting Neptune trine or sextile Mercury helps us to
integrate or marry rational left-brain processes with the intuitive
and feeling right brain. Our imagination is active but doesn't interfere
with our ability to think clearly and logically as well. What we 'feel'
about people and events will often tum out to be uncannily accurate.
There may be something 'inspired' about many of the ideas, thoughts
and feelings we are having at this time, and we will be able to
communicate these in a way which makes sense to other people.
Any Neptune-Mercury transit may ask that we 'use' our Mercury
for the sake of other people, perhaps taking on the role of spokesperson for those unable, for whatever reasons, to communicate
their needs for themselves. Harmonious as well as hard NeptuneMercury transits increase our capacity to register and take in subtleties and undercurrents in our immediate environment which previ- ,
ously we might not have noticed; with the transiting square or
opposition, however, there may be more danger that our psychic
receptivity is contaminated or distorted by our own projections and
fantasies. Because we are receptive to thoughts and feelings circulating in the atmosphere, psychic flashes are not uncommon. We think
of someone we haven't seen in years, and that person turns up the
next day. Our, dreams during this time will provide our conscious
mind with information that will help us in the course of our everyday
lives.
The harmonious transits of Neptune to Mercury allow us easier
and more constant access than usual to the wisdom of our unconscious mind- to the 'wise person' inside each of us. We can make good
use of these transits if we take time each day to be still and reflective.
During these periods of introspection, we can ask our unconscious
(or our inner 'wise person') to give us the kinds of answers or
guidance we need to better understand or resolve any problems we
are having, or have had, in our lives. Helpful information or insights
might dawn immediately. But even if we receive nothing at first, if
we continue to commune with the unconscious in this way, answers
will eventually come - sometimes in roundabout ways through
things we happen to read or something we see on television. 138 Neptune Transits Under the harmonious transits of Neptune to Mercury, creativity
and practicality work well together. The inspiration of Neptune
could be channelled into artistic outlets: writing, painting, music,
dance, acting and photography are just some of the avenues that
benefit from the transiting trine or sextile. Endeavours other than
artistic ones can be helped as well. Scientists intent on advancing
knowledge in their chosen fields, or stockbrokers gambling in the
City or on Wall Street, also will be aided by the kinds of 'flashes',
insights and intuitions that accompany the transit of Neptune in
trine or sextile to Mercury.
The hard transits of Neptune to Mercury, while intermittently or
sporadically giving some of the advantages mentioned so far, are
usually much more troublesome and far more "difficult to handle
wisely. With transiting Neptune conjunct, square or opposing MerCUry, the conscious and unconscious minds are again brought together, but in a way which can be quite disturbing. Fear, doubt and
confusion can take over the mind, and severely retard our ability to
function as well as usual in the world. We have more trouble
organizing ourselves and our daily lives - activities that have previously come easily may be more difficult to execute. We may find
ourselves wishing we are somewhere else rather than where we
happen to be at a particular time. We can be with people or involved
in some job or task and yet we are not really 'present' or 'all there'we are physically present, but our minds are somewhere else. If
we're the kind of person who is normally fairly vague, disorganized
and without direction, we might not even notice the disorientating
effects of this transit. However, if we have always been fairly disciplined and orderly, the hard transits of Neptune to Mercury can be
very upsetting.
This was the case with Mark, a freelance writer who, up to the
time ofthis transit, had few problems disciplining himself, structuring
his day and accomplishing a great deal. He would wake up by seven,
do his morning exercise routine, shower, shave, serve himself a
healthy breakfast of orange juice, muesli and fruit, and punctually
turn on his word processor by nine to begin his work. Transiting
Neptune in Capricorn came to square his Mercury in Aries and he
began to experience a kind of lethargy and lack of interest in his To the Planets and Through the Houses 139 work and life which he had never felt before. He didn't feel like
getting out of bed at all; he was no longer motivated to keep up with
his exercises; he started going to a local restaurant for a breakfast of
egg, sausage and chips; and he was lucky if he made it to his desk by
noon. He lost touch with his resolve and his direction in life. The
conflict between what he thought he should do and what he actually
felt like doing created a terrible tension. At first he tried to maintain
his old routine, but his feelings of restlessness and lethargy were so
strong that he eventually had no choice but to give in to them.
Although he was frightened to do so and worried about his ability to
keep up with his workload and pay his bills, he gave himself permission to lie in bed, and allowed himself the luxury of doing no work
all morning if that was how he felt. He decided not to force himself to
write, but to do so only when the urge took over. By mid-afternoon,
hours after he would normally have begun to work, he finally
wandered over to his word processor. He worked for as long as he
felt like writing, and finished when he felt like finishing. In other
words he stopped making himself do things, but learned to accept
and flow with his moods and inclinations. In the end, he found he
accomplished as much this way as he had done before.
Although anyone who is not self-employed won't be able to
indulge his or her feelings and moods in the same way as Mark,
there is still a lesson for us in the way he dealt with this transit. It
was only after giving in to his lethargy tliat he was able to find the
energy to attend to his work and daily tasks. Under difficult
Neptune-Mercury transits, we may have to let go of our old ways of
ordering our life and day-to-day routines, and let ourselves be lost
for a while, until the psyche works out a solution. For many people,
this is a scaty prospect - it feels as if we have relinquished our grip
on life- and yet under any significant Neptune transit, it is sometimes
only by losing ourselves that we can find ourselves again.
Hard Neptune-Mercury transits cloud the conscious mind: our
rational thought processes (as symbolized by Mercury) are taken
over by moods and emotional complexes which bubble up from the
unconscious or from the depths of our being (Neptune). Any means
of escaping from everyday life might tempt us now - overdoing
drugs or alcohol, losing ourselves in television or the movies, reading 140 Neptune Transits mystery novels all day, or becoming absorbed by our own daydreams
and fantasies. Our memory will be less reliable, and we could have
more difficulty than usual remembering or retaining information.
Phone numbers and addresses are taken down incorrectly - we
think we have our facts right, but we don't. When Neptune adversely
transits Mercury, communication could also suffer: mail gets lost in
the post, and people misquote us or don't clearly hear what we are
trying to say. We may not be able to find the words to express
accurately what we are going through, or we could purposely try to
hide or colour the truth in some way. (One author wrote two books
under a pseudonym during this period; another used a ghost writer.)
Interactions or business dealings with others may not be totally
clear at this time: we might be deceiving certain people or doing
things behind their backs, or others might try to fool or deceive us
(especially in the case of transiting Neptune opposition Mercury).
People inaccurately interpret our motives, or we misread theirs.
Most astrology books caution us to examine carefully the fine print
of any contracts we sign at this time.
With Neptune conjunct, square or opposing Mercury, our perception of reality could be distorted out of proportion by our feelings and
unconscious projections. Taken over by irrational fears, we might
imagine other people are thinking or saying things about us which
they actually aren't. Whereas transiting Neptune trine or sextile
Mercury gives rise to intuitive insights and inspirational dreams, the
hard Neptune-Mercury transits often coincide with mental instability, forgetfulness, delusions, bad omens and nightmares. Those of
us who do not already have some familiarity with the workings of
the unconscious could be thrown badly off balance. Since the unconscious is so actively determined to reveal itself to our conscious
minds during this period, these transits indicate a good time for
some form of psychotherapy or self-exploration, but we should ensure
this is undertaken with experienced and well-qualified practitioners.
We are too susceptible now to other people's thoughts and ideas to
risk putting our psyche into the hands of charlatans or quacks.
Under any Neptune-Mercury transit, we might experience
moments of heightened awareness and vision, during which we
glimpse intangible dimensions of being - people's auras become To the Planets and Through the Houses 141 visible to us, or we can perceive disembodied entities or various
coloured 'thought-forms' floating in the atmosphere. With the hard
transits, however, these experiences could be unpleasant: demons,
rather than angels, come to visit. Or we hear voices which tell us to
do strange things; in fact, these voices are probably denied and splitoff aspects of our own psyche coming back to us supposedly through
outside sources. Again, an experienced and supportive counsellor
could help us through some of the more difficult manifestations of
these transits.
Neptune-Mercury transits (especially the hard angles) sometimes
indicate complications with brothers, sisters, other relatives or neighbours. We might be called upon to make adjustments or sacrifices on
behalf of a relative or neighbour, and we may need to be extra
understanding of what they are going through at this time. They
could be experiencing mental or emotional confusion, problems
relating to drugs or alcohol, or even a period of spiritual or creative
inspiration. Again, as with any Neptune transit, how far we should
bend over backwards for other people is called into question. It may
be right to adjust to their needs or take on their problems to some
degree, but we should also know where to draw the line.
In his book Planets in Transit, Robert Hand points out that the
stressful transits of Neptune to Mercury could coincide with periods
of high anxiety and peculiar nervous ailments. 1 These problems are
likely to be emotional in origin. However, these transits may coincide
with disorders of the nervous system which are organic at base, so if
we are unable to surmise a clear psychological cause of our physical
problems at this time, it might be wise to consult a neurologist.
Neptune-Venus
Under these transits, we will meet Neptune in the arena of love and
relationships, in issues to do with creative expression, and through
changes that occur to our value-system. It is very difficult to cover
adequately all the different ways Neptune-Venus transits affect the
sphere of relationships, but a general summary of how certain
clients experienced these periods will give a good idea of what to
expect. 142 Neptune Transits Neptune dissolves separateness: when it contacts Venus by any
transiting angle, the urge to lose ourselves in another person is very
strong. Whether or not we are already in a relationship, we could
fall madly in love at this time. Our new beloved may appear to be the
answer to all our romantic dreams - he or she sweeps us off our feet
and promises the keys to heaven. But transiting Neptune also brings
a tendency to over-idealize and not see clearly whatever it is touching. In the case of Venus, there is a good chance we are not seeing
others realistically: we are so enchanted by their good points and the
wonderful way they make us feel that we overlook or play down
other qualities in them which are more problematic for us. We may
marry or form a relationship under any Neptune-Venus transit,
believing we will live happily ever after, but soon discover that all is
not what it first appeared. Although coming down to earth in this
way is never pleasant, at least now we can perceive more clearly the
real issues which need to be faced in order to make the relationship
work. Even if he isn't really Prince Charming or she isn't the goddess
we first thought she was, perhaps we will still see enough worth in
the other person to make an effort to establish the relationship on
more solid ground.
However, as the transit passes, we may find that the situation is
impossible: it was all a dream and destined to fade away. We might
even learn something from the experience (besides just remembering
to be more careful next time). The potential lesson is a deep one, and
involves our letting go of the notion that there is somebody out there
who will come along and be the perfect mother or father we once
had, or didn't have, as a child. Neptune-Venus transits compel us to
seek our lost wholeness (the uroboric or oceanic oneness we felt in
the womb and in the first months of life) through romantic love; but
these transits also demonstrate that in the end our lost primal
paradise cannot be regained through the external agency of another
person. No matter how wonderful our beloved is, he or she will not
always 'fit' us perfectly, and inevitably we will be let down in some
ways. The heights we ascend and the depths we fall to under these
transits ultimately teach us a very profound truth: the wholeness we
all yearn for can only be found from within ourselves. And from
what I have; seen in my astrological practice, this applies not just to To the Planets and Through the Houses 143 the hard angles of transiting Neptune to Venus but to the trine and
sextile as well.
One way or another, these transits ask that we make sacrifices
and adjustments in love which often involve putting our own needs
aside for the sake of other people. The following brief case histories
illustrate the different ways this can happen. Laura, a single woman
of 25, fell in love with her boss when transiting Neptune conjuncted
her Venus. The attraction was very powerful- she felt he understood
her better than anyone else had ever done. The feeling was mutual:
he apparently received the kind of love and understanding from her
that his wife was unable to give him. However, he had a young
family and was not prepared to upset his home life and risk separation
from his children in order to give himself entirely to his relationship
with Laura. So Neptune was asking that something be sacrificed: she
could forgo her desires for a stable, conventional marriage and carry
on with the clandestine, part-time affair, or she could end the
relationship altogether. Either way, she had to let go of something.
Laura eventually broke off with her boss and left the job.
Tom ran into a similar problem when Neptune squared his Venus.
He had been married for ten years and had two children he adored.
Under this transit, he fell in love with a woman he met through a
friend. As a result, he faced three choices, all of which characterize
Neptune's effect on Venus. He could keep the affair secret and carry
on behind his wife's back (Neptune transits to Venus sometimes
involve one partner deceiving or being deceived by the other). He
could end the marriage in order to pursue his new relationship more
openly and fully,. or he could finish the affair. Tom chose to carry on
with the affair but keep it secret. Just after his Neptune-Venus
transit finished, his girlfriend met another man whom she ended up
marrying.
In love, Venus expects something back in return: 'I'll love you if
you love me' or 'I'll love you if you do what I want.' Neptune is a
more selfless love - 'I'll love you even if you can't always love me
back in the way I need.' When transiting Neptune aspects Venus, we
may find ourselves in situations where we are asked to love somebody
even if he or she can't always give us precisely what we would like.
Diane's story illustrates this kind of Neptunian situation. She and 144 Neptune Transits her husband Eric appeared to have an ideal marriage -two beautiful
children, an idyllic home in the country, and no financial worries.
And yet, when transiting Neptune in Capricorn came to oppose her
Venus in Cancer, Eric began to voice his restlessness. He felt trapped;
life had become too known and settled, and he yearned for more
freedom. Diane's first reaction was outrage- it was all very well for
him to talk about his desire to take off and travel around the world,
when she would have to be the one stuck at home looking after their
children. She complained of his unfairness, but the more she tried to
tie him down, the more he wanted to break loose. Eventually she
gave up holding him back - although she admitted her anger and
resentment, she told him that if he really needed time away, he was
free to take it. She loved him enough to give him room to do what he
felt he needed. Eric's reaction was interesting. As soon as he had her
permission to do what he wanted, his feelings changed and his
restlessness subsided. Neptune was teaching Diane how to be more
selfless- to love her husband even if what he felt he had to do wasn't
what she personally wanted. When Neptune aspects our Venus, we
are usually the one who has to make the adjustments to what a
partner needs.
Under any Neptune-Venus transit, we might fall for Neptunian
types (anyone with Pisces, Neptune or the twelfth house strong in
the natal chart, or who is going through important Neptune transits).
We could find ourselves attracted to 'losers' or victims, people who
just can't seein to get their lives together and look to us for emotional
or financial support. Or we play the needy, weak one- the ailing
hero or the damsel in distress - and look' for a saviour to rescue us.
And we are especially susceptible to partners of a dreamy, poetic or
artistic sensibility- who inspire us with their vision and imagination,
but may not have much to offer in the way of material security. In
each of these situations, there is something unequal or imbalanced
about the relationship. We are strong and they are weak, or the
opposite way around. We need to ask ourselves why we _have
attracted these kinds of relationship at this time - what is the lesson
_in it for us? What does rescuing another person do for us? Why do
we have such a low opinion of ourselves that we put up with people
who treat us badly? If we are looking for a saviour, what unfulfilled To the Planets and Through the Houses 145 early-life longing are we playing out? People are usually dealt into
our lives for a reason; if we are drawn to dreamy, poetic types now,
it must be saying something about qualities we need to integrate
into our awareness in order to become more complete.
Also, as in the case of Laura mentioned above, we might have an
irresistible attraction for people who are unattainable or unable to
love us back in the way we need. Why is this? There are no set
answers, but I would certainly explore_ the possibility of an unresolved Oedipal dilemma: are we still trying to steal father away
from mother or vice versa? Or is there some quasi-religious drive in
us that equates making personal sacrifices with the path of spiritual
redemption and salvation? What is it about being tragic that is so
appealing? Or is there a part of us that is actually terrified of a
committed relationship, so we keep going for people with whom we
can't form that kind of union? Loving someone who is unattainable
means we can fantasize how wonderful it would be if only we could
always be with that person. which is very different from the reality
of domestic life. In some cases, transiting Neptune aspecting Venus
(both the trine and sextile as well as the hard angles) does coincide
with the loss or giving up of a loved one - through divorce, death or
some other form of separation. If this does occur, we need to take the
time to mourn over what has been lost.
More generally, these transits (especially the trine, sextile and
some well-aspected conjunctions) indicate a time when our ability to
appreciate the world around us i~ heightened. Our heart expands
and is full of love not just for one person, but for all of humanity and
the rest of creation. We are easily touched by beauty, and feel more
tender and caring towards others. Creative expression can reach an
all-time high, along with an increased appreciation of any of the arts.
When Neptune transits Venus we are attracted to anything that
takes us beyond the boundaries of our separate self, and this accounts
for the enhanced religious, spiritual or mystical longings some people
feel at this time. However, the transiting square and opposition (and
a difficultly aspected transiting conjunction) can 'make' us more
gushy or sentimental than usual; we are so desperate for love and
affection that we seek it anywhere we can find it, a situation which
could give rise to promiscuity or a lack of discrimination in our 146 Neptune Transits choice of partners. The urge to transcend the mundane realities of
everyday life can also manifest itself in an inordinate amount of
pleasure-seeking, and frequently an over-indulgence in drugs and
alcohol.
As with anytransit of an outer planet to Venus, we may experience
a shift or change in our value-system - in what we find beautiful or
hope to gain in life. If we have always placed our faith in money or
material success as the ultimate goal of existence, we will probably
discover that there are other less tangible assets or qualities we need
for real fulfilment. There is something paradoxical about the way
Neptune-Venus transits work. Sometimes these transits don't give us
what we want, so we are forced to look for our happiness in some
other way. Sometimes these transits give us precisely what the heart
desires, but we then find out it was not all we thought it would be.
Ned's case is a good example. When transiting Neptune conjuncted
his eighth-house Venus, he came into a lot of money through an
inheritance. He had looked forward to this legacy for some time,
believing it would solve all his problems in life. It didn't - he still felt
an inner emptiness and sadness which all the money in the world
couldn't compensate for. When this happens we have to rethink our
value-system and look elsewhere for the kind of fulfilment we seek.
Neptune-Mars
Mars represents the impulse to affirm our individuality by asserting
who we are - its vital drive enables us to go after what we want in
life and make our mark on the world. If we are not in touch with our
Mars energy, we are weak and ineffectual; but when Mars is distorted
or undisciplined, we can be overbearing, violent and aggressive,
wanting our way regardless of how others feel. Any transit of
Neptune to Mars will alter the manner in which we assert ourselves.
Transiting Neptune trine or sextile natal Mars usually is much
easier to handle and a more obviously positive experience than the
transiting conjunction, square or opposition. Mars by·itself is rather
self-centred and impulsive- it acts because it wants to, and doesn't
always stop to take other people's feelings into consideration. With
the harmonious transits, Neptune can have a softening or refining To the Planets and Through. the Houses 14 7 effect on Mars. We act less selfishly, not just to affirm our own
individual egos, but out of concern for others. At times our actions
may feel inspired, as if we instinctively know the right path to take.
Under these transits we might use our energy and drive to promote a
cause which will benefit others rather than just ourselves. We will
be more thoughtful about the way in which we assert ourselves, and
try to do so in a manner that respects other people's needs and
wishes. We are still asserting our will, but we are more sensitive
about the effects of our actions, and unlikely to harm or ride roughshod over others in the process.
The hard transits of Neptune to Mars (including transiting Neptune conjuncting a difficultly aspected natal Mars) are more complex
and problematic. In these cases, Neptune has a dissolving or clouding
effect on Mars. We are confused about how to direct our energy or
drive; we feel lethargic and listless or unsure of what direction to
take. Even if we have a sense of what it is we want to do, we could
have great difficulty motivating ourselves and actually getting
started. Or we undertake projects which for reasons seemingly
beyond our control could end in failure. For instance, one man with
transiting Neptune in Sagittarius squaring his natal Mars in Pisces
attempted to open a new restaurant in the Brixton area of London.
The date for its official opening turned out to be the first night of a
whole summer of rioting in that area. Another example is a woman
with transiting Neptune conjuncting her second-house Mars. She
purchased shares in a newly privatized company, and three days
later the stock market took a drastic fall. Neptune demands sacrifices
in connection to the principle represented by whatever planet it
transits. In the case of Mars, Neptune interferes with our ability to
succeed in what we would like to achieve for ourselves. Transiting
Neptune in hard angle to Mars works insidiously to find ways to
render our personal will and drive impotent, and any new enterprise
begun under these transits is likely to run into troubles and difficulties
we haven't expected or accounted for.
For those of us who are used to being dynamic and successful,
these transits are very uncomfortable. We feel we have lost our drive
and power, and our ability to be effective. We don't know ourselves
any more. It may be some reassurance to learn that the transit Neptune Transits
won't last forever, and yet it will still span a period of three to five
years. Some astrologers would advise us not to embark on new
projects during thls period - especially ventures of a speculative or
high-risk nature - and this may be wise advice. But in addition to
learning to be more careful about when to initiate projects, there are
other ways we can grow under difficult Neptune-Mars transits. If we
have been too identified with an image of ourselves as powerful and
potent, these transits teach us that there are forces out there that are
greater than us - forces that supersede the will of the individual ego.
If we have been too arrogant and identified with winning, we will
have to alter our self-image. We are not a god: we are human. We
realize, maybe for the first time, what it feels like to be adrift and
unable to get our lives together or achieve our desired goals. We
learn what it feels like to lose, and this can make us more sensitive
and understanding of other people who have met failure in their
lives.
Provided we take the time to try to figure out why we haven't
succeeded, failing at something we would like to achleve could also
prove a blessing in disguise in another way. By looking more deeply
into our own psyches, we may be able to discover hidden assumptions we have about life or about ourselves which are standing in
the way of making the most of our potential. Do we unconsciously
believe we are weak and inadequate, and therefore compensate by
taking on too much in an attempt to prove our effectiveness to the
world? Does our sense of inadequacy stem from being put down or
rejected as a child? Are we afraid to succeed, because we fear
invoking the wrath and envy of others, especially a parent who
might be ambivalent about our being more successful than him or
her? Or is there a part of us which wants to stay small and weak so
that we can manipulate others into taking care of us? In other
words, what do we gain by failing? It may be hard to face these kinds
of issues in ourselves, and yet difficult Neptune-Mars transits do
serve to bring them to the surface.
Neptune works against separateness. When Neptune transits
Mars, if we are acting too much for our own sake - to affirm our
individual power or to enhance our egos - we are likely to fail.
However, if we are using our drive and energy to promote something ' To the Planets and Through the Houses 149 which will not only benefit us, but which will serve others in some
way, then these transits do not have to yield such disastrous consequences. Neptune wants us to relinquish using our Mars just for our
own ends. In a sense, we are being asked to give away our power,
and to employ it to help others rather than just ourselves. In this
way we have raised Mars to a 'higher' level, because we are exercising our personal will for the good of others. However, even though
we may be doing something which is designed to aid and help the
world, we should be careful about being too identified with the
results of our actions. If our egos have too much invested in succeeding (no matter how much others will benefit from our actions), we
are more likely to run into trouble when Neptune is transiting Mars.
These transits, recalling the precepts of Vedic philosophy, are trying
to teach us how to act without being overly attached to the fruits of
our action. This concept is so contrary to the way most of us are
brought up in our goal-oriented Western society that it is hard to
understand, let alone learn.
Even with the best intentions, we should be careful under these
transits not to give ourselves over to misguided or extreme causes.
And we should be especially wary to avoid being carried away by an
image of ourselves as some kind of divine channel through which a
higher or greater purpose is being served. A messiah or saviour
complex is always a danger when Neptune makes any important
transit to our chart. We may be an agent through which some
positive changes are effected, but if our own ego assumes too much
of the credit, Neptune will make sure that we end up with egg on
our face sooner or later.
Any combination of Mars and Neptune means that we are capable
of acting (Mars) with secrecy (Neptune). In certain instances, such
behaviour may be necessary in order to execute a job or transaction.
However, the temptation to be dishonest or deceptive can lead to
problems under difficult Neptune-Mars transits. We think we have
covered our tracks as cleverly as possible, only to be caught out later
by some unexpected circumstance or fluke. If possible, honesty is the
best policy when transiting Neptune is aspecting our Mars.
During hard Neptune-Mars transits, our actions may periodically
be taken over and governed by uncontrollable impulses stemming rso Neptune Transits from our own unconscious. Neptune loosens the grip we have on
ourselves, exposing aspects of our nature that we have previously
managed to keep under control. As a result we may find ourselves
acting in quite 'crazy' or compulsive ways, only to wonder later
what in the world came over us. Betty is an almost classic example.
When transiting Neptune in the twelfth came to square her second
house Mars, she couldn't control her urge to buy things. She knew
she was spending more than she had, and that sooner or later she
wouldn't be able to cover the bills her credit cards allowed her to
amass, and yet she couldn't stop herself. It was only through the
help of a counsellor that she was able to discover and work through
the deeper psychological reasons contributing to her need to spend reasons directly related to a disappointing love affair in the previous
year and the loss of her father early in her life. In general with
Neptune-Mars transits, we will exhibit loose or uncontrollable behaviour most clearly in the area of life associated with the house our
natal Mars is in, or the house(s) with Aries or Scorpio on the cusp.
Although we might be shocked by the way we are behaving, these
experiences do serve the purpose of revealing unconscious complexes, which for the sake of our psychological health and maturity
need to be explored and confronted. Neptune has only brought to
the surface what was there all along.
Sexuality is another area that can be. affected by Neptune-Mars
transits. With the harmonious transits, we could experience a softening or refining of our sexual expression; making love becomes more
subtle or tender. The hard transits may bring more problems. Because
Neptune loosens our control over unconscious drives and complexes,
it is possible that sexual urges and fantasies could intensify during
this period. Those of us who have as a rule tried to exercise restraint
and propriety in this department will be most disturbed by these
transits. Our first impulse may be to dismiss the kinds of fantasies
and desires we are having at these times as mere aberrations which
certainly have no real connection to anything going on inside us.
This isn't the case; and while it is not necessary to act out our
fantasies, we can still learn quite a lot about what makes us tick by
taking time to analyse and explore their underlying psychological significance. To the Planets and Through the Houses I 5I Some of us may not be able to contain our sexuality at this time,
and might find ourselves driven by insatiable urges which no amount
of actual sexual contact seems to quell. Again, the nature of these
urges needs to be examined: it may be that we are trying to use sex
to compensate for insecurities in ourselves which ultimately cannot
be resolved in that way. Henry is a case in point. Transiting Neptune
came to conjunct his first-house Mars at the age of 60, and he used
sexual conquest to prove he was still young and potent. In doing so,
he was avoiding the real issue - the fact that he hadn't yet come to
terms with ageing. When transiting Neptune squared her Mars,
Barbara also went through a period of sexual compulsiveness. Deeply
convinced she was ugly and unattractive, she turned to sex to prove
her worth and appeal. But no matter how many men she bedded,
she was still left with inner feelings of inadequacy. Like Henry, she
was using sex to try to resolve deeper issues which needed to be
examined and dealt with more directly.
Neptune transits stirs a longing to reconnect to our lost wholeness.
Some of the sexual compulsion associated with Neptune-Mars transits could stem from a desire to regain that lost unity through the
sexual act. While it is possible to lose ourselves temporarily and
merge with another through sexual union, the experience of wholeness with the rest of life can only be secured on any long-term basis
by finding it from within ourselves.
Any Neptune transit can express itself in apparently opposite
ways. While a Neptune-Mars transit increases sexual appetite in
some people, other people may have the reverse experience, and go
through a period in which their sexual drive is low or inactive. It
may be that the libido or life-force is seeking to be redirected into
other channels besides a sexual one - such as a creative endeavour
or a particular mission or task which is engulfing us. The desire to
transcend the sexual drive as a way of spiritual growth also could be
activated at this time.
Mars is an animus principle, which means that during NeptuneMars transits we could encounter Neptune through male figures in
our life. Fathers, sons, bosses, boyfriends, husbands, or any men we
know or meet now may be going through a Neptunian phase: they
might be experiencing disturbing psychological or physical ailments, 152 Neptune Transits or a period of intense creative or spiritual inspiration. We should
also watch for a tendency to attract dishonest or deceptive men.
Neptune-Mars transits can affect our physical health, depleting
drive and energy. Some of us feel like sleeping all day, and it may be
appropriate to limit activity in order to spend more time resting and
being reflective, However, under these transits physical lethargy
could be due to the fact that we are avoiding facing some problem or
issue in our lives with which we should be dealing. Not attending to
what needs to be done can give rise to depression, illness or fatigue.
Examining what it is we need to take care of, and finding the
courage to do it, will free our trapped energy. Neptune-Jupiter
Jupiter is associated with the urge to give meaning to existence
through a chosen philosophy or belief system. It is also linked to any
experitmces which broaden our awareness, such as travel or the
pursuit of knowledge or higher education. Neptune inspires, but it
also can confuse. When it transits in aspect to Jupiter, we will
experience either or both of these effects -in some cases Neptune
stimulates Jupiter's natural expansiveness and idealism; in other
cases, Neptune clouds or distorts Jupiter's judgement and vision;
Transiting Neptune sextile or trine Jupiter is generally a positive
experience. The outcome of transiting Neptune conjunct Jupiter
depends on how Jupiter is aspected in the natal chart. If natal Jupiter
is not too adversely aspected, the transiting conjunction will have all
the benefits of the transiting trine or sextile. If Jupiter is not comfortably placed in the chart, the transiting conjunction will expose
and exacerbate the problems inherent in the birth map.
The harmonious transits stimulate that part of us which wants to
believe in something: we see faith and belief as the path to redemption
and fulfilment, and therefore we are open to being inspired or
uplifted by some sort of religion, philosophy, political theory or belief
system. Metaphysical or spiritual philosophies could appeal to us at
this time - anything that enhances our sense of brotherhood or
sisterhood with the rest of life, or gives us the feeling that we are
participating in some grand plan or larger scheme of things. Our To the Planets and Through the Houses 153 general outlook will be an optimistic one, and even if we are experiencing difficulties in our lives, we will still have faith in our
future, a feeling that destiny is ultimately on our side. Opportunities
come along which arouse our enthusiasm and energy, and we feel
an increased desire to participate in life, meet people and have new experiences.
The harmonious transits of Neptune to Jupiter also indicate a
good time to broaden ourselves through travel. We will attract
experiences while travelling which arouse our compassion for humanity and enhance our understanding of life. It is a good time for an
extended visit to another country, where we have a chance to settle
in and absorb another culture more fully. These transits also favour
any study which deepens or broadens the mind, and equips us with
skills which can be used to help others and advance the quality of
life on earth.
In general, transiting Neptune conjunct, square or opposing Jupiter stimulates similar issues as the trine or sextile, but in a more
troublesome or problematic way- especially if natal Jupiter is not
well aspected. For instance, we could be attracted to a religion or
philosophy during this transit, but somehow get carried away by
our own enthusiasm and become fanatic or extreme. Believing that
what we have found is the answer to everything for everyone, we
could try to push our beliefs too strongly on to other people. These
are the kinds of transits under which people disappear off to an
ashram in India or the States. While many good experiences can
come through such associations, we could easily be disappointed or
disillusioned if we pin too much hope on a religion or philosophy
solving all our problems. Neptune can cloud or distort Jupiter's
vision, and we need to be careful to whom we entrust our faith
during this period: we might be easy prey for odd cults or misguided
gurus.
Neptune also asks that we make sacrifices in relation to whatever
principle it is transiting. Therefore, when it links up with Jupiter, the
· sacrifices may be in the area of religion or philosophy. This could
mean we become involved with a cult or guru who insists we give
up our ego, our name, or all our worldly possessions in order to find
God. Or we may have to give up our belief-system itself. Jeremy is a 154 Neptune Transits good example of this. For years, he had been an active member of a
meditation group, avidly following his mentor's philosophy and
teaching. However, when transiting Neptune came to conjunct his
natal Jupiter in Sagittarius, he became disillusioned with the organization. His faith dissolved and he felt he no longer had any clear
direction in life. As in the case of all outer planet transits, something
had died so something new could be born. His old philosophy
collapsed, leaving -him temporarily bereft, but it was only then that
he was able to discover and formulate new beliefs by which to guide
his life.
Travel is another area affected by difficult Neptune-Jupiter transits.
The urge to travel could be linked with escapist fantasies at this time:
we dream of faraway places that will take us away from our problems, or from a life which is too restricted, dull or mundane. We're
_ sure the grass is greener somewhere else, but under a Neptune
transit, such hopes are likely to prove illusory. During this period we
should be wary of being deceived by people we meet when travelling.
It would be wise to check and recheck all travel arrangements these are the kinds of transits where you find yourself booked into a
hotel which hasn't been built yeti
There is something quite manic about transiting Neptune square
or opposing Jupiter, since both Neptune and Jupiter are both expansive energies. When they combine adversely, they produce a
tendency to overdo things. Neptune also can confuse Jupiter- our
perspective on life and our vision of what is possible may be nebulous
or unrealistic. Put all this together and we have a formula for
trQuble. First of all, we might have an inflated sense of our own
power or capabilities. Believing that we can do anything, we fly too
high, taking on too much and over-extending ourselves. Secondly,
these transits also give a naYve faith in life: we are convinced that no
matter what we do, it will work out all right in the end. So we
gamble with unwise risks, over-indulge in drugs and alcohol, and
spend more money than we have, as if we are immune to the
dangers involved. With transiting Neptune trine or sextile Jupiter,
we genuinely might get lucky. But with difficult transiting conjunctions, squares or oppositions, we are more likely to be in the right
place at the right time for the wrong thing to happen. To the Planets and Through the Houses ISS Most astrological textbooks warn us of impracticality, excessive
idealism or clouded vision when transiting Neptune is adversely
aspecting Jupiter. In general, I would agree with this counsel: this
period is not the best time to undertake risky financial ventures.
Even apparently sound investments could be thwarted by circumstances we were unable to see or predict.
Neptune-Saturn
By sign, house and aspect, Saturn indicates (among other things)
where we feel weak, incomplete or insecure. We usually try to hide
these uncomfortable feelings from both o~selves and others. However, when transiting Neptune aspects Saturn (and this applies to the
harmonious as well as the hard transits), defences in that area fail,
and we are forced to confront our innermost doubts and weaknesses.
Consider, for example, the case of a man with Saturn in the third
house, who fears he is not intelligent enough and feels inept at
communication. Because he thinks he is inadequate in that area, he
will do what he can to defend or protect himself against having to
face those feelings. He will try to avoid situations in which he will
appear stupid; he might accuse intellectual people of talking a lot of
nonsense; or he might compensate for his insecurity in this area by
working very hard to develop his mind and his ability to communicate -reading, taking courses, and collecting as many degrees as he
can. Belittling the importance of third-house matters or the converse
approach of trying to become a master of that sphere are attempts to
protect himself against his basic feelings of weakness. Transiting
Neptune aspecting his third-house Saturn will find a way to dissolve
or erode these defences and expose his underlying insecurities and
fears.
In addition to indicating areas of our life where we feel weak and
inept, Saturn also shows where we feel pain. It is natural that we
should want to hide from or avoid pain, so we find ways to protect
ourselves. When transiting Neptune aspects Saturn, however, it
undermines these protective barriers and reveals the hurt underneath. Paul, born with Saturn in Capricorn in the eleventh house
of friends and groups, is a good example. His father was a British r 56 Neptune Transits diplomat who mairied an Indian woman. When Paul was six, he
was sent to a boarding school in England. Partially because of his
half-caste background, he felt different from the other boys there, and
was never fully accepted by them. His way of dealing with the
situation was to decide that he would become so powerful and
successful in life that people had to respect him. Which is precisely
what he did. By the age of 3 5, he had built up a prosperous business;
he was a rich and influential man. However, when transiting Neptune came to conjunct his eleventh-house Saturn at the age of 54,
Paul sold his business and became involved with the human potential
movement and other forms of psychological self-exploration.
Through the catalyst of a therapy group, he reconnected to the
vulnerability and insecurity he felt around other people; he came to
see that the decision he had made at age six to be successful was
nothing but a defence against feelings of hurt and inadequacy. Paul
had structured his entire life as a way of avoiding that pain, and it
was only in his fifties, when transiting Neptune conjuncted his
Saturn, that he realized this. He was stripped bare, left with the
original anger and pain he felt at six, but which he had managed to
hide and compensate for all these years. The transit allowed him to
see through his defences, and contact the feelings which were
underneath. By acknowledging and attending to the hurt six-yearold in him, he was eventually able to free himself from the principle
on which he had structured his life: he no longer needed to be
successful in order to prove he was an acceptable human being.
Saturn, the boundary-builder, serves to bar from our awareness
those parts of ourselves that we don't like and make us feel uncomfortable. Neptune, the boundary-dissolver, undermines the defences of
Saturn, and exposes what we have kept hidden. Transiting Neptune
in trine or sextile to Saturn may do this more gently or gradually
than the transiting conjunction, square or opposition, but it is still
not an easy experience for our egos to bear. We may even feel as if
we are going crazy. And yet by letting go of our existing image of
ourselves and reconnecting to what we have excluded from our
identity, we can change and grow. We also should remember that
it's not only 'negative' parts of ourselves which we repress or deny.
Saturn tries to protect us against our pain and insecurity or any To the Planets and Through the Houses I 57 other 'nasty' feelings we don't wish to acknowledge, but we also
might be repressing some of our positive potential as well- untapped
resources or creative capabilities which have been stifled in the
course of our development. Neptune-Saturn transits remove barriers
that stand in the way of our developing these hidden gifts and
talents.
Saturn also signifies restrictions imposed from the outside in the
form of the rules laid on us by authority figures and social conventions. Transiting Neptune will undermine these boundaries as well.
Under Neptune-Saturn transits we may be compelled to act in ways
that are directly at odds with how our parents or society believe we
should behave. For instance, a 'well-brought-up' white English
woman with transiting Neptune in the seventh squaring her natal
Saturn in the tenth fell in love and married a black man at this time
-much to the disapproval of her family and many of her associates.
Through this experience, she had to confront and step beyond the
kind of conditioning and rules that had been imposed on her from
the outside, and that up to this point she had never questioned.
Under Neptune-Saturn transits our whole world view could change:
new ideas and beliefs come to replace our old way of looking at life.
With the transiting trine or sextile this could happen more gently we have revelations or new insights which alter our perception of
reality, and yet we don't experience any major difficulty integrating
these into the already existing structures in our life. With the
transiting square or opposition we will generally encounter greater
inner or outer resistance in the process of assimilating our new ideas
or visions. How easily these changes are accomplished under the
transiting conjunction depends largely on the natal aspects to Saturn
in the birthchart.
Neptune leans towards the mystical and spiritual and is easily
carried away by flights of the imagination; Saturn has its feet
planted firmly on the ground in the domain of practicality and
common sense. Neptune dissolves our separateness and makes us
aware of that part of us which is universal and unbounded; Saturn
defines our individuality- where we end and others begin. Obviously
these two energies are not the best of friends. None the less, transiting
Neptune in trine or sextile to Saturn (and in some cases of the I 58 Neptune Transits transiting conjunction) suggests a period in our lives in which we
can successfully marry intuitive or spiritual vision with practicality
and everyday reality. We have compassion and empathy for those
around us, but we still know when to draw the line if others should
ask too much or in some way invade our boundaries. However, in
the case of the transiting square and opposition and a difficult
transiting conjunction, we will experience greater tension when
trying to integrate or blend the contrasting energies of Neptune and
Saturn. Neptunian revelations about the interconnectedness of all
life can threaten that part of us which has worked so hard to build
and maintain an individual identity (Saturn). We fear that acknowledging our universality means forfeiting our individuality. To some
degree this is true - in order to experience our essential oneness with
the rest of life, we do have to relinquish the sense of ourselves as
totally separate and distinct. And yet universality (which by definition means the inclusion of everything) does not exclude individuality: while not fully losing our individuality, it still is possible
to recognize and experience that part of us which is universal and unbounded.
The harmonious transits of Neptune to Saturn also indicate times
when, with patience and discipline, we can translate creative inspiration into some form of concrete expression. The transiting square and
opposition will give more problems in this respect. We may have a
vision (Neptune) of something we would like to achieve or express, but
encounter numerous internal or external blocks and resistances
(Saturn) in the process of giving form to what is in our imagination.
Patience and persistence may help, but we also need to stop and
examine more closely why we are running into difficulties- what the
blocks mean and what they are trying to 'tell' us. For instance, the
problem could be that we are lacking in some skill or knowledge
(Saturn) which we will have to acquire before we can successfully
implement our vision. Or it might be that what we would like to achieve
is too grand or extreme and therefore impractical and unrealistic? If so,
we may need to adjust the scale of an endeavour to align it with what is
humanly possible or to make it more acceptable to others. (Whether we
like it or not, when Neptune runs up against Saturn, we may have to
work within the limits of what the more conventional elements of To the Planets and Through the Houses I 59 the establishment are able to condone.) And in some instances, failing
to realize our dreams or visions has nothing to do with external forces
blocking us, but with something inside ourselves which insists on
sabotaging our efforts. If this is the case, then we need to ask ourselves
why we fear success? Is there some part of us which is guilty about
achieving our ambitions, or which unconsciously fears that others will
envy and dislike us if we should succeed?
Saturn is associated with boundaries - and this includes the
physical body which contains us. The more difficult Neptune-Saturn
transits sometimes coincide with illnesses or ailments that drain our
vitality. Tiredness and confusion are likely to be psychological in
origin at this time; but it is always wise to consult a doctor if
physical symptoms persist, of if we are suspicious of anything now
which might be surreptitiously undermining our health.
Neptune transits to Saturn could make us feel that we are losing a
grip on ourselves. In the past we may have been practical and
disciplined, and now we are vague, lost, dreamy or just plain lazy.
We thought we knew ourselves- that we were in control of our
lives, but now we aren't sure what is real and what isn't. These
transits sometimes deprive us of elements of our lives (property,
people, possessions or belief-systems) with which we have been
closely identified. As frightening as it may be, we might have to let
ourselves fall apart before we can put ourselves together again in a
new way. An experienced, supportive counsellor, therapist or analyst
could help us through the process.
Neptune-Uranus
Since Uranus spends seven years in a sign, Neptune tr1""1sits to it will
affect large groups of people at the same time, indicating new ideas
and trends which sweep through the collective. How NeptuneUranus transits manifest in our individual lives is shown by the
house placements involved - the house Neptune is transiting
through, the house natal Uranus is in, and the house or houses
where Aquarius is found.
Whenever Neptune contacts a planet by transit, it can make us
more receptive to the planet it is touching. In the case of Uranus, we I 6o Neptune Transits may be open to the idea of change or freedom. In 1988, the transiting conjunction of Neptune to Uranus was happening to people in
their eighties. As the century progresses, this transit will occur
later and later in people's lives. This late-occurring NeptuneUranus transit indicates that while one part of us may fear death
and the prospect of non-being, another part senses the time has
come to disengage from ordinary life and leave behind what is
known. In some cases, death under this transit could signify a
freeing of the self from the restrictions of the physical body. However, the transiting Neptune-Uranus conjunction might force
changes on us against our will. In other words, Neptune may be
asking that we accept and go through some kind of Uranian disruption, even if this is not what we want. This could correlate with
hospitalization, or being taken away from our own homes to be
cared for in an institution for the elderly. These later-life NeptuneUranus conjunctions might also correlate to the kind of mental
confusion which older people sometimes experience. Neither Neptune nor Uranus are down-to-earth planets, and their meeting by
transit could mark a time when we are not seeing concrete reality
in a clear way. Our minds might be off somewhere far away, and
our behaviour could become quite odd. More positively, for some
older people this transit naturally draws the mind into reflecting
on abstract or metaphysical concepts concerning existence and its
meaning. Having lived so long, we have a better overview of life.
When transiting Neptune sextiles or trines Uranus, we are more
receptive to new ideas, trends or currents in the atmosphere. If we
have felt stuck or at a dead end in our lives, these transits could
bring insights and revelations which enable us to progress. Rather
than adapting ourselves to please others, we want to be free now
to express who we are and what we believe. Our interest in life
widens, and we could be drawn to philosophical or metaphysical
studies as a way of deepening our understanding of how the
universe works. We discover new ideals and principles we want to
support, and look for ways we can improve and enrich life, not
just for ourselves but for others as well. Political theories and social
movements catch our attention, and we might become involved
with societal reform - especially any cause which will aid those To the Planets and Through the Houses I 6I who are underprivileged or who we feel are being treated unfairly
under the existing system.
With the harmonious transits of Neptune to Uranus we are so
inspired by a new vision of life that we usually don't have too
difficult a time adjusting to or accommodating these new insights.
We feel ready for them. However, under the transiting square or
opposition of Neptune to Uranus, changing our lives is fraught with
tension and conflict. In the case of the difficult transits, Neptune
sometimes works first to undermine our existing beliefs: the principles
by which we have guided our life are called into question. What we
once thought was the truth is no longer so convincing. We could
experience a longish period of confusion, a phase when the old isn't
working but nothing new has come to replace it. Or, caught in a no
man's land, we vacillate between our old theories of life and the new
ideas and ideals to which we are drawn. Either way we go, we feel
insecure and uncertain. We are guilty or frightened of letting go of
our old world view, but something inside urges us on. And yet we
can't quite give ourselves to the new values and beliefs.
There is no escape from this tension, except to prevent ourselves
to be confused, and allow the time we need to integrate new ways
of being into our lives. William is a good example. Born with
Uranus rising in the first house in early Cancer opposing Venus in
Capricorn in the seventh, he had very strong ideas about what he
wanted or didn't want in life. The product of an unhappy marriage
and disruptive. early home environment, he had decided he never
wanted to marry or even live with a partner - he preferred to live
alone and to keep his relationships open and at a distance. However, at the age of 37, when Neptune crossed over his descendant,
conjuncted his Venus and came to oppose natal Uranus in the
first, he met and fell deeply in love with a woman who knew for
certain that she wanted marriage and a family. Caught between
his feelings for her and his desire for space and independence, he
would call an end to the relationship, then change his mind a few
weeks later and beg to get back together again. He had never felt
so tom and confused in his life- transiting Neptune in the seventh
longed to be with her, but it opposed his natal Uranus in the first,
that part of him that wanted to back off. After a year of painful 162 Neptune Transits indecision and soul-searching, Uranus conceded to Neptune, and
William set up home with his girlfriend. Time and introspection
enabled him to resolve his dilemma.
Neptune-Uranus transits are most significant when they activate
natal aspects Uranus makes to other planets in the chart - especially
to any of the personal planets. We've observed this in the case of
William mentioned above, where transiting Neptune conjuncted his
Venus and triggered off his natal Venus-Uranus opposition. Phoebe
also had to adjust her world view when transiting Neptune opposed
her Uranus. She was born with a close square between the Sun in
early Libra and Uranus in early Cancer. When Neptune moved into
Capricorn, it opposed her Uranus and simultaneously squared her
Sun; and her mother confessed that the man Phoebe had been raised
to believe was her father wasn't actually her real father. The Sun is a
significator of the father, and its natal square to Uranus suggests
something unusual or unconventional about Phoebe's relationship
to him. Transiting Neptune, by opposing the Uranus and squaring
the Sun at the same time, activated the natal Sun-Uranus square,
and brought a revelation (Uranus) which dissolved (Neptune) her
existing sense of identity (the Sun).
When transiting Neptune squares or opposes Uranus, we could be
attracted to cults, groups or movements led by charismatic 'gurutype' figures who inspire us with new vision. As with any hard
transit of Neptune, if possible, we should be careful whom we let
influence us at this time. However, even if we are 'taken in' and later
disillusioned, the experience could have some benefits, and it might
make us more cautious next time someone comes along promising salvation.
All Neptune-Uranus transits open us to experiences of a mystical
or psychic nature. With the transiting square or opposition, some of
these may be upsetting or disturbing, especially if we are the kind of
person who prided ourselves on our rationality and lack of gullibility
in'these matters. If this is the case, we should seek the help of people
familiar with metaphysical or spiritual dimensions of being. Exploring the occult or supernatural during this period should only be
done under the guidance of a mature, trustworthy and experienced
guide. To the Planets and Through the Houses 163 Neptune-Neptune When an outer planet transits in aspect to its natal position, the
nature of that planet is brought sharply into focus in our lives.- The
various Neptune-Neptune transits coincide with issues specific to
different ages or stages of life, so we shall consider each of these
transits individually by aspect. Trarzsiting Neptune conjunct natal Neptune
Neptune's cycle is approximately r6o years; therefore it doesn't
complete a full circle and return to its natal place in the span of a
lifetime. However, the transiting conjunction can occur if Neptune
crosses over itself shortly after birth. For instance, if a person is born
with Neptune retrograde, it will eventually turn direct and transit
back over its natal position. Or if someone is born with Neptune
direct, it could transit over itself twice in the first year of the life once moving backward and then again as it proceeds forward. These
transiting conjunctions after birth coincide with an early experience
of sacrifice or loss. To some extent, this is true for all of us - coming
out into the world means relinquishing the uroboric oneness with
life we felt in the womb. Another early Neptunian loss or sacrifice
could occur if our mother, for whatever reason, is unable to look
after us adequately. If this is the case, we are forced at a very early
age to sacrifice something which is our birthright - the right to be
nurtured and loved. As a result, in later life a part of us will still be
seeking from others the kind of care and nurturing we failed to
receive from her. Transiting Neptune sextile natal Neptune
Transiting Neptune sextiles its natal position in our middle to late
twenties, roughly the same time as Saturn approaches its first return
and transiting Uranus trines its natal placement (discussed on p. 71).
Together these three transits describe a stage in personality development which takes place just prior to turning 30, when almost
everyone wants to make some changes in his or her life. Neptune I 64 Neptune Transits gives us the ability to envision and imagine what we ideally could
be. When transiting Neptune sextiles its own place, it .activates that
part of us which wants to become something more than we already
are. Even if we have achieved much, Neptune still yearns for more.
As this transit approaches, we grow increasingly restless. Women
who have devoted their twenties to bearing and raising children will
probably feel the need for other forms of self-expression. Men who
have devoted themselves solely to work and carving a niche in the
world start wondering what other aspects of life they are missing.
Single women with careers may find themselves thinking seriously
about marrying and having children. Men who have never stayed in
one place long enough to amount to anything begin to feel the need
to commit themselves and lay down roots. Neptune urges us to
explore potentialities in ourselves which we have up to now ignored
or put aside.
The concurrent Saturn return could prove an ally to Neptune at
this time. First of all, Saturn's prominence now will help to keep our
Neptunian vision of what is possible within realistic proportions.
Should we overstep our mark and aim for something which is
beyond our true capabilities, Saturn is not far behind to remind us of
our limits and keep our perspective in place. Secondly, Saturn -the
concretizer - will support us in the process of implementing Neptune's dream. Imagining what we could be is one thing, but taking
the practical steps necessary to fulfil that vision is another, and no
planet can do that job as well as Saturn. Transiting Neptune square natal Neptune
This transit, which occurs around the age of 42, roughly coincides
with transiting Uranus opposing natal Uranus (discussed on p. 73),
and with transiting Saturn opposing natal Saturn. Taken together,.
these three transits describe the kinds of crises and changes associated with the passage into mid-life.
When transiting Neptune squares its own place, we will again
have to confront the discrepancy between what we would have liked
to achieve so far in our lives and what we have actu&lly accomplished. We are not getting any younger, and this transit makes To the Planets and Through the Houses r6s us painfully aware of our unsatisfied longings, our unrealized dreams
and id~als. It's not unusual to experience a desperate urgency at this
time: life is passing us by and we had better hurry if we are to have
our share of the cake. To some degree, the dissatisfaction and dismay
we feel now is a good thing - it is the spur which prompts us to do
more with our lives. We are motivated to make changes for the sake
of greater happiness and fulfilment.
This is fair enough. If we are in a job which isn't fulfilling, it
makes sense to consider other lines of work which might be more
satisfying. If we are not getting what we need or want in a relationship, the answer could be finding a different one which might
work better. However, because this transit is a Neptune square, we
need to be careful we aren't chasing after something unreal or
illusory. We could overthrow all that we have built in our lives only
to discover that the new 'perfect job' or the new 'Mr or Ms Wonderful'
doesn't deliver all that was hoped for.
As usual with Neptune, the issues are not straightforward. Some
of the greater happiness we seek might be found through implementing external changes, and it may be absolutely fitting to do so; but
it's also possible that the crisis is an inner one, which cannot be
resolved by simply making outer adjustments in our lives. For instance, ageing is something we ali have to face at this time. No·
amount of jogging, working out, dieting, sexual conquest and outside
validation will reverse the unavoidable truth that we are getting
older. Neptune squaring Neptune ultimately asks that we let go of
our youth. Rather than trying to hold on to it, the time has come to
mourn its loss.
Neptune is the planet of dreams, but it is also associated with
making sacrifices. Wherr Neptune squares itself, we may have to
sacrifice (Neptune) some of our dreams (Neptune). In other words,
we might have to relinquish fantasies from earlier life, which we
now realize are probably unattainable. By the age of 42 we have a
fairly good idea whether or not we will ever be Prime Minister,
President, or the richest person in the world. The time has come to
let go of unreal dreams and focus on more feasible goals.
Even if we have achieved the degree of success we hoped for when
we were younger, transiting Neptune square Neptune will still make r66 Neptune Transits us aware of where we are incomplete or unfulfilled. The wholeness
and fulfilment we believed could be gained through work, relationships or material well-being just isn't enough. We may be rich,
happily'married, with beautiful children, living in a fine home, and
yet something is still missing. What we are experiencing is a
'spiritual' crisis, or a crisis of meaning. The way through this crisis
can be found only by looking inward in search of new goals and ideals
which will give our life greater purpose and significance. Transiting Neptune trine natal Neptune
This transit occurs around the age of 55, and may coincide fairly
closely with transiting Uranus trilling its own natal position (discussed on p. 72). It's easy to bemoan the loss of youth and dwell on
the negative effects of ageing, but the harmonious triggering of both
Uranus and Neptune at this time imply there are still plenty of new
opportunities for growth and expansion. We might be tempted just
to coast along, but if we are willing to make the effort, we will
discover that life is far from over.
Although physical vitality and the mind's ability to absorb unfamiliar information do slack off with age, the combined effect of
these transits suggest we are ready for new realizations and insights.
By this time in life, we probably know ourselves better than, ever
before, and have a realistic idea of what we are capable of doing
and what is truly out of the question. Transiting Uranus trine
Uranus indicates that the late fifties is a period to give ourselves
permission to be who we are - to do what we would like to do,
rather than what we believe or think we ought to do. We might
even have the courage to try a few things which up to now we
haven't had the nerve to attempt - what Gail Sheehy in her book
Pathfinders calls 'the last chance leap'. 2 And transiting Neptune
trilling natal Neptune adds yet another dimension to the kind of
growth which is possible at this time - growth of an inner and
spiritual nature.
Any important Neptune transit signifies the possibility of an increased empathy and concern for others. In particular, Neptune
trilling Neptune describes a time when we can appreciate and derive To the Planets and Through the Houses I 67 greater enjoyment from relationships and social-contacts. Seasoned
by life, we have a better understanding of ourselves and our own
foibles and contradictions, and therefore more potential for tolerance
of others. Roles are relaxed -men are freer to explore the feeling side
of their nature, and women find it easier to assert themselves and to
get what they want. As the demands of work and family subside,
there will be more opportunity for companionship with a mate, and
a chance to get to know our grown-up children as individuals in
their own right.
The boundaries of Neptune extend beyond the concerns of our
own personal self. Neptune trining its own place could coincide with
an influx of transpersonal or superconscious awareness into everyday life. Freed from the busy strivings of earlier years, there is more
time to stop and reflect on life's meaning, and to see beauty in things
we hurriedly passed by before. Even if we are not mystically inclined,
we may experience an increase in idealism at this time and a desire
to engage in activities which promote our vision of a better world.
The enhanced empathy we feel could find expression in community
or charity work, where we serve and help people other than our- .
selves.
Any important Neptune transit entails making sacrifices of some
sort. As in the case of Neptune square Ne~tune, we will have to let
go of life-dreams or goals which we now recognize as improbable or
unrea1istic. However, the trine angle suggests that we encounter less
trauma or pain in doing so - we are more ready to accept ourselves
as we are even if we have not achieved as much as we hoped for,
and to give our blessing to our own life. Transiting Neptune opposition natal Neptune
This transit occurs when we are in our mid-eighties, and roughly
coincides with the return of transiting Uranus to its natal placement
{discussed on p. 78).
The negative manifestations of the Neptune opposition are all too
obvious and common during this period. In line with Neptune's
dissolving and weakening effect, our bodily processes run down and
we become less resistant to illness. Energy diminishes as our physical r68 Neptune Transits organs wear out, making us slower and less flexible. We might be
facing financial limitations and restrictions at this time. Mental
confusion may set in, and we could suffer hallucinations and delusions which put us out of touch with the reality around us. We
might end up institutionalized, bedridden, aimless and totally dependent on others.
While some of the effects of ageing are undeniably grim, it is
still possible for many of us to use and understand this transit
constructively. In fact, senility is not the rule in old age- the vast
majority of people in their eighties remain unaffected by it. Many
people in this age group report that even though their bodies look
old, they don't feel that way inside. The Neptunian influence at
this time indicates that we have no choice but to disengage from
many of our past activities: we are unlikely to be pursuing a career
or raising a family at this phase of our lives. However, withdrawing our energy from these activities also means that we now have
the opportunity to find other dimensions of experience in which to
engage. Old age is not just a period of decline: it offers - as does
every stage of life - its own unique opportunities for development. ·
Even though short-term memory may be impaired, our longerterm memory is enhanced. Freed from social responsibilities, not
only do we have more time to reflect on our life as a whole, but we
are also better equipped to do so. By this I mean not just a nostalgic
recollection of episodes, but the much more fruitful task of re-evaluating and reappraising past events within the framework of the overall
context of our lives. It's time to weigh things up and to look back
over our lives with the added insight that age allows. In doing so, we
create the opportunity to come to terms and make peace with past
experiences - the chance to discover how even the most distressing
events also served some purpose or taught us a necessary lesson. We
might even glimpse a quality of inevitability to all that has happened,
what Erikson referred to as ego integrity, 'the acceptance of one's one
and only life cycle as something that had to be and that, by necessity,
permitted of no substitutions'. 3 Neptune opposing its own place does
not have to leave us confused, bitter and full of regrets. Through the
kind of introspection and soul-searching transiting Neptune invokes
at this time, we are capable of achieving not only a healthier level of To the Planets and Through the Houses 169 self-esteem, but also a greater respect for that higher ordering principle, both mysterious and wise, which guides and oversees all our
lives.·
While contemplation and philosophical speculation are ideal Nep. tunian pursuits, we should be wary at this time of disappearing into
the oblivion of self-absorption. Old people are more capable than any
other age group of enjoying long periods on their own, and yet
satisfaction can still be gained from interaction with others. Associates weaker and less able than us may need our help, and we
will feel better about ourselves if we can lend a hand where possible.
Both younger and older people alike could benefit from the long
vision our experience of life has given us. And even if we are
severely handicapped or incapacitated, we are performing a Neptunian act of service when we give others the chance to be of helP to
us. Allowing ourselves to be cared for iS yet another way of relinquishing our ego and separateness - something we all have to do when
death comes.
Thi~s transit is a time to reflect not only on life, but also on death.
What lies beyond? Will our spirit continue to live in some other
form? And, as mentioned in the section dealing with the Uranus
return, death requires more than just thought and speculation - it
also requires preparation. If we can sort out the unfinished business
and loose ends of our life, we are more likely to leave it behind in
peace.
Neptune-Pluto Because Pluto moves so slowly, large numbers of people will experience Neptune-Pluto transits around the same time. These transits
describe stirrings in the collective which influence our individual
charts according to the house placements involved (the house Neptune is transiting, the house of natal Pluto, and the house with
Scorpio on the cusp or contained within it). How we are affected
personally by Neptune-Pluto transits also depends on the aspects to
natal Pluto in our chart. Any natal Pluto aspect will be activated
when Neptune contacts Pluto by transit. 'For instance, take the case
of a person born with Venus in 2 5 degrees Aries opposing Pluto in I 70 Neptune Transits 23 degrees Libra. When transiting Neptune in Capricorn comes to
square Pluto in Libra, it also will square Venus in Aries around the
same period. Therefore, the Neptune transit will bring out the
Venus-Pluto opposition at that time.
It is highly unlikely that anyone born in this century or in the first
half of the twenty-first century will live long enough to have transiting Neptune come to conjunct his or her natal Pluto. However,
transiting Neptune sextile, square, trine or opposing Pluto are all
possible. Any contact between transiting Neptune and Pluto will
arouse certain basic issues - although we will generally find the
trine and sextile somewhat easier to handle than the square and
opposition.
When Neptune transits in aspect to Pluto, we become more
open and receptive to any of the things which Pluto represents.
Primarily this means that whether we like it or not some part of us
is seeking change and renewal at this time. Pluto - the planet
which symbolizes death and rebirth - is nudged into action by
Neptune via the spheres of life signified by the houses involved. For
example, take the case of Gavin, who was born with Pluto in Leo
in the seventh house. Gavin was 28 when transiting Neptune in
Sagittarius in the eleventh house first came to trine his Pluto. At
this time, he joined a psychotherapy training group (eleventh
house) which had a profound effect on his consciousness. He also
met and became involved with a woman in the group. After much
soul-searching, he ended a long-term relationship in order to be
with this new woman. So we can see the link between transiting
Neptune in the eleventh (the house of groups) and the disruption
of his present partnership (Pluto in the seventh). Even though the
transit was a trine, it still created upheaval. His natal Pluto ruled
his Scorpio midheaven, and he and his new partner decided to
work together as co-therapists for other couples. In this way, the
transit of Neptune trine Pluto not only altered his seventh-house
situation, but also affected his tenth house, which Pluto in the
seventh ruled.
As with any transit to Pluto, if we are not aware of that part of us
which requires change, there is more likelihood that we will attract
or provoke disruption into our lives. We will unconsciously set up To the Planets and Through the Houses I 71 our lives to fall apart in some respect. Or a _collective phenomenon,
such as war or an economic recession, could intercede and bring
upheaval into our lives during this period.
When Neptune transits in aspect to Pluto, we are inclined to look
more deeply into ourselves or life in general. This could stimulate an
interest in depth psychology, metaphysics or the occult, and draw us
to groups concerned with these matters. In Gavin's case, his desire
to study as a psychotherapist reflected a growing collective interest
in psychology, which was partly symbolized by transiting Neptune
in Sagittarius trilling a whole generation's Pluto in Leo. One manifestation of this widespread transiting trine was that many people
became fascinated (Neptune) by the idea of exploring the hidden
dimensions of the psyche and themselves (Pluto in Leo), probably in
the belief that some kind of personal or social salvation (Neptune)
could be found through penetrating Pluto's realm. Gavin's individual
participation in the trend created the circumstances which changed
his life, particularly in the sphere of Pluto's natal house and the
house with Scorpio in it.
As a general rule, Neptune-Pluto contacts draw us into Pluto's
realm, often because we feel some kind of salvation lies there. Some
of the generation born with Pluto in Virgo are already experiencing
the effects of transiting Neptune in Capricorn trilling their natal
Pluto. The Yuppie movement reflects the earthy nature of this
particular Neptune-Pluto contact, where nirvana is being sought
through jobs (Virgo) which promise material success and well-being
(Capricorn). In line with the respect for tradition evinced by earth
signs, conventionality is becoming the fashion and is seen by many
as the only road to happiness. This earthy transiting trine also
symbolizes the increasing awareness people have of their bodies and
what they are taking into their systems (Pluto in Virgo). Exercise
and proper diet are the new gods, demanding obedience in the name
of having a fulfilling life.
Of course, Neptune also elicits disappointment and disillusionment
through any planet it is aspecting by transit. Therefore, when transiting Neptune aspects Pluto, we could be let down or experience losses
in relation to the signs and houses involved. Some people with
transiting Neptune in Capricorn trilling natal Pluto in Virgo could 172 Neptune Transits find that their goal of material success constantly eludes them; or
even if they achieve their desired financial status, they may discover
that it hasn't brought the kind of bliss they hoped it would.
Neptune-Pluto transits draw out (Neptune) what is buried in us
(Pluto). During these periods, we are more susceptible to unconscious complexes and compulsions taking us over. This can happen
under any Neptune-Pluto transit, but the transiting square or opposition 'is likely to produce the most dramatic effects. Emotional
complexes left over from early childhood, dislodged by transiting
Neptune, float up to the surface level of consciousness, where they
colour and influence how we see life and what we attract to us.
This is particularly evident when transiting Neptune activates natal
aspects from the personal planets to Pluto. Christina is a clear
example. She was born with Mercury in Aquarius opposing Pluto
in Leo. When she was 14, transiting Neptune in Scorpio came to
square both ends of her Mercury-Pluto opposition, and her
younger brother (Mercury rules relatives) was diagnosed as having
leukaemia. The entire household was disrupted, and her parents
focused their attention primarily on tending their sick son. Christina understood the necessity for this, but she also felt her own
needs were being neglected as a result. Unable to voice this to her
parents, she used getting into trouble at school as a way of indirectly diverting their attention towards her. Christina's behaviour
worsened, and the school suggested a family therapist be brought
in. In the course of the therapy, Christina's present needs were
made clear, but it also came to light that Christina had been intensely envious of her brother all her life. Before his birth, she had
been 'the only child, very much doted on by her parents. Her
father desperately wanted a son, and after her brother's arrival
Christina felt pushed aside and rejected. The transit of Neptune in
square to her natal Mercury-Pluto opposition triggered an emotional time-bomb which she had been carrying inside for a very
longtime.
While any Neptune-Pluto transit could stir issues to do with
sexuality, the transiting square and opposition are likely to be the
most difficult in this respect. The sexual awakening attending adolescence is never easy, but this phase of life could be further compli- To the Planets and Through the Houses I 73 cated if Neptune adversely aspects Pluto during this period. This
was the case for Robert, who was 16 when transiting Neptune in
Scorpio in the eighth house moved into square with his natal
Pluto in Leo in the fifth. Although he was interested in the girls in
his class, he felt even more strongly attracted to other boys, and
one older male friend in particular. Confused and embarrassed by
his sexual urges, he didn't know how to cope with his feelings, and
knew no one he could turn to for guidance. Robert's situation
illustrates one manifestation of Neptune-Pluto transits - the arousal of drives we find overwhelming and uncomfortable. In his
case, these were sexual urges, but other drives of a destructive or
aggressive nature could also surface at this time. Young people
with this transit can be helped if they are allowed to bring into the
open and discuss their innermost feelings - especially those they
are most ashamed of - with an understanding older person or
trained counsellor.
Most people living now will experience the transit of Neptune in
opposition to natal Pluto in their fifties and sixties. Any of tlie
manifestations of Neptune-Pluto transits discussed so far apply to
this transit as well. In particular, unresolved psychological complexes
and various kinds of compulsions and obsessions could be brought
out through people or situations we meet at this time. Some facet of
our psyche we have buried or kept secret may have to be confronted,
and issues we failed to come to terms with when transiting Neptune
squared Pluto might re-emerge for us to examine more closely.
Neptune draws out what Pluto has kept hidden, so physical weaknesses and ailments could be exposed under this transit. More specifically, with the transiting opposition we may be asked to accept
(Neptune) something dying (Pluto) in our lives. For some people this
transit could coincide with the loss of a parent, close friend or mate,
or with other major life-changes, such as retirement, divorce, or the
menopause. Again we see the influence of Neptune: one stage of life
has to be let go in order to make room for something new. An
attitude of willingness, acceptance and faith will aid the passage,
and yet we still need to give space to the anger, resentment, guilt
and pain engendered whenever anyone we are close to dies, or any
phase of life passes. I 74 Neptune Transits Transiting Neptune Through the Houses
First House
When any outer planet transits over the ascendant and through the
first house, our next major stage of growth involves a confrontation
with the qualities of the transiting planet. The dissolution of our
existing sense of self and our orientation towards life are the primary
effects of Neptune moving through this area of the chart. Because an
old self is dying, we might feel lost and confused at this time: we used
to know who we were and what we wanted in life, but now we are
not so sure. Neptune, the planet of leaky margins and fuzzy boundaries, diffuses our sense of identity and blurs our vision, and our
immediate reaction is probably that of worry and fear: the ground
has been taken away from beneath our feet, and we feel as if we're
falling into a void. Every time we are about to establish a more solid
footing, events seemingly conspire to undermine us. Even if we see a
direction we would like to follow, something comes along to block
our way or frustrate our plans. When Neptune is around the ascendant, we may have no choice but to accept our confusion and be with
it. Essentially this means giving ourselves permission to tread water
until the time comes when we are able to recover a grip on ourselves.
This isn't easy. It entails trusting life enough to let go and see what
happens next. Unfortunately, not everyone possesses that kind of
faith.
According to the psychologist Erik Erikson, we are more likely
to have acquired a basic trust in life if as a small child our survival
needs were met and satisfactorily fulfilled. Júpiter But if our mother/caretaker consistently failed to respond adequately to our
requirements, then we grew up with a lack of faith not only in life,
but in ourselves as well. We form the opinion that we are bad,
unworthy and unlovable - why else wouldn't mother have provided
us with what we need? Without a basic trust in life or ourselves, the
transit of Neptune over the ascendant can be especially difficult.
How can we let go and trust that everything will ultimately fall back
into place, when deep inside we believe that the world doesn't care
about us? To the Planets and Through the Houses 175 With or without faith, the transit of Neptune over the ascendant
may be one of the most frightening or lonely periods in our lives.
This transit exposes any feelings of abandonment and neglect we felt
as a child. It may help to realize that the emotions we are experiencing now are 'old' ones which are resurfacing. Taking the time to
grieve for the ideal mother or father we didn't have is one way we
can begin to use this transit constructively, and exploring these
feelings with a therapist or counsellor will aid the process. We are
vulnerable and exposed at this time, and the counsellor could provide
the kind of support and containment we lacked as a child. Or we
might transfer the rage we feel about not getting our basic requirements met as a child on to the therapist or therapy situation and
work it through in that way. Bringing these feelings out into the
open is the first step in coming to terms with them.
When transiting Neptune crosses over the ascendant and through
the first house, we are often drawn into victim/saviour relationships.
It's fairly easy to see how wecould identify with being a victim at
this time: this transit not only often produces confusion and a loss of
direction, but it also can reactivate the feelings of helplessness we
experienced in early life, when we needed someone bigger and more
powerful than ourselves in order to survive. If under this transit we
feel weak, 'little' or lost, we would naturally be in the market for a
rescuer. Looking for another person to save us might be beneficial in
the short term, but as a long-term proposition it is doomed to fail.
The other person won't be able to sustain the role of saviour forever.
Sooner or later he or she will let us down. Besides, finding someone
else to take over our lives reinforces a sense of ourselves as small and
weak, and perpetuates any tendency we might have to manipulate
others by playing on their sympathy. However, if we have always
appeared as the big, strong and capable one, this transit could be the
time when we are meant - for the sake of wholeness and further
psychological growth - to allow out that part of us which is more
weak and vulnerable and to let other people see that side of our
nature.
Playing the saviour is also tempting now, and sometimes appropriate. Neptune dissolves separateness and can confer a greater
degree of empathy and compassion for other people. Our own boun- I 76 Neptune Transits daries are down, and we are more sensitive to what others are going
through. To some degree, putting our own needs aside and attending
to the plight of those less fortunate than ourselves is a positive and
natural way to use this transit. However, in the name of psychological honesty, we should examine what personal benefits we are
deriving by taking on the role of martyr or saviour. Helping others is
one way of enhancing our own self-esteem. It also gives us power
over other people. With Neptune around the ascendant and first
house, some of our motives for serving people may be pure, but
other factors can creep in as well. This transit is a good opportunity
to examine more fully our reasons for wanting to rescue others.
Neptune enhances a desire to transcend our separateness and
merge with something greater than ourselves, so urges and experiences of a mystical or religious nature could occur with Neptune
passing through the first house.- Devotional feelings run high, and
we should exercise some discrimination in our choice of what to
worship or surrender ourselves to at this time. Neptune's legendary
gullibility makes for a funny story now and then; but. there are
charlatans around who could lead us far worse places than just up
the garden path.
Because Neptune enables us to encompass realms beyond our
ordinary ego-borders, this transit enhances our ability to serve as a
medium through which archetypal images and feelings can flow.
Creative people often feel more inspired at this time, and could do
some of their best work. Regardless of our artistic capabilities, giving
some form of creative expression to what we are experiencing now is
an excellent way to use this transit.
Whether we know it or not, when Neptune transits the ascendant
and first house, we want to 'lose' ourselves. Unwittingly we set up
circumstances through which the structures we have built so far in
our lives topple and collapse, so that we have to put ourselves back
together ·in a new way. Drawn to pie-in-the-sky schemes or unrealistic proposals which are destined to fail, we are left emotionally
or financially bankrupt, with little choice but to pick up the pieces,
put ourselves together in a new way and start again. If we fall in
love under this transit (which many people do), it's not just with
anyone, but with the woman or man of our dreams. The problem is To the Planets and Through the Houses I 77 that sooner or later we wake up to discover that our beloved is not
everything we imagined him or her to be. We may have been
looking to another person to be the ideal parent we lost or never
had. Under this transit, however, we will have to face the fact that
we need to find our own ideal parent within ourselves, rather than
importing someone else to play that role for us. Romantics will be ill
their element now: transported to the heights of ecstasy one day,
and plunged into the depths of despair and disillusionment the next.
If we have always lived a rigid, cautious but boring existence, it may
be that the loosening and dissolving effect of Neptune is precisely
what we need for our next stage of growth.
Anything that promises to deliver us from our shackles will be
very tempting now. With Neptune transiting the ascendant and first
house, we might be drawn to drugs and alcohol as a way of
expanding our boundaries, or as a means of escaping from difficulties
we don't want to face. People prone to addictions will have to
exercise some restraint and discrimination during this period, and
find healthier ways to deal with their problems and pain. We also
could feel more tired and lethargic than usual - especially when
Neptune is crossing the ascendant. We're sleepy during the day,
then lie awake all night when we should be sleeping. We may suffer
from periods of 'divine homesickness' -the yearning to return to the
state of oneness with all of life we felt prior to birth - and there is a
strong temptation to withdraw from the everyday world and to
inhabit one of fantasy and dreams. To some extent, we may need to
indulge these urges before we emerge ready to face mundane reality
again.
Second House
While this transit brings change in the sphere of money, material
possessions and our value-system in general, the exact way in which
this occurs can vary significantly from person to person. In some
instances, transiting Neptune in the second may increase the longing
for money and possessions. We might find ourselves fantasizing
more than ever about all the things we could do if we only had the
financial resources. Wherever Neptune is transiting is where we are I 78 Neptune Transits looking for the experience of something numinous and divine. In the
case of the second house, we might see material success as the be-all
and end-all of existence, as if wealth was heaven itself. The god
Neptune had great riches under the sea and yet he still longed for
the earthly possessions of his brother Jupiter. Neptune transiting the
second could intensify a dissatisfaction with our existing material
status: if we are poor, we want what rich people have; if we are rich,
we want even more. Whether we do anything concre~e about realizing these dreams is another story. Neptune is not the most practical
of planets.
However, even if we achieve all the material success we hope for
under this transit, we will find that something is still lacking. In the
end it is only the infinite that will satisfy Neptune. Seeking material
riches and wealth as a way of becoming complete just doesn't work.
The kind of wholeness and fulfilment Neptune is looking for can't be
found in anything external; it can be found only on an inner plane,
within one's own self. By the end of Neptune's transit through the
second, some of us will have learned the truth.
Neptune blurs distinctions, and can bring confusion, chaos and
deception in money matters when it transits this house. In our fog,
we make unwise investments and costly errors of judgement. Even
something which appears to be a safe bet could be undermined by
unexpected flukes and unforeseen circumstances. Neptune lives in a
fairy-tale world, and any get-rich-quick scheme may be hard to resist
for someone with this transit. Other people might deceive us with
offers of work or money-making schemes which subsequently do not
deliver what they promised. Thieves come in the night and deprive
us of some of our possessions. Or we might be tempted to undertake
illegal or dishonest ways of making money. A word of advice:
underhanded dealings usually don't succeed when Neptune is
moving through this house.
With Neptune transiting the second, we could have a great deal of
trouble holding on to money, and our efforts to accumulate wealth
may come to nothing. Money slips through our hands like water we might wake up one day to discover we have turned into a 'credit
card junkie', compulsively spending more than we actually have or
can afford. Or we receive a big fat cheque in the first post, and then a To the Planets and Through the Houses r 79 bill for the same amount in the second. Neptune dissolves separateness and increases our sense of unity or oneness with others.
When this happens in the second house, it can give rise to the feeling
or belief that 'what's mine is yours'. As a result, we may find it
difficult to resist a hard lu(: Urano story: we can't help giving a little
something to the homeless bum on the corner, or reaching for our
cheque book to support another charity or disaster fund. (Thieves
also glimpse the Neptunian vision of the oneness of life, but they see
it the other way around- 'what's yours is mine', or at least it should
be.)
There are deeper implications behind all the various workings of
Neptune in the second discussed so far. Neptune dissolves boundaries
which are too rigid or narrowly defined. Our deepest Self is unbounded and infinite, and Neptune doesn't like us to forget that fact.
It we become too attached to anything, Neptune may take it away to
remind us that our true identity does not depend on that specific
thing being in our life. If we are deriving our sense of identity from
our bank balance or possessions, transiting Neptune in the second
will do what it can to upset the status quo. Our real worth cannot be
measured in material terms, and ultimately this is what Neptune
transiting the second wants to show us.
None the less, most of us adore our comforts and crave the
security and power money brings. Ownership makes us feel safe, and
we define ourselves by our tastes - those things we choose to
possess. Most of us wouldn't consciously decide to give our money or
possessions away for the sake of demonstrating that our true identity
is unbounded. Therefore transiting Neptune has no choice but to
work surreptitiously to teach us its lessons and to change our values
and attitudes in this domain. Under this transit, unconsciously
.motivated by Neptune, we will unwittingly set up circumstances
which result in our forfeiti.rig or losing some of what we have
attached to ourselves- in particular, our money or property. We
forget to close the bathroom window or lock the back door, and we
let ourselves be talked into unwise schemes and investments. Something in us seeks redemption through letting go of our attachments
and discovering the Self that is there when everything else we
thought we were is taken away. I 8o Neptune Transits As Neptune transits the second house, what we value will change.
And when our values change, the choices we make in life also
change. Carole is a good example. During this transit, she chose to
leave a highly paid secretarial job and take a sizeable cut in salary in
order to work for another firm whose product she believed in more.
Money had always been important for her, but at this time her
values shifted: working for something she considered worthwhile
took precedence. When Neptune moved into Michael's second house,
he gave up his secure job as a computer programmer to train as an
actor - something he had always dreamed of doing. In keeping with
the nature of Neptune, both Michael and Carole made financial
sacrifices to pursue a path which promised greater fulfilment.
In certain cases, this transit manifests itself quite concretely - that
is, we earn our money through a type of work which is 'Neptunian':
acting, modelling, painting, poetry, dance, fashion, photography,
healing, the selling of alcohol or drugs, etc. Professions as varied as
that of a clergyman, chemist or merchant marine could also be
connected to a transiting second-house Neptune. Third House
Transiting Neptune through this house alters how the mind functions. In particular, Neptune's natural receptivity means we become
more sensitive to undercurrents and nuances offeeling in the environment. Our intuition and perception increases - we notice things
happening around us that we never registered before. However,
Neptune's dissolving effect on the mind also indicates there will be
phases when we experience mental confusion and scattered thinking.
Those of us who have prided ourselves on a clear, rational approach
to life will have the hardest time coping with this transit. Nothing is
ever simply black or white in the house where Neptune is transiting.
When Neptune moves through the third, we can view any situation
from so many different angles or levels, we may find it more difficult
to take a definite stand on issues about which we were once absolutely certain.
Neptune has a wide variety of effects on this house, some positive,
and some potentially quite negative. An open mind is a mixed To the Planets and Through the Houses I8I blessing. We are so receptive to others, we could easily be taken in
by what they have to say. More gullible than usual, we are more
capable of being deceived or misled by any powerful or charismatic
personality who comes along. For this reason, many astrologers will
warn us to be cautious about who we let influence us while we are
under this transit. Also, Neptune can create confusion in dealing
with others. We think they are saying or promising one thing, only
to find we have understood them incorrectly. Or other people could
misinterpret us. Many of these problems can be avoided if we take
extra time to clarify the details of any transactions or exchanges we
are involved with during this period. If not, perhaps we will learn
from our mistakes, and be more careful in the future. Sometimes it's
almost impossible to resist falling into the kind of traps any Neptune
transit sets, and as a result we have to learn our lessons the hard
way.
Neptune is paradoxical in this house. On the one hand, we are
prone to misreading and misunderstanding others, and yet, on the
other hand, we can be almost psychic in our ability to pick up on
what people are thinking. We know what others are about to say
before they say it. Or we might have thoughts which we believe are
our own, when in actual fact we have absorbed the thoughts of
those around us. We may even find ourselves voicing things which
other people are thinking but not saying. Neptune acts like a sieve in
whatever area of life it is transiting. When it transits the third our
attunement to the mental plane of existence is so strong that we
literally pick up on thoughts and ideas circulating in the atmosphere.
This could work well for writers or public speakers, who are able to
act as channels or mediums through which ideas and information
can flow. Because we are more attuned to what people around us
are experiencing and feeling, what we write or say is more liable to
touch and inspire others. However, if transiting Neptune in the third
is making difficult aspects to the rest of the chart, there is also the
possibility that our perception may be distorted (usually by our own
unconscious complexes), and we are giving expression to erroneous
or ill-conceived opinions and points of view. Later on, we may have
to admit our errors of judgement - a humbling experience, and a
typically Neptunian lesson. 182 Neptune Transits Even if we are not consciously trying to deceive people, this transit
could make it difficult for us to express honestly or clearly what we
feel. We feel things which are impossible to put into words. Or we
attempt to speak what we believe, but as soon as we have spoken the
words, we become aware of other factors which contradict what we
have said.
In contrast to the increased gullibility and misunderstandings that
often come with this transit, Neptune also makes us more aware of
the hidden meanings and messages contained in what people say or
do. A man tells his wife how much he loves her, and yet she senses
other emotions in him. A father tells his daughter that everything is
fine between himself and her mother, but the daughter 'feels' the
hostility in the atmosphere at home. In other words, we are aware of
what is not being said or expressed, even when people insist they are
telling us the truth. This transit creates a great deal of confusion in
our minds. Do we believe what we are being told-, or what we feel?
Are our deeper assumptions correct, or are we imagining something
which isn't there? As one might expect with Neptune, there are no
clear-cut answers. What we are sensing is probably right, but it's also
true that our own inner insecurities and doubts could be obscuring
our interpretation of the environment. The best we can do is to look
inside ourselves and attempt to sort out the degree to which our
anxieties are based on the reality of the situation, or whether they
stem primarily from deep fears and complexes we carry around with
us. In doing so, we also might come to recognize that our inner
complexes actually influence the kinds of experiences we attract into
our lives. For example, if we believe we are unlovable, we could act
in ways which make it difficult for others to love us; or we might
unconsciously choose partners who have problems with expressing
or feeling their love. Exploring the connection between what is
happening in the environment and what is going on inside ourselves
is a fruitful use of Neptune transiting the third.
Education could be affected by transiting Neptune here. Young
people with this transit sometimes experience learning problems, or
have trouble adjusting socially with peers and classmates. Usually
these difficulties can be helped by the caring intervention of an older,
understanding person. The kinds of subjects which capture our To the Planets and Through the Houses I 83 interest or attention at this time may reflect any of the levels or
meanings of Neptune. For instance, we may be drawn to a study of
metaphysics, religion, psychic phenomena or the occult. Or there
could be a desire to increase our knowledge of art, music, dance,
poetry, film, the theatre or photography. This transit enhances a
sensitivity to other people around us, and we may be motivated to
become involved in work or projects which aid those who are less
fortunate than ourselves. For this reason, the helping professions,
healing arts, and ways of reforming or improving the educational
system itself are other areas which could attract our interest when
Neptune moves through the third.
The third house is also associated with relatives (siblings, uncles,
aunts, cousins) and neighbours. Deceptions could occur in this
sphere, or we may be asked to make adjustments and compromises
on behalf of a relative or neighbour during this period. They may be
going through a challenging phase of life, and we will probably be
quite sensitive to their needs and difficulties. As with any Neptune
transit, we need to be careful to set boundaries and limits; becoming
too involved with the troubles of a brother, sister or neighbour could
drain our own physical, psychological or material resources. Rather
than 'taking on' all their grievances ourselves, it often is wiser to
advise them to seek professional counselling or to direct them to
relevant agencies which are experienced in dealing with their particular problems.
When transiting Neptune in the third triggers difficult aspects in
the natal chart, latent mental and emotional problems or neurological disorders might be brought to the surface. In extreme cases,
this could result in mental breakdowns or physical illness related to
the malfunction of the brain and nervous system. In some cases,
mobility, vision or hearing could be impaired. The effects may be
severe, but it is only when these conditions are exposed that suitable
treatment can be sought.
Fourth House
Neptune transiting the fourth touches us on a deep, personal level,
and its effects will be manifested both outwardly and inwardly in our 184 Neptune Transits lives. Obviously, these two dimensions are connected: external contingencies will prompt inner changes, and any inner change will
express itself externally in some way. We'll examine the inner,
psychological consequences first, and then move on to the more
mundane ramifications of this transit.
At any time during the period when Neptune crosses the IC and
journeys through the fourth house, we may experience phases of
inner confusion. We aren't sure exactly who we are or what we are
here for. The fourth house is associated with our base of operations on an external level it is our home, but psychologically it represents
'where we are coming from'. Neptune here can describe feelings of
being lost; we don't know where we are, and we don't have a solid
enough sense of ourselves on which to base an approach to life.
Especially when transiting Neptune is hovering around' the IC or
cusp of the fourth, we may need to take time just to be with
ourselves, time to look inward and make contact with what we are
feeling deep inside. Through turning our awareness inward and
withdrawing into the self, we will be better able to attune ourselves
to our innermost needs and urges~ When Neptune crosses the IC, it
is appropriate to pause and take stock of our lives. Asking certain
questions will help this process. What has motivated us in life up to
now? Are these motivations still important to us, or is it time to
allow new urges and goals to replace the old ones? Have our
motivations been our own, or have our choices been influenced
heavily by parents or society? Regardless of what others may want
for us, what do we really want? What does our own psyche want to
make happen for us?
With Neptune transiting the IC, the answers to these questions
probably are unlikely to come quickly or dramatically. When Uranus
transits this area, we might wake up one day jolted into a sense of who
we are and filled with certainty about what we want in life. Neptune,
however, doesn't operate that way. With Neptune, we just have to be
with ourselves and wait until we can sense or feel more clearly the true
urges stemming from our core Self. Neptune doesn't push and shove; it
nudges. And when it transits the fourth, it asks that we find meaning
and strength from inside ourselves-that we are true to our own psyche
-ratherthanlookingforsomething 'out there' to tell us what to beordo. To the Planets and Through the Houses r8s A re-evaluation of our deepest urges, needs and motivations at
this time could be prompted by the feeling that our life is incomplete.
Neptune transiting the I C can stir a deep malaise- we are not happy
with existing circumstances surrounding us, and we don't feel fulfilled by the kinds of structures we have created or built for ourselves
in our lives. In other words, we are frustrated with the whole way
our life is set up. The fourth house has a rebounding effect on the
tenth, and some of this frustration could be related directly to
feelings of dissatisfaction with the work we are doing in the world.
In fact, we may need to take some time away from work or other
external commitments, in order to create more space for our own ,.
selves. By reducing our outer activity, we are better able to respect
the inner process of unfoldment our psyche has in mind for us. By
quieting down, we are better able to 'hear' our deepest needs and
urges. In this sense, Neptune transiting the IC or fourth is asking
that we give up or sacrifice some of our involvement with the
external world for the sake of communing more closely with our
inner selves.
Memories from the past could also be aroused at this time. Unconscious complexes and patterns related to childhood experiences
and conditioning are dislodged from the depths of the psyche and
float to the surface of consciousness. We may find ourselves in
current situations which parallel earlier events in our lives, and
trigger feelings which have been buried in us from previous stages of
development.
For instance, when Anne had
transiting Neptune
\
.
conjunct her fourth-house Sun, her husband was diagnosed as
having cancer. This situation reactivated a long-forgotten experience
-when she was four years old her father had to go into hospital for a
major heart operation. The news of. her husband's illness brought
out the earlier fear, guilt and insecurity that had gripped her at the
time of her father's hospitalization. In facing her present circum. stances, she also had to confront unresolved emotions from her
childhood. In the process, Anne's psychological understanding of
herself deepened, and she was able to examine and apprehend more
clearly a part of herself which somehow felt responsible if people
around her were sick or unhappy. The transit of Neptune over her
fourth-house Sun was a difficult period, and yet it provided the 186 Neptune Transits opportunity for her to discover and begin to work through a complex
she had carried around inside her for many years.
Looking inside ourselves is the most subtle effect of this transit,
but it can also be manifested quite concretely in issues to do with the
home and personal life. Very often transiting Neptune in the fourth
coincides ·with a phase of making major adjustments or sacrifices
within the sphere of the home. We may have people living with us
who require extra care or support. Sick relatives come to stay, or a
spouse, lover, child or flatmate with whom we share our home may
be experiencing a difficult time. What is going on within the home
could drain us or demand so much of our attention that other areas
of our life have to take second place. Any of these contingencies
reflect Neptune's tendency to dissolve separateness by asking that
we put our own needs aside for the sake of others. To do so may be
right and appropriate under this transit; but we also need to acknowledge and deal with that part of us which might resent the sacrifices
we have to make. Otherwise, the undercurrents within the home
will be permeated with the poison of unrecognized resentment.
In some cases (usually when transiting Neptune in the fourth
opposes natal or transiting planets in the tenth), we are caught in a
conflict between our personal life (the fourth) and our professional
life (the tenth). In this situation, the majority of people may feel
the need to sacrifice the amount of time they would be using to
pursue career activities in order to tend to pressing personal or
- domestic issues. However, sometimes this happens in reverse: we
give up some of the time we would be putting into our personal life
in order to engage in tenth-house activities. In the first instance, the
career is given up for the sake of the home; in the latter, the
home/personal sphere is compromised for the sake of career. In
either case, we meet Neptune - the planet which teaches us about
sacrifice and letting go.
Neptune transiting the fourth could indicate deception within the
home - someone we live with is deceiving us. Or the dissolving effect
of Neptune might be manifested concretely in collapsing foundations
or rising damp. These situations, though real enough, often symbolize deeper issues which we need to examine. For instance, if the
house is literally falling down around us, what does this say about To the Planets and Through the Houses r 87 our inner psychological state of being? Rationally minded individuals
may laugh at trying to make such connections, but if we look deeply
enough we will often discover a surprising reciprocity between the
inner and outer dimensions .of life. In a few cases, this transit
coincides with our having to give up a home entirely. We may be
forced to leave a house we treasure. Divorce, the death of a partner,
the ending of a relationship, or the splitting up of a family could
mean the structure of our home life as we have known it dissolves.
Such occurrences may be the outer manifestation of a Neptunian
process: the need to let go of old ways of being in order to rebuild life
on a new foundation. Consciously we may not be choosing this to
happen, and yet Neptune leaves us with no alternative: our inner
growth demands these kinds of changes at this time.
We seek greater wholeness and fulfilment in the area of the chart
where Neptune is transiting. A number of people I have encountered
with Neptune moving through their fourth were working very hard
to establish a more ideal home. Some were involved in revamping
their home in order to make it more beautiful, comfortable or
complete - which can be a positive, concrete use of this transit. I
have also come across many people who purchased a home when
Neptune crossed the IC and moved through the fourth. Since Neptune is the planet of deception, many astrological textbooks warn us
of such transactions at this time. We may be unaware of something
wrong with the house we are buying, so precautions should be
taken to investigate such possibilities thoroughly. Or we set our
sights on a property we love, but unforeseen circumstances mean
that in the end we can't buy it. In any of these ways, Neptune can let
us down. However, tQ say that we should never buy a house or flat
under this transit is 'too extreme. Neptune doesn't only indicate
disillusionment or disappointment. For some people, buying a home
of their own at this time could be the realization of a life-long dream
-another manifestation of Neptune. And, in most cases, acquiring a
property is Neptunian: we are under the illusion that we own it,
when in actual fact it belongs to whomever we borrowed the money
from for the mortgage.
The fourth house can be associated with one of our parents, quite
often the father (although the mother may fit better here in some r88 Neptune Transits cases).* Neptune transiting this sphere could describe something he
is going through. He may be ill, depressed, or facing a major lifechange, such as retirement or the loss of people close to him. He
might find religion or take up writing poetry. The fact that these
changes are happening for him when Neptune transits our fourth
means that in some way we will be touched by what he is experiencing. He may need us to look after him, or we may have to be
especially sensitive and understanding 'or his situation. In some
cases, this transit could coincide with death of the father - we
literally have to give him up.t However, what he is experiencing
at this time could also have the effect of bringing us closer to him.
Barriers that might have existed between our father and ourselves
dissolve, and we can relate in a fashion not possible before. In this
way, Neptune could help us heal earlier wounds in relation to the
father, especially if we felt misunderstood, unloved or unappreciated by him. On another level, this transit also suggests our
capacity to find 'the father within' - the discovery of something
within our own selves which can provide us with the strength
and loving support we previously looked for in an external fatherfigure. Father also can be taken to be a symbol of spirit or God,
and Neptune in the fourth could prompt an inner search to discover and reconnect to the spiritual source of life. Which brings
us back to the idea that, in its deepest expression, transiting Neptune in this house is asking that we turn our attention inward,
where our soul lives. Fifth House
Underlying the fifth house is the urge to distinguish ourselves as
someone special and unique, the desire to express and radiate our
individuality by putting our stamp on whatever we do. When Neptune -the planet that knows no boundaries and limits - transits the
fifth, we could succumb to a tendency to self-aggrandizement or to *See chapters. notes.
tSee p. 26r for a discussion of the issues raised by a parent's death. To the Planets and Through the Houses 189 assert inappropriately the demands of our ego. It is a law of life that
depression follows inflation: if we become too carried away with
ourselves under this transit, we inevitably invite a fall. With Neptune
moving through the fifth, it is not uncommon to overdramatize and
exaggerate whatever we are experiencing. Everything is bigger than
life: we don't just feel happy, we are ecstatic; we don't just feel sad,
we plunge to the depths of tragedy and despair. And somewhere in
between these mood swings, we are capable of discovering a truer
sense of our identity, worth and abilities.
Neptune enlivens the imagination, and for artistically inclined
people this transit could be a fruitful period, bringing new vision and
ideas. Those of us who have never really tapped our creative potential
may be better able to do so at this time. However, unless we are
prepared to put in the effort and discipline (Saturn) needed to take
our inspired artistic vision and give it concrete manifestation, it will
remain only on the level of fantasy. As usual, Neptune may ask that
we make sacrifices in this area. Some of us may have to give up a
reliable job or fixed income in order to pursue our artistic ambitions.
Or the reverse could be the case. We may be forced to abandon or
curtail creative aspirations in order to undertake work which offers
greater stability and security.
The search for pleasure can be both rewarding and elusive when
Neptune is moving through the fifth. Because there is usually a
fascination for the affairs of the house where Neptune is transiting,
in general I would recommend people under this transit to follow
any urges they have to explore hobbies or spare-time pursuits which
might interest them. This could be anything from an evening class
in painting or calligraphy to regular nights out at the theatre or
ballet. We might take up a sport or discover a penchant for rockcollecting or train-spotting. In fact, the difficulty with diffuse Neptune
here could be deciding which of our many interests to choose to
focus on. Once we finally settle on one, it could absorb us totally at
this time, and contribute to feelings of greater well-being and completeness. On the other hand, we also run the risk of becoming
obsessed or taken over by a spare-time activity. This in itself may not
be problematic, unless we are using that form of recreation as an
escape from other areas in our life we need to face. Should our spare~ 190 Neptune Transits time pursuit entail some form of gambling, we are likely to find
ourselves on the losing end. (With foggy Neptune transiting the fifth,
speculative ventures may not turn out as hoped.) But whether we
win or lose, the deeper psychological motives giving rise to compulsive gambling will need to be explored.
The fifth house is also associated with love and romance, and
Neptune here raises a variety of issues, most commonly the problem
of idealizing a relationship or a loved one. We might ascribe 'divine'
qualities to partners, but fail to see their faults and shortcomings,
and then become disenchanted when they don't live up to our
expectations. Romance is not likely to be straightforward with Neptune around. We worship someone at a distance, or fall for a person
who is already attached or who cannot love us back in the way we
need.
Victim/saviour relationships are common with Neptune transiting
the fifth, and we will be drawn to people wounded in some,way or in
obvious trouble or pain. Once again, our motives for embarking on
these kinds of relationships need to be examined. Is playing the
rescuer a means of bolstering our own sense of self-worth and
power? Do we believe that serving others is the only way we can
coerce.people into loving us? Conversely, we may play the victim
and look for someone to rescue us. While it's possible that sharing
love can be healing for both parties, there are many pitfalls to such
unequal relationships.*
Neptune will also be encountered through children, another fifthhouse concern. A child born under this transit may have Neptune or
Pisces prominent in his or her chart, or might be a dreamy or artistic
type, or have difficulty relating to the world. We may have to make
sacrifices for our offspring at this time. A child could be ill or disabled
in some way and need special care and understanding. The more
subtle issues around this transit may be our tendency to over-idealize
a child, or an attempt to turn the child into someone who will
redeem us. Why is it so important to us that our child be exceptional?
What are we wanting the child to live out for us? We may have to
*See the section on Neptune-Venus transits (p. 141) for a further discussion of these issues. To the Planets and Through the Houses I9I stand by and watch our older children going through an emotional
crisis which we are unable to prevent. Relinquishment is a key
Neptune issue. If our children are coming of age, this transit could
indicate the need on our part to let go of them; if they are suffering in
some way, we may have to recognize the limits of our power to
protect them, or our role as omnipotent parent. An older woman
might have to face the menopause, and the passing of her .childbearing abilities. In this case, she will need to mourn the loss of this
capacity, and consider alternative avenues into which she could
deploy her urges to mother and nurture others.
Unplanned pregnancies could occur under this transit. However,
many psychologists would argue that there is no such thing as an
accidental pregnancy, and if we end up in this situation we will learn
a great deal about ourselves by examining any possible hidden
motivations for getting pregnant at this time. Is the pregnancy a way
of manipulating a partner or holding a relationship together? Or is
pregnancy a means of avoiding other issues in the life, such as
the establishment of a career? Honestly facing our ulterior motives
may be difficult, but it is crucial, not only for our own sake, but
for the sake of the father and the child as well. Abortions, miscarriages and the loss of children may also occur when Neptune is
transiting the fifth, although these will be contingent upon other
aspects of the natal chart. The accompanying grief, anger, guilt
and resentment all need to be understood, and some form of counselling is highly recommended at these times.* Neptune uses suffering to change us - in whatever house it is transiting, we sometimes experience losses which hurt us very deeply. Pain hurts, but
it may help to remember that suffering is one of the paths which
lead to greater consciousness.
Sixth House
This transit affects two areas of life in particular - work and health.
Because Neptune dissolves boundaries, when it transits the sixth
*See Suggested Reading (J2: 386) for a list of books dealiug with death and the grieving
process. 192 Neptune Transits house the boundary between what is inside us and what is outside
us becomes more permeable. If we observe the body closely at this
time, we will see the way in which it registers what we are feeling
and 'picking up' from the environment: we walk into one room
and we feel physically light, buoyant, and expansive, and we go
into another situation and our stomach tightens and neck tenses.
A great deal could be learned about ourselves and others now by
taking time to examine the body's reaction to different people and
environments.
Also, since our physical defences are weakened, we are more
prone to invasion by germs, illnesses or stress in the atmosphere,
and for this reason we should do what we can to' strengthen .our
nervous system. Exercise, proper rest and diet can help to counterbalance some of the possible detrimental effects of Neptune in this
house. We are more sensitive to what we take into our systems;
therefore, over-indulging in alcohol or drugs could be very dangerous. We might discover certain foods to which our body has a
negative reaction. Making dietary adjustments is one form of sacrifice
Neptune may call for when moving through the sixth. However,
Neptune can cause us to be carried away in whatever house it is
transiting, and we run the risk of becoming obsessive about health
and diet. In our quest for ideal health, we could put all our faith into
one specific dietary programme. Approached sensibly, some of these
regimes- grape fasts, raw food or low mucous diets, for instancecan have a cleansing and beneficial effect on the system. But we
should exercise discernment and common sense in this area, and
seek the guidance of a qualified practitioner before embarking op.
diets of an extreme nature, especially since health problems may be
hard to diagnose: there are cases of people with Neptune transiting
the sixth who have been treated for the wrong illness, or who have
been prescribed medication which produced unfortunate side-effects.
Under this transit, we might benefit from alternative or complementary medicines such as homeopathy, naturopathy or acupuncture, which seek out the subtle causes of illness, and generally treat
the body more gently. With Neptune around, illnesses may be
emotional or psychological in origin, and could be serving some
ulterior motive or purpose. For instance, when Neptune transited To the Planets and Through the Houses 193 Kate's sixth house, she developed a stomach ailment which a number
of specialists were unable to diagnose or cure. Eventually Kate
sought the help of a holistic medical practitioner, who not only
examined her body but also enquired into the overall situation of her
life. Through their talks, Kate came to see that her illness did have a
psychological basis. At the time she became sick, she was employed
by the social services in an extremely demanding job looking after
emotionally disturbed adolescents. Rather than admit the work was
beginning to get the better of her, she used sickness as a way of
taking time off. She desperately needed someone to look after her for
a change, and illness offered a legitimate excuse to ask for this.
When Neptune transits the sixth, health problems may be the
catalyst through which we re-evaluate our lives, and arrive at a
degree of psychological or spiritual understanding we previously
didn't have.
Faith and attitude play a large part in the course of recovery from
any illness, and this is especially crucial with Neptune transiting the
sixth. If we want to live and believe we can be helped, our chances of
returning to health are increased. If we are fed up with life, and have
been told that there is no possible cure, we are more likely to give up
and die. In Love, Medicine and Miracles, American surgeon Bernie
Siegel reports on his experiences with patients who have participated
in influencing the course of their illness and miraculously recovered
from serious life-threatening diseases. 5 People with Neptune transiting the sixth, whether they are ill or not, would benefit from his
insights.
Work is another area that Neptune affects when moving through
this house. In some form, adjustment or sacrifice may be called for in
this sphere. We might yearn for employment which offers greater
fulfilment than what we are doing already, and yet our attempts to
find such a job keep failing. Or we may be forced, probably for
practical or financial reasons, to stay in a job we don't find totally
satisfying. With Neptune moving through the sixth, we might have
to accept a work situation we can't significantly alter, at least for the
time being. But in doing so, Neptune could be teaching us one of its
lessons: sometimes it is only when we give up trying to change
things that a solution to our problem appears. I 94 Neptune Transits The element of sacrifice can make itself felt in relation to work in a
number of other ways. Wherever Neptune transits, we may have to
give more than we receive. We might be working very hard at a job
which doesn't offer a fair remuneration. Or our work may involve
having to live somewhere we wouldn't choose ourselves; or the job
could be draining, so that our health and personal life suffers. This
transit also means that we are more sensitive to the atmosphere and
conditions at work. The job itself may not be secure, or we might be
working under conditions of confusion and uncertainty. Co-workers
could burden us with their problems, or look to us for help and
support, and we might become very entangled in their lives unless
we know where to draw our boundaries. Misunderstandings with
employers, employees, or fellow workers could arise. We might be
the victim of an employer's or co-worker's deceit, or scapegoated by
people we work with. One woman with this transit was deeply hurt
when another woman in her office wrongly accused her of stealing.
At certain times during this transit, we may find ourselves unable
to cope with the ordinary and mundane practicalities of everyday
life. Our daily routines seem incredibly boring or pointless; we want
a more glamorous life, not the drudgery of cooking, dusting, and
worrying about paying bills. Or we might find that even simple tasks
become more complicated and difficult than usual. We take our car
to the garage to be serviced, and it comes back in a worse condition
than when we took it in. An au pair could let us down, and the
milkman may charge us twice for the same delivery. And yet the
transit of Neptune in the sixth also increases our capacity to perceive
beauty in little, everyday things we might have overlooked before, a
chance to discover the truth of the saying 'In every speck of dust,
there are a million Buddhas.'
In spite of all the potential difficulties this transit can bring, it is
possible for Neptune in the sixth to describe a period when we are
absorbed in a job we find very fulfilling. In particular, this can be a
good time for creative or artistic work, or for employment which
involves caring for or helping others. In Planets in Transit, Robert
Hand makes an interesting and valid point when he says that this
transit is best used working in a field of social service looking after
people in need, or employed in a hospital, prison or similar institu- To the Planets and Through the Houses I 95 tion. Neptune has what he calls an 'ego-denying' effect: if, under this
transit, you are in a job just for your own benefit - solely to bolster
your ego or bank balance, for instance - you probably won't be
happy or very successful. But if you are working with a spirit of
service to others, then you are complying with Neptune's tendency
to dissolve separateness, and you are acknowledging your connectedness with the rest of creation - which is the main thing
Neptune wants to teach us. 6
Seventh House
When Neptune transits the seventh, we will be changed through
situations we encounter in the sphere of close partnerships. Some of
these experiences will not be easy, but they offer the possibility of
gaining greater self-awareness and increasing our insight into the
realm of relationships in general. Even if we are already in a relationship, we could fall for someone new we meet at this time. But
there are likely to be complications. We might not be perceiving this
new person clearly. With transiting Neptune in the seventh, we may
be looking for a god or a goddess - a knight in shining armour or the
fair damsel of our dreams. We project an image of our ideal partner
on to other people, and fail to see what they are really like. In the
end, we will be disappointed when they turn out to be human,
flawed or less than perfect. This doesn't have to mean the end of the
relationship, but rather the end of our illusions about the other
person. We can then begin the task of building the relationship on a
more solid footing.
We will be attracted to 'Neptunian' types at this time, possibly
falling fpr people who are deceptive and treacherous. They may not
be this way intentionally, and yet they somehow involve us in a web
of confusion and deceit. We could be drawn to someone with Neptune, Pisces, or the twelfth house strong in his or her natal chart, or
a person who is experiencing an important Neptune transit. Planets
transiting the seventh often mirror attributes and traits we are now
ready to discover in ourselves or build into our own nature. In the
case of Neptune, we may fall for an artist whose creativity we
admire, and this is an indication we are ready to explore our own 196 Neptune Transits creative side. If a mystically inclined or religious person powerfully
appeals to us, this means the time is appropriate to connect with the
mystic in ourselves. If it is a deceitful person, then the time has come
for us to examine more closely our own capacity to deceive and
betray.
Victim/saviour relationships are common with this transit. We
could become involved with people who need rescuing - alcoholics,
drug addicts, or other confused and lost souls. A partner I'night be
experiencing fairly severe emotional difficulties, or problems with
health, money or work; whatever the case, they need our support,
care and understanding. Sometimes this transit coincides with our
falling in love with people who aren't free to commit themselves to
us, or who are unable to love us back. We might have to make
major sacrifices and adjustments for the sake of a relationship. While
it may be appropriate to give a great deal to others at this time, we
should be careful not to be foolishly altruistic and turned into a
doormat - someone who too easily is walked over and abused. If we
have been too selfish, intolerant and ungiving in the past, this
transit asks that we become more flexible and less demanding.
However, if we have repeatedly allowed others to take advantage of
us, this transit will bring hard lessons which serve to teach us the
necessity to draw firmer boundaries and to have more respect for
our own rights and needs.
Transiting Neptune in the seventh is also a phase in which we
might look to another person to save and redeem us - someone who
will take our pain away and fulfil our deepest longings. Unconsciously, we are seeking the lost ideal mother or father, who will
understand us perfectly, and always be there in every way we need.
Unfortunately, no partner is capable of such a feat, and inevitably a
time will come when we are let down and disillusioned. However, it
is only when this happens that we can initiate the process of
grieving for the lost ideal 'other', and begin to look inside our own
selves for the kind of loving acceptance and understanding we have
been seeking from a partner.
With Neptune transiting the seventh, we may be in a relationship
which is far from ideal, and yet refuse to admit this is the case. We
pretend everything is fine and try to present to the world the fa~ade To the Planets and Through the Houses 197 of a perfect partnership. But Neptune has an uncanny way of
catching us out: unexpressed feelings bottle up, and eventually
explode to cause a mess, or they turn inward and attack us in the
form of ill health or depression. Neptune, like Pluto, is an underworld
deity. As in the case of Pluto transiting the seventh, this is a period
when we need to bring the frustrations we are feeling in a relationship to the surface so they can be faced and, we hope, resolved.
This takes courage, and the willingness to admit that something is
wrong in the first place. In the long run, it doesn't pay to deceive
ourselves in the area of life being transited by Neptune.
If we over-idealize or over-romanticize relationships or another
person at this time, Neptune sets traps to catch us out. However, it is
possible to meet someone now with whom we have an uncanny
psychic rapport and closeness. And yet, no matter how divinely
ordained the union might seem, we will still have to make adjustments and compromises. Even true soul-mates might find themselves
arguing over who's turn it is to do the washing up, or the proper
way the toothpaste tube should be squeezed. With Neptune around,
as much as we might hope otherwise, relationships do not arrive
pre-packaged as perfect. I have come across people under this transit
who have been so hurt and let down in a relationship that they have
decided to give up the idea of marriage or close partnership altogether. Or for religious or spiritual reasons, some people decide to be
celibate and focus primarily on their relationship with God. With
Neptune transiting the seventh, we might believe, consciously or
unconsciously, that giving up a relationship or making sacrifices in
this area is a way of being spiritually cleansed or purified. It's worth
recalling the story of the god Neptune who, dissatisfied with the
rulership of his own watery domain, coveted the city of Attica
belonging to Athene, goddess of wisdom, and threatened it with
destruction by flooding. Such contradictory feelings of possessiveness
and an urge to destroy what we cannot have may threaten our
relationships unless we use Athenian judgement.
Sometimes this transit signifies the loss of a partner - through
death, divorce, or some other form of separation, and if this occurs,
Neptune is working through fate to teach us a lesson in non-attachment and letting go. We have been robbed of the happiness and 198 Neptune Transits fulfilment we once hoped the relationship would provide; we have
been robbed of intimacy and can no longer 'lose' ourselves in
someone else. Before we can forgive or come to terms with our loss,
we must come to terms with feelings of abandonment; we have to
mourn the person and dreams we have lost and we have to grieve
for our old self which is dying - and we need to do this without
permanently over-identifying with an image of ourselves as 'tragic'
victims of fate, for ultimately grief must be left behind if we are to
have a new life.
The seventh house describes more than just close personal relationships. Many astrologers associate this area of the chart (along
with the eighth house) with business partnerships, and we should be
careful of confusion, deception and misunderstandings in this sphere
as well. The seventh is also linked to law courts: legal battles could
be messy, complicated and drawn-out if undertaken at this time.
More broadly, the seventh house describes something about our
interaction with society in general - what we have to offer other
people, and what they see in us. With Neptune transiting here, we are
capable of expressing greater sensitivity and compassion with others.
Artists, musicians, healers, counsellors, fashion designers, photographers, models or those involved in any other 'Neptunian' profession
might find the public quite receptive to them at this time. However,
because Neptune is also the planet of the victim and the scapegoat, this
could be a period in which we become the focus of a public scandal, or
find ourselves punished and admonished for qualities we exhibit which
other people have difficulty accepting in themselves.
Eighth House
Neptune dissolves boundaries and separateness, and what better
place to do this than the eighth house of sex, death, intimacy and
sharing. Neptune can create confusion, deception or disappointment
in any of these areas, and yet it also brings experiences of an
inspiring, even ecstatic nature in relationships when transiting this
house.
Exchanges between people- whether the currency is monetary,
emotional or sexual- will be affected by any of the possible influences To the Planets and Through theHouses 199 of Neptune. On a mundane level, this transit indicates a propensity
towards misunderstandings in our transactions with other people.
Any contractual arrangements we enter need to be made as clear as
possible, otherwise we might discover that how we understand an
agreement is quite different from the way another person understands it. At this time it is necessary to secure promises in writing
and to read the fine print; this applies particularly to financial
dealings, which could become confused. Neptune creates vagueness
or gullibility - we don't see other people or situations clearly for
what they are, and the wool could easily be pulled over our eyes
now. We might be offered gifts or money from people whose motives
appear honourable, but who are really trying to manipulate or
control us in this way. Therefore, if possible, we should be quite
careful in our choice of people with whom we do business. Wherever
Neptune is transiting, we often unconsciously set ourselves up for a
fall: unless we keep our eyes wide open and seek advice on our
dealings from practically minded people we trust, we might walk
right into a trap. Conversely, we might be tempted to try to fool
others at this time. The eighth house is commonly called the house
of other people's money, and is associated specifically with the
finances and resources we share with another person (usually a
marriage or business partner, or someone with whom we have a
fairly close tie), and under this transit it pays to be scrupulous in the
way we handle other people's money or resources. In issues to do
with business, taxation, property or investment, honesty is indeed.
the best policy.
Alternatively, it could be that our partner might be experiencing
financial problems, or a relationship we hoped would bring us
material gain fails in that way. Difficulties and confusion over inheritances and legacies are not uncommon when Neptune is moving
through this area of the chart. But concrete resources such as
money or possessions are not the only kind of values described by
the eighth: this house denotes a partner's value-system, what he or
she believes in or holds dear. Neptune moving through the eighth
renders us more open to what other people value or espouse. We
may be so moved or won over by what others believe that we alter
our own views or biases as a result. Or we could find ourselves in a 200 Neptune Transits situation which requires us to make concessions on behalf of others:
our partner's values conflict with our own, and we are the one who
ends up making the adjustments and compromises. In either case,
Neptune in the eighth asks that we 'give up' something - our
money, possessions, some of our beliefs or values- in the course of
blending or merging with others. Because we are more susceptible to
another person's influence at this time, we should try to be cautious
about whom we put our faith in.
The eighth house describes how we die as an 'I' to be reborn as
'We': the kinds of issues we encounter when we attempt to be
intimate or to fuse with another human being. In many ways,
Neptune, which by nature is concerned with the dissolving of separateness and ego-boundaries, is at home in this area of the chart; and
this transit not only can enhance our receptivity to others, but it
also can make it easier for us to 'let ourselves go' in the process of
merging or relating more closely with a partner. The sexual act is a
profound exchange of energy between two people; it also is a way of
fusing and merging with another. For these reasons, sex is associated
with this house. Neptune transiting the eighth will influence our
sexuality in various respects, all of which are in accord with the
different levels or meanings of Neptune. Under this transit, sex can
be the symbolic means by which we transcend the isolated self,
either by losing ourselves in another person or by absorbing somebody else. Love and sex can be an escape, a way of abandoning or
forgetting the self- we let go and give ourselves to another. Or sex is
the area through which we abnegate personal responsibility and
control: a partner captivates us, and we are carried away by a force
more powerful than we can resist. With transiting Neptune in the
eighth, sex also can be an expression of worship and reverence, a
way of offering ourselves to somebody else. In certain cases under
this transit, giving of the self sexually can be experienced as a form
of service, or an attempt to please or heal others. The reverse is also
true - loving sexual contacts could heal some of our emotional
wounds at this time.
However, there are other levels of Neptune which affect sexuality
during thts transit. Some people experience confusion as to their true
sexual identity or proclivities. Neptune's diffuse and fluid nature can To the Planets and Through the Houses 201 make it hard for us to know exactly what it is we want or desire. By
nature, Neptune yearns for greater fulfilment and ecstasy. During
this period of our lives, sexual fantasies could increase both in
amount and intensity, as if we are looking for something more
satisfying and exciting than we already know or have. And yet, even
if we succeed in finding and acting out our fantasies, we might be let
down or disappointed; we still feel unfulfilled and left with an
obsessive hunger that no amount of sexual activity is able to quell. If
this- is the case, we will need to examine what inner needs we are
symbolically trying to fulfil through the act of sex, and look for other
ways to satisfy or come to terms with those needs in us.
Under this transit, we may choose or feel compelled to make
sacrifices in the area of sexuality. A relationship we are in might not
satisfy us sexually in the way we would like and yet we choose to
maintain it. Or, for any number of reasons, we could find ourselves
forgoing or turning down a sexual relationship with someone to
whom we are strongly attracted. Some people might decide to transcend libidinal desires altogether, for the sake of channelling these
energies in other directions. In other words, giving up sex is seen as
the path to God, a way of purifying or spiritually redeeming
ourselves.
The transit can also bring experiences to do with death, another
eighth-house concern. Again, Neptune's influence will vary: some of
us with Neptune transiting here may try to escape from facing the
reality of death, our own or someone else's. However, this transit
offers the chance to deepen our understanding of death and the
process of dying. Dr Elisabeth Kiibler-Ross had Neptune transiting
her eighth house throughout the decade of the 196os, years in
which she worked closely with terminally ill patients. Her book On
Death and Dying was written and published during this period, and
records her pioneering efforts to bring death out into the open and to
ensure that dying people are treated with compassion and
sensitivity. 7 Under this transit, we can give care and comfort to the
dying, but they have just as much to give to us - insight into an
experience we all sooner or later must go through. With Neptune
transiting the eighth, we could learn to accept death, and in doing
so, tremendously enrich our capacity for life and living. 202 Neptune Transits More negatively, a death-wish or suicidal longing could be activated at some point during Neptune's transit of the eighth. We long
for the peace of non-being and see death as a release, a respite from
pain and the harsh realities of life within boundaries. Suicide is a
complicated issue, made even more so with a transit of Neptune, the
least clear-cut of all the planets, through this house. Faced with the
kinds of horrors that accompany some terminal illnesses, suicide
may be an act of courage, a rational choice to abandon and give up
·the physical body. However, in the majority of cases the desire to kill
oneself when Neptune is moving through the eighth is not a desire
to end one's life forever, but a desire to die and be reborn into a new
or happier existence. Suicidal people with this transit need help to
see that they are confused about what they really want: their goal
isn't a physical death, but a psychological one. And with the right
form of counselling or support, this can be achieved.*
Our sensitivity to undercurrents in the atmosphere increases under
this transit. We more readily feel or register what is passing between
people, even things not spoken or overtly expressed. For some, this
can inspire an interest in psychology, or a desire to explore the
mysterious and hidden dimensions of life through such subjects as
the occult, esoteric philosophy or metaphysics. Our receptivity to
intangible and non-material forces can operate constructively or
destructively depending on the kinds of aspects transiting Neptune
in the eighth is making to other planets in the chart. Most positively,
we might receive - as if out of nowhere - helpful guidance and
inspiration, which not only helps us in our own life, but can be of
use to other people in times of crises. However, psychic openness can
manifest in less pleasant ways: there may be times we feel gripped by
forces or compulsions over which we have little conscious or rational
control. We might interpret this as possession, the belief that we
have been invaded by some psychic entity or that we have been
taken over by another human being. Such cases as these may exist,
but it is more likely that the overwhelming forces we feel now
originate from our own unconscious minds. When Neptune transit& *The concept of psychological death is more fully discussed in chapter 8, p. 221. To the Planets and Through the Houses 203 the eighth, parts of our psychological make-up we would rather
keep hidden or at bay seep through the barrier we have erected to
keep them out. We haven't necessarily been taken over by disembodied spirits, poltergeists or other external agents, but by dispossessed parts of our own psyches. If we can find the right kind of
psychological help at this time, we will be able to integrate more
properly into our conscious awareness aspects of ourselves we have
never been able to face before.
N'mthHouse
This transit activates the area of the chart associated with philo. sophy, travel and higher education. With Neptune moving through
this house, we may be drawn to a religion, philosophy or belief
system in the hope that it will be the means of our salvation: we put
our faith in faith - if only we can find something to believe in, we feel
we will be saved. While many people can have positive experiences
along these lines, there are also certain problems and pitfalls which
frequently accompany this transit.
Neptune could confuse us in our search for higher truths and
principles by which to guide our lives: we yearn to merge with
something greater than the self, often through a devotional adherence to a philosophy, religion, cult or guru. But, as usual when
Neptune is around, we might not be discriminating enough about
whom is to be trusted. Irresistibly attracted to anyone or anything
that promises enlightenment and redemption, we could find ourselves involved with rather strange groups or sects. The main danger
is giving too much power to those people leading these groups. If
they tell us to believe or do something, then we do it, in the belief
that they know best what we need. I have seen many cases of people
with Neptune transiting the ninth who allowed themselves to be
misled in this way, and have been psychologically damaged as a
result. Even if friends we normally trust warn us against such
involvements, Neptune's capacity to engender passionate feelings
(perhaps even a Dionysian desire for dismemberment) makes it
difficult for us not to. be carried away or taken in by charismatic
figures when it is transiting this house. Putting our faith in a guru or 204 Neptune Transits cult and then being disappointed or disillusioned may be an unavoidable or even necessary lesson under this transit.
Of course, not everyone will become entangled with charlatans or
frauds. There are many gurus and teachers with a great deal of
integrity, who have much to offer people exploring a spiritual path.
The problem may not be the guru or group itself, but our own
mishandling and distortion of the teaching. With Neptune in the
ninth we could become fanatic or obsessive about a religion or beliefsystem. We might believe that the truth we have found is the
answer to everything for everyone, or we could fall prey to the
'buddha disease', and emulate our guru or teacher to such a degree
that we only eat, think, say and do those things that he or she does.
We mistakenly believe that imitating an enlightened being is the
way to become one. However, there is a flaw in this way of thinking.
Acting in the way we believe a realized being would act doesn't
make us enlightened. Consciousness is not the by-product of behaviour. When our consciousness changes, then our behaviour will
naturally change. It doesn't work the other way around.
A philosophy we embrace when Neptune is transiting our ninth
could entail some form of sacrifice or relinquishment. In order to find
God, we feel we have to give up something- our ego or separateness,
our possessions, or anything. to which we are overly attached. Our
image of the deity will probably be coloured by Neptune: God is seen
as caring and compassionate, and someone who can be found
through devotion, love and prayer, not through intellectual arguments or discourses.
At some point during this transit confusion could set in over ~hat
we believe. The dissolving effect of Neptune may mean that a
philosophy or world view we once counted on and respected could
let us down, or no longer seem valid. As a result, we are left adrift,
unsure of what to believe in or how to guide our lives. We might
experiment with different philosophies, hoping that one of them will
be able to replace what we have lost, but repeatedly find ourselves
disappointed. We need to take time to grieve for our lost beliefs, and
to mourn illusions about ourselves and life in general which need to
be let go of now. Ultimately, under this transit, we may have no
choice but to exist temporarily in a state of uncertainty and not- To the Planets and Through the Houses 205 knowing, until the time comes when we formulate or discover a new
way to give meaning to existence. But even this 'un-knowing' may
ultimately be felt as something akin to a state of grace: with no
illusions, no need to verify one's faith or to have it demonstrated by
logic or experience, we may approach life unburdened by preconceived philosophical notions and expectations.
Neptune also will influence travel at this time. Under this transit,
some people embark on a pilgrimage to places which hold special
importance for them. If transiting Neptune is not making too many
difficult aspects, we are likely to discover places abroad that we find
enchanting or captivating. This is usually a good time to absorb
another culture, and we might be drawn to living in a foreign
country. However, a stressful transit of Neptune ~n the ninth inclines
to deception and disappointment in travel: a holiday might let us
down, and work out completely different from how we hoped or
expected. Unless we learn to keep our eyes wide open, we could be
the victim of treachery or deceit while travelling.
Generally, transiting Neptune in this house opens the mind and
inspires the imagination. We become concerned with what Maslow
called 'the farther reaches of human nature'. We yearn to realize
and expand our potential, and enrol on courses or training which
promise greater fulfilment and self-actualization. This can be a good
transit during which to pursue an in-depth study of healing, meditation, philosophy, religion, metaphysics, painting, music, dance, the
theatre, film, photography, chemistry, or other related 'Neptunian'
topics. However, difficultly aspected Neptune transits in the ninth
can create confusion about what direction to take in life, and an
uneasy uncertainty about our future. These feelings could manifest
in the sphere of higher education: students applying to colleges
when Neptune is making a hard ninth-house transit may experience
the disappointment of not being accepted by the school of their
choice. We might be confused about what course of study to follow,
or find ourselves disillusioned about or unfulfilled by an educational
institution or system. One way or another we meet Neptune in the
halls of academia: we fall in love with a married professor or run
into problems with drugs or alcohol. The entire duration of this
transit could be a period when our view of life and our future swings 206 Neptune Transits from extremes of ecstatic optimism to utter despair. And somewhere
in between these swings, we might discover a truer sense of our
potential, and a deeper understanding of the nature of reality.
On a more mundane level, the ninth house is associated with inlaws. Neptune here may ask that we make compromises, sacrifices
or adjustments on their behalf, especially if they are experiencing
difficult passages in their lives. However, as always with Neptune, it
is wise to know where and when to set our boundaries. Tenth House
While Neptune is in the tenth house (especially when it first crosses
from the ninth into the tenth), we may go through a period during
which we are confused about what we are doing with our lives.
We're no longer sure who we are and what we really want. Should~
we stay on our old path, or follow a new one? What new one should
we choose? What is our true vocation or calling? Taking time now to
engage in some serious reflection about ourselves, our ambitions,
and what it is we want from life, is a constructive way to use this
transit. It may help to seek the guidance of a careers advisor,
someone who is trained to assist people examine these kinds of
issues.
Neptune transiting the tenth often expresses itself in dissatisfaction
with our existing work. We crave something more exciti:qg and
fulfilling; we want to go after our dreams rather than settle for what
we already have. The time may be right to give up one form of work
for the sake of another, but we need to examine carefully the new
direction we want to take in order to be sure ofits plausibility. With
Neptune in the tenth, there could be the danger that we are fantasizing about career possibilities that are truly impractical, unrealistic or
beyond our reach. However, if our aims and goals are within reason,
then it is appropriate now to let go of our old work, and begin the
process of concretely realizing our new ambitions.
Neptune doesn't only signify delusion and uncertainty: it also
brings idealism and passion. Some of us could feel a calling at this
time- a vision of what we are here on this planet to do. We are
drawn towards a particular line of work which excites and arouses To the Planets and Through the Houses 207 us emotionally. For some people, this could be an artistic or theatrical
career, or work in film, photography, fashion and even politics. Or
we are inspired to pursue a profession which involves helping and
caring for others: social work, nursing, and other forms of healing or
counselling. We may be pulled towards a religious vocation or a
career as a meditation or yoga teacher. We need a career we believe
in, work that satisfies deep yearnings within us. However, under this
transit, we need to examine our motives. In whatever house Neptune
is moving through, we could be driven by a desire for glamour and
recognition. Is a career in the arts enticing us mainly because of the
glamour associated with these professions? Is the idea of being a
therapist, counsellor or healer appealing because of the power and
image it bestows on us? Are we choosing a career because we think
it's impressive and we like how it will sound when we tell others
what we do?
In this house, Neptune can stir delusions of grandeur. If we are
seeking a career primarily for the sake of aggrandizing our worth in
our own or other people's eyes, we are likely to encounter difficulties
under this transit. Ultimately, Neptune's task is to dissolve, not
inflate, the rigid boundaries of the ego. In some form, when Neptune
transits the tenth, our work ideally can be a means of transcending
our -sense of isolation and separateness. In the end, the kind of job
we are doing is less important than the spirit with which we do it.
Undoubtedly, some desire for personal recognition and success will
be present in most work we undertake, but it is the degree to which
this motivates us that is the crucial deciding factor when Neptune is
transiting the tenth. If aspiring artists are primarily seeking fame
and fortune, Neptune- the ego-dissolver- is more likely to frustrate
their overtly egotistical ambitions. However, if artists are more concerned with acting as mediums through which ideas and images can
flow and find concrete expression, the presence of Neptune in the
tenth will aid them in this process.
Probably no action is completely altruistic. When we help or take
care of others, we may do it for reasons of compassion, but there are
likely to be other more personal reasons as well - the need to be
needed, for instance, or the apparent control over pain (ours or
someone else's). If, when Neptune transits our tenth, we are drawn 208 Neptune Transits to the helping professions, it is advisable to examine all the different
levels of motivation that exist inside us. If our ego is too wrapped up
in our work, we will encounter many problems in our job at this
time. 8 Setbacks and sacrifices in the area of career often accompany this
transit of Neptune. Our ego might be denied the affirmation it seeks
or deserves, which could occur when we work hard at something for
which we receive inadequate recognition or remuneration. Initially,
at least, we may have to give more than we get back in return. We
could experience ego-deflating disappointments at work, such as a
colleague being chosen for a promotion rather than us. A boss or
employer may be going through a difficult or chaotic time which
makes demands on our patience and understanding, or the job itself
might be in some kind of jeopardy. For some people, this transit may
coincide with the loss of work, perhaps through redundancy. This
can be devastating, not only for financial reasons, but ruso because
losing a job means forfeiting the identity and sense of worth the
work has given us. Being made redundant can evoke anger and
outrage. We may not be able to understand why this had to happen
to us. Again we meet the dissolving effect of Neptune, which asks
that we relinquish an existing sense of self so that something new
can be born. It is frightening when our life falls apart in this way,
and yet falling apart can be the first phase in a process of building
ourselves anew.
Older people may have to face retirement under this transit. Like
redundancy, retirement can entail a great sense of loss: it strips :us of
an identity; it deprives us of a workplace where we had a chance to
meet and interact with others; it robs us not only of a salary, but also
of a source of self-worth and a way of proving our competence. Even
if we use our newly gained free time to explore various hobbies or to
take trips around the world, we still can be left feeling useless and
unnecessary. And yet, if approached in the right way, old age and
retirement can be a productive and fulfilling time of life.*
The tenth house also describes our public standing, and how we
*Issues around retirement are also discussed on p. 73. To the Planets and Through the Houses 209 are seen by others. For some of us, this transit could mark a period in
which we are idealized and worshipped by segments of the populace.
Something about us captures the collective's imagination and interest, or we become the living embodiment of a movement or force
sweeping through parts of society. Musicians, artists, fashion designers, actors and actresses, politicians, social prophets and reformers couid find themselves in the limelight when Neptune is
transiting their tenth. Even if we enjoy the fame and attention,
handling this situation may not be easy. Our personal lives become
food for public consumption, and we could feel robbed of our privacy
and peace. Or the adulation we are receiving might distort our ego
out of all proportion; and when this happens, Neptune will not be far
away, construing some means of toppling us off our pedestal. In a
few cases, this transit also could coincide with a period in which we
are the focus of a scandal, or we end up assuming the role of a public
scapegoat or outcast. It's not a good time to engage in anything
illegal or dishonest - Neptune has a way of catching us out, no
matter how clever we think we're being.
Aside from career issues, the tenth house is associated with our
mother or father, describing the parent who has exerted the biggest
influence on our socialization - that is, the one who has done the
most to prepare us to meet and fit into society. (Usually this is the
mother, but the tenth may apply in some cases to the father.)* If we
take the tenth to mean the mother, this transit indicates that we will
encounter Neptune in some way through her. She may be facing
physical, psychological, or material difficulties in her life, or experiencing a phase of increased religious or creative inspiration. She might
legitimately need our help or support, but she also could be making
impossible demands which drain or anger us. As usual with Neptune,
we have to reconsider what boundaries are appropriate; with a
demanding mother, for example, it may be appropriate to be there
for her in the way she needs, but it's also wise to recognize the limits
of our duty or patience, rather than totally sacrifice our personal
lives on her behalf. Conversely, this transit could indicate a time
*See chapters, note 5. 2Io Neptune Transits when we look to her to save or redeem us in some way. In certain
instances, transiting Neptune in the tenth might coincide with her
death. A time, in other words, when we have to let her go.*
Eleventh House
When Neptune is transiting the eleventh house, we experience
phases of uncertainty and confusion about our life-goals and objectives. This is because our ideals are changing- the vision of what we
hope to gain or achieve in our lives is in flux. Existing ideals seem too
narrow, too circumscribed, and thus lose their validity' or power.
Until a new set of ideals can be formulated, we are adrift, not
knowing what to believe in or hope for. Given time, the uncertainty
will pass and we will emerge from it with a renewed sense of vision
or purpose, not only for ourselves, but possibly for the whole planet
as well.
Most of us have a skin-encapsulated identity- we define ourselves
by the boundary of our skin. What is inside the skin is us; what is
outside is not us. But we also define ourselves by what we own, by
our job, by a relationship or marriage we might be iri, by children
we produce, by our religious beliefs, etc. In other words, our individual identity is expanded to include things beyond the borders of
our physical body. With Neptune transiting the eleventh, it's possible
to take this even further so that we transcend our ego and separateness through identifying ourselves with a group of people or with
all of humanity itself. We might even glimpse what the mystics
describe as our oneness with the rest of life, a deep interconnection
with others which extends beyond traditional ties of church, state or
family.
Einstein spoke of 'widening our circle of compassion to embrace
all living creatures'. Mercúrio Will Durant, a historian and philosopher,
expressed something similar when he wrote: 'the meaning of life lies
in the chance it gives us to produce, or contribute to something *See p. 26r for a discussion of the issues raised by a parent's death. See also
Suggested Reading (p. 3 8 6) for a list of books on death and the grieving process. To the Planets and Through the Houses 2II greater than ourselves'. 10 Rather than being concerned solely with
our personal needs and requirements, we can support and promote
the needs of humanity, especially those segments of the population
we feel are ill-treated or misunderstood. Transiting Neptune in the
eleventh, in one of its broadest manifestations, promotes this kind of
altruism and concern for others: it inspires a utopian vision so that
we are motivated to join groups promoting humanitarian, social or
spiritual causes. We want to join with others to bring our idea of
truth, justice or beauty to the world, and it could be a period when
we give of our time and of ourselves to promulgate ideals which;. we
believe will benefit the planet.
Such causes and ideals may be noble and can achieve many
positive effects. However, when Neptune is involved, we could be
carried away with our beliefs and visions. We also might put our
faith in something which later lets us down or doesn't deliver what
it first promised. To make matters worse, Neptune brings with it a
tendency to proselytize, an emotional certainty that what we see as
the truth is what others also need. We lose ourselves in a cause; we
fly too high. Neptune is paradoxical: it inclines us to such flights of
emotion and feeling, but if we go too far, it will at some point stick a
trident in our bubble· and bring us back down to earth. What goes
up must c;:ome down. Many astrologers will warn us of the dangers
of this kind of Neptunian inflation, and advise that we avoid going
over the top in any eleventh-house concern at this time. This is
sound counsel, and yet there is still much we can learn from making
the 'mistake' of getting carried away. Yes, we are in danger of going
too high and then landing flat on our face, but the whole experience
may enable us to mature and 'grow up' in a way which wouldn't
have been possible otherwise.
However noble or ill-conceived our notions might be, not all of us
will use the transit to embark on the path of redeeming humanity.
There are many other ways Neptune can be experienced via the
eleventh-house issue of groups. We could be drawn to secret sects
and societies, to artistic groups, or to spiritualist and psychic circles.
Or we look to a group for our own redemption and salvation, as if
· through the experience of participating in it we will be cleansed and
purified. We could be let down by a group, or make sacrifices on its 2I2 Neptune Transits behalf - we give our money and time away to causes, or abandon
other activities in order to attend meetings or follow a particular
group's code of conduct. Group involvement may be a way of
escaping from problems in other areas of our life which need attention. There is a temptation to lose oneself in a group, or to become
caught up in a social whirl, seeking 'glamorous' friends who bolster
our image and sense of self-worth, thus deriving our sense of identity
from the group rather than from within.
This transit will be experienced through issues around friends and
friendship. Manifesting itself most positively, Neptune here could
indicate friends who are supportive, caring and there when we
really need them, or friends who broaden our horizons and open us
to new visions and goals. Likewise, our capacity to help and nurture
associates will be enhanced. However, if we are repeatedly looking
to friends to save and rescue us, we will not only tax their patience,
but also fail to develop within ourselves the qualities we need to deal
with our own problems. Conversely, under this transit, friends may
want us to be their rescuer, or we may make it our mission to 'save'
them in some way. As usual with Neptune, we need to examine any
hidden personal motives which are contributing to our taking on
this role. Is saving others the only way we feel worthy of friendship?
What kind of power does this position give us? What is it we want to
'cure' in them or rescue them from, and why does it bother us so
much?
At times during this transit, we may have some difficulty finding a
group we feel comfortable in or friends with whom we fit. In general,
new friends we attract now will reflect the qualities of Neptune they may have Pisces, Neptune, or the twelfth house strong in their
natal chart. They may be artists, healers, dreamers, or involved in
any of the professions and interests associated with Neptune. During
this period, old or new friends could be undergoing significant
Neptune transits - they might be experiencing physical, psychological or material difficulties, or opening to artistic or mystical
inspiration. This transit also makes us more susceptible to the influence of friends and groups in general. Their influence may be
constructive, introducing us to useful new activities or ways of
behaving, but under this transit it is just as easy to abnegate To the Planets and Through the Houses 2r3 personal responsibility for our actions and be swept along by the
crowd into forms of behaviour that are negative and destructive. In
whatever house or sphere of life Neptune takes over, discernment
and clear-sightedness are not the rules of the day. If at all conceivable,
we should be discriminating in our choice of friends or groups at this
time. If not, Neptune may have some hard lessons to teach us.
When Neptune moves through the eleventh, we might have the
experience of being betrayed, let down or abandoned by friends. In
.other words, our ideals of comradeship are not met. Sometimes a
friend may act in a way that is unforgivable, and we will feel we
have no other choice but to call off the relationship. However, if we
repeatedly find ourselves blaming friends for not living up to our
expectations, perhaps it is our expectations themselves that need to
be examined, let go of or modified. If we believe a friend should share
all our tastes, goals and passions, we are asking too much of friendship. If we insist that a friend should feel only absolute love and trust
for us, we are expecting too much from that person (or any human
being, for that matter). On one level, friends will rejoice in our
achievements and successes; but at the same time, they secretly or
unconsciously might feel envious of our good fortune. They want to
hear of our triumphs, but another part of them could feel competitive
and resent our being happier or more successful than they are. With
Neptune transiting the eleventh, friends whom we hoped would 'fit'
us perfectly, could let us down; or they might admit to or display the
'darker', negative emotions they have for us - feelings we may not
believe should accompany friendship. Rather than always ending
the relationship in these cases, Neptune could be asking that we let
go of the unrealistic expectations we put on friendship, and learn
instead greater forgiveness and acceptance of others.
In some cases under this transit, we will lose friends, perhaps
through death. As with any death, we will need timeto acknowledge
and accept the loss, and to be with the grief, anger or guilt associated
with it. If we have the opportunity to be close to a dying friend,
Neptune's influence in this house indicates that we may be able to
ease or help our friend with this transition. What we gain from this
kind of experience not only will teach us a great deal about death and
dying, about surrender and faith, but also about life and living as well. 214 Neptune Transits No matter how hard we try to pursue them, some of our aims in
life could continually elude us during this transit, and we may be
forced to recognize that certain of our goals and expectations are
unrealistic or improbable. Childhood dreams of wealth, fame, and
fairy-tale romances that last forever may have to give way to more
realistic ideals that are within our capacity to achieve. Even if we do
actualize many of these wishes, we will still feel vaguely dissatisfied.
With Neptune transiting this house, we put our faith in our dreams:
'If I could have this or that, then I would be complete.' Rarely,
however, can the kind of fulfilment Neptune seeks be completely
satisfied, certainly not by anything external - be it material wealth,
a loved one, or noble principles and causes. That lost feeling of
wholeness we all seek to regain does exist, but it can't be found by
searching for it outside ourselves. It can only be found within.
Twelfth House
The twelfth is Neptune's natural house, and this transit can be very
powerful, describing a period when we are more than usually sensitive not only to forces operating in our unconscious, but also t<'
feelings and undercurrents in the atmosphere around us.
In whatever house Neptune is transiting, we are drawn into the
spectrum of life represented by that domain, and we feel (sometimes
not consciously) that our redemption, renewal or wholeness will
come through the affairs of that house. In the case of the twelfth,
this can mean we become fascinated by or are drawn into the
workings of our unconscious mind and what is going on inside us.
We feel a pull to look inward, both to understand ourselve~ better
and to find greater fulfilment in our lives. The motivation to reflect
more deeply on ourselves and life in general could be prompted by a
growing sense of dissatisfaction with our present existence. We
might have achieved a great deal materially in the world, but a
nagging sense of incompleteness tells us that there is more to life.
Even those of us who have been engaged in a fair amount of selfanalysis or self-examination may feel under this transit that we are
. ready to explore the psyche more thoroughly than ever before.
Transiting Neptune in the twelfth stirs deep feelings: the emotions To the Planets and Through the Houses 2I5 it brings out exert such a strong force that we will have difficulty resisting or denying them. One of Neptune's objectives in this house
is to overwhelm the ego and our existing sense of self - to break
down the control we have over what we allow into conscious
awareness. Obviously, many of us will find this threatening, because
we have little choice but to accept and go with emotions and feelings
which we were previously able to manage or keep at bay. In this
sense1 we become a victim to our own unconscious: hitherto buried
or curtailed drives and urges gather power and engulf us in such a
way th~t they can no longer be denied or excluded. To many people,
this will feel as if they are being swept away by uncontrollable inner
forces and compulsions - an especially frightening state of affairs for
those who have always kept themselves tightly held together. Some
people might believe they have been taken over and possessed
by evil spirits.* But there will be others who experience Neptune
transiting the twelfth as the breakthrough they have been waiting
for, a welcomed chance to gain deeper insights into their own
nature.
However we feel about it, the floodgates are open. What do we do?
We can try to resist Neptune andre-exert even tighter controls over
ourselves, but such efforts are not likely to prove successful. Nighttime dreams and daytime fantasies will persist all the same, reminding us of those parts of ourselves we are trying to forget. So much
energy can go into denying what we are feeling that there is little left
with which to live our lives. It is wiser and more productive to cooperate and work constructively with this transit through some
form of counselling, therapy, spiritual guidance or self-exploration
which will facilitate and give meaning to what the psyche is trying
to make happen. Whether we like it or not, Neptune is heading
towards our ascendant and we are on the edge of major psychological
change and renewal. New growth demands that an old self is shed.
Transiting Neptune in the twelfth reveals what is hidden in us so
that we can attend to aspects of our psyche we have previously
ignored. Neptune, the planet which knows no boundaries, asks that
"This topic is discussed more fully on p. 202 in the section on transiting Neptune
through the eighth house. 2I6 Neptune Transits we treat all of ourselves with compassion and non-judgmental love,
even those parts of our nature we have banished because we believed
them evil or wrong. In the name of psychological growth and
honesty, all of what is inside us needs to be accepted. Negative and
destructive urges may now float to the surface of our awareness, and
these can be distressing to acknowledge and experience. While such
feelings don't have to be acted upon or expressed openly, they do
need to be examined and faced for what they are: they are part of us,
just as much as our arms and legs are a part of us. We cannot
transform or resolve anything we condemn or deny in ourselves.
At this time, we need to have faith in the wisdom of our unconscious. This does not necessarily entail exhibiting every urge or whim
bubbling up from inside, but it does mean listening to and acknowledging what we are feeling. Under this transit, we might have
certain intuitions and impulses which, if followed, affect us in ways
we might not have imagined. The urge to pursue a particular course
of study, to contact somebody we haven't seen in a while,. or to visit
certain places, may be messages from the unconscious directing us
towards experiences which unexpectedly benefit ourselves or others.
The unconscious is smarter than we may believe. Even supposed
mishaps or slip-ups could turn out to be the intervention via the
unconscious of a 'higher intelligence' which has our well-being in
mind. We leave the house, realize we have left something behind,
and go back to find the telephone ringing with some urgent or
timely news that we would have missed if we hadn't returned just at
that moment.
Hidden in all of us is the urge to reconnect to a lost unity and
oneness with the rest of life which we unconsciously remember as
having experienced somewhere in the past. Mystics call it 'divine
homesickness' - the longing to find God or return to our source.
Psychologists might label it the desire to restore the blissful symbiosis
we once felt with mother, when we were one with her and she was
the whole world to us. However it is understood, this transit stirs a
longing for wholeness and harmony with something greater than
ourselves, something beyond the lonely boundaries of our isolated
ego.
As Judith Viorst explains in her book Necessary Losses, restoring To the Planets and Through the Houses 2I 7 this connection may be an act of sickness or one of health. 11 We
might seek that boundless place through alcohol, drugs, various
forms of escapist behaviour, or ultimately through suicide (literally
the destruction of the separate-self). Or we look for it in 'healthier'
ways, through meditation, prayer, religion, art, or through communion with nature. We hope to regain our lost paradise in love and
in the sexual act, where we lose ourselves and merge with another.
And yet, that same quest for cosmic union is not dissimilar to some
forms. of schizophrenia and madness - a childish blurring of reality,
or the failure to establish clear boundaries between ourselves and
the rest of the world. When Neptune transits the twelfth, any of
these ways to heal the primal wound of lost unity may be sought.
Some are more positive than others, and it helps to·be conscious of
our true goal. If we are aware that transcending our separate and
fragmented existence is the goal we are seeking, we can embark
consciously on a constructive path to arrive there, rather than
inadvertently taking the more haphazard routes, by which we risk
destroying our health, our sanity or ourselves in the process.
Transcending separateness also means a greater sensitivity to
what those around us are feeling or experiencing- especially people
in need or suffering pain. Their plight will touch us and in some way
resonate with our own wounds and vulnerability. This kind of
receptivity might entice us into work, paid or otherwise, which
involves caring and helping others. Or we could become identified
with and swept into collective struggles for social reform - such
things as campaigning for nuclear disarmament, working for an
AIDS charity, or fighting for animal rights. Even though we
probably are motivated primarily by genuine social concern, altruism
or compassion, we should examine other more personal reasons
why service of this sort appeals at this time. There can be a glamour
attached to being the kind of person who ,rescues or fights for others,
or it may be the only way we can feel we have any worth or power.
Serving others also could be a means of assuaging some deep-seated
guilt left over from childhood and early life, which needs to be
examined and better understood for what it is. The discovery of
personal motivations needn't deter us from such undertakings; on
the contrary, an awareness of all. the charged psychological reasons 218 Neptune Transits why we are drawn to causes and crusades can help us achieve our
larger aims more cleanly and effectively. Under this transit, however,
we should bear in mind that we are more easily invaded or drained
by people and environments with whom we come into contact.
Accordingly, we may need more time on our own in order to cleanse
ourselves of the 'psychic smog' which we have absorbed and accumu
lated from our interaction with the world.
The twelfth house is associated with institutions (hospitals, daycare centres, orphanages, prisons, libraries, museums, charitable
organizations, etc.). When Neptune transits this house, we will meet
any of the levels ofNeptune through this sphere of life. How this
happens can vary. On the negative side, we might encounter maltreatment in our dealings with such places: we feel inadequately
cared for in a hospital, or end up a victim of bureaucratic confusion
and red tape. And yet, with Neptune here, an involvement with an
institution (either as an inmate or as a worker) could yield positive
experiences of an inspirational or healing nature. Generally, the
kinds of aspects transiting Neptune is making to the rest of the chart
will be some indication of how we fare in this respect.
When Neptune transits the twelfth, unresolved issues from earlier
in our life (or from past lives) could come back to haunt us. Old
resentments and hurts reappear, sometimes disguised in the form of
new conflicts and crises, sometimes through recurring dreams or
memories. In some cases, the actual people associated with an
earlier trauma or period of pain in our lives turn up on our doorstep
or cross our path again. The good news is that Neptune in the
twelfth can ultimately have a cleansing effect on the psyche, enabling
us to feel the kind of love, understanding and forgiveness 'needed to
make peace with people and events from our past, or with parts of
ourselves. We can surrender to these feelings of reconciliation as a
prelude to our new life which will occur when Neptune crosses the
ascendant. PART FOUR
Pluto Transits 8 Plutonian Crises
So long as you do not die and rise again,
You are a stranger to the dark earth.
GOETHE People tend to be afraid of Pluto transits, and they have a right to be,
for we are dealing here with the god of death, whose domain is the
dark and shadowy underworld. Transiting Pluto often brings us
painfully into contact with death. In some cases this can mean a
literal death - our owh or that of someone close to us - but more
usually these transits correspond to psychological deaths or 'egodeaths': the death of a part of us, the death of ourselves as we know
ourselves.
Most of us establish and bolster our identity through attaching
ourselves to things that give us a sense of who we are. The people
with whom we associate, the person we marry, the work we do, the
money in our bank account, the children we produce, the religion or
philosophy to which we adhere - all these are used to help shape
and support identity.
In the course of development, we also come to form opinions or
beliefs about ourselves and about life 'out there', and these 'scripts'
or 'life-statements', as they are sometimes called, also contribute to
our sense of identity. One person's script may be 'I am able to
achieve what I want'; another person's statement about life may be
'I always lose.' One life-statement could be: 'The world is a safe place
I can trust', while another could be 'The world is dangerous and out
to destroy me.' We derive our psychological identity not only through
relationships or a job, a vocation or a talent, but also through these
kinds of statements and beliefs about life and about ourselves. They
are part of our personal mythology, and, more to the point, may be
unconscious and therefore unchallenged. Under a Pluto transit, any
22I 222 Pluto Transits of the 'props' from which we derive our identity could collapse or
irretrievably break down, for with Pluto there is no going back, no
return to innocence. Psychological deaths of this sort are not infrequent: we have all experienced the end of 'chapters' in our lives,
the end of a phase or career or important friendship - the death of
ourselves as we have known ourselves. With Pluto, however, such
pain may also bring to the surface much darker emotions - rage, a
dreadful sense of humiliation - forcing us to look at the ferocity with
which we cling to things. Even giving up negative attachments - a
bad relationship, an unsatisfying job, or a 'loser' script - demands
that we acknowledge how great is our sense of loss, and requires
major readjustments in our life. We may be perfectly aware that
letting go of an unfulfilling or destructive partnership is the best
thing we could do - we may spend years in psychotherapy attempting to transform negative patterns brought over from childhood and yet we still feel a sense of loss and a reluctance to free ourselves
of these attachments. Intellectually we may know that we will be
reborn and that the changes are positive, but we still experience the
death of our attachments as frightening and painful.
Blessed are those who mourn, and especially those who learn that
mourning involves not only grief and sadn~ss, but also anger or
guilt we might feel about our loss. We might be angry because
something we relied on is deserting us, or we are angry at ourselves
for not having let go of an outworn part of our lives sooner. We
might feel guilty or responsible for having caused the death of
someone or something which has passed away, or guilty because
the changes we go through hurt or disrupt others around us. In
order to ease our death and rebirth process, we need humility and
patience and to give time to all the feelings engendered by loss, for
only then can we be fully open to the new unknown 'I' that is
wanting to be born. There is no way to avoid grief, and no easy way
to mourn: especially under Pluto transits do we learn that any
attempted 'heroic' struggle or wilful assertion against it only deepens
our anguish. The ego- our sense of a 'me-in-here' -tries to preserve
those internal or external attachments which give it a sense of
stability and solidity. The ego is not interested in its own destruction.
Pluto, however, the god of the underworld, represents a force that Plutonian Crises 223 operates from beneath the surface level of consciousness - a force
inimical to the ego's efforts at self-preservation. Pluto symbolizes a
part of our own psyche that unconsciously 'sets up' or attracts
situations through which we fall apart, not simply because it is
'malefic'. Pluto does tear us down, but it does so for a purpose: in
order that we can be rebuilt in a new way. Transiting Pluto may
well create pain, crisis or difficulty, but it does so in the name of
growth and needed change.
Our true and deepest nature, although unrecognized in most of
us, is unbounded and infinite.* If we derive our identity mainly
through 'props' - whether things or people - or if we overly identify
with a particular belief-system or one overriding self-image, transiting Pluto may disrupt these attachments and identifications. And it
does this in order to help us re-identify ourselves in a broader and
more inclusive way. The house or planet transiting Pluto is affecting
shows the areas of life in which attachments are being tom down
and restructured. For example, if transiting Pluto is making an
aspect to natal Jupiter or moving through the ninth house, it will
challenge an existing world view or philosophy to which we have
been overly attached or may severely disrupt the direction of our
education. In this way Pluto reminds us that our true identity is not
_contingent on any particular perspective on life. Images of Scorpio
Scorpio, co-ruled by Pluto, is a complex sign, for unlike the majority
of the other signs which generally have one symbol- Aries the Ram,
Taurus the Bull, Gemini the Twins, etc., - Scorpio has a number of
different representations: the scorpion, the snake, the eagle and the
phoenix. Scorpio, moreover, is much more than just one sign of the
zodiac, where your Sun, Venus, Mars or ascendant might be, but
also represents a principle or facet of life which we are all subject to:
the cyclic process of change, decay, death and renewal. The different
*See section entitled 'Oneness and Separateness', chapter 6, pp II4-I7. 224 Pluto Transits images associated with this sign illustrate the kinds of deaths and
transformations which are part of a universal evolutionary process;
they also illuminate the ways in which Pluto acts as an attachmentbreaker.
The lowest level of Scorpio is symbolized by the snake - a reptile
which regularly sheds an old skin for a new one - and by the
scorpion, the animal with the deadly sting in its tail. People dominated by this feeling-level of Scorpio act almost exclusively from
their own emotions and desires: they are totally at the mercy of their
moods, and express themselves in a way which is vehement, instinctive and primitive. When they're feeling good, they couldn't be nicer
to people. When they're feeling miserable or nasty, no one is safenot even their closest friend. This level or phase of Scorpio (which
some people never outgrow) is described in an old story about the
meeting of a scorpion and a frog.
The story begins at the side of a lake the scorpion wants to cross.
He asks the frog if he wouldn't mind giving him a ride on his back to
the other shore, and the frog - hesitant - says: 'I'll give you a ride
across the lake, but you must promise not to sting me.' To which the
slightly offended scorpion replies: 'Of course not; why would I do a
thing like that?' The scorpion mounts the frog's back, and they start
their journey. Halfway across the lake, however, the scorpion stings
the frog. As they both sink to their deaths, the frog asks 'Why did
you do that? - you promised me you wouldn't.' With its last breath
the scorpion answers: 'Because I felt like it.' There are people who
act ltke this scorpion and sting because they feel like it. That is, they
are compulsively dominated by their moods and instinctive responses
to life, and can suddenly turn against people to whom they have
been close, or destroy structures in their lives that have been supporting and bolstering their identity. They may attack for any number of
reasons- revenge, anger, a need for change and new growth, or
sometimes purely for the sake of excitement if life has become dull.
Sometimes in the process they destroy themselves ·as well - and
sometimes they even know this risk and seem to coUrt destruction in
a perverse exercise of will.
·
However. the death of the scorpion in the water is also symbolic of
a potenp.al transformation and renewal. Lower-level Scorpions can Plutonian Crises 225 die and be reborn on to another level - that of the eagle. People on
this second level of Scorpio are not identified solely with their
emotions or whatever they happen to be feeling at a particular time,
but instead derive their identities and their sense of meaning and
purpose in life from something outside themselves: a relationship, a
cause or project in which they are involved, or a philosophy or
vision that excites them. They will serve their loved one or their
cause with admirable single-mindedness, dedication and vitality.
Like the eagle who flies higher and sees farther than any other bird,
and is a deadly hunter, people who have attained this eagle-level of
Scorpio usually possess lofty principles and ideals but still retain
their deadly sting. Should anything threaten what they value or
believe in, the eagle-level Scorpion will swoop down and attack,
perhaps even viciously destroy, its opponent. Clearly, the main
problem with people at this stage of Scorpio is their intensity. They
may be serving noble sentiments such as truth, justice or love, or
worthwhile ideals which promote the welfare of humanity, but they
pursue their aims with such passion and in such a focused manner
that they lose sight of everything else. They become so absorbed in
the object of their devotion that they forget their true nature is
unbounded and infinite, or they bum themselves out from righteous
indignation or from the superhuman physical demands they impose
upon themselves. A further stage of growth - another ego-death -is
needed, and this is when the phoenix may be born.
The phoenix was a mythical Egyptian bird. It was consumed by
fire, but then rose out of the ashes to live again: it thus became a
symbol of immortality. People who resonate with the eagle-level of
Scorpio may find that the passion of a significant relationship 'bums
itself out'; or a cause in which they have so fervently believed
exhausts them or proves false. When this happens, it feels to them as
if they themselves have been annihilated. Like the phoenix, they are
reduced to ashes and may remain in that state for some time before
rising renewed out of the cinders. When we attach ourselves to
something - no matter how noble or transcendent - we limit our
identity and forget that our true nature is unbounded and infinite. In
the process of growing towards greater wholeness, we have to let go
of
attachments in order to learn that who we really are is that om 226 Pluto Transits part of us which remains when everything else we thought we were
is taken away. By transit, Pluto represents a force which tears down our ego-identities until we discover our essence, the transpersonal
Self, the eternal and universal core of our being. This is a difficult
lesson, which transiting Pluto will bring to us again and again by
bringing us to our knees. We can still have and enjoy relationships,
beliefs, causes or ideals; but we must remember that our true and
most basic identity is not dependent on any of these things. Images of Descent
Pluto's domain was the underworld and, in psychological terms, the
underworld is synonymous with the unconscious. The ego is the
centre of consciousness, the centre of what we are aware of or
identified with in ourselves. However, beyond the ego level of awareness lies the unconscious - all those attributes and elements of our
being which we have not yet contacted or integrated. The nature of
life is to move towards wholeness, and Pluto serves this drive by
breaking down the boundaries and attachments of the ego and
forcing us to recognize those par~ of ourselves that the ego has
excluded from consciousness. We have discussed how Pluto acts to
put us in touch with our universality and unboundedness - something to which most of us are not consciously attuned. In a similar
manner, and also in the name of wholeness, Pluto will force us to
confront anything that is buried in us - be it our untapped potential
or our repressed demons and complexes.
Pluto transits evoke images of descent - a voyage into the underworld of the unconscious, a voyage to discover what is hidden in
us. It must be emphasized again that the unconscious is not only the
storehouse of disavowed negative or destructive emotions, complexes
and feelings, although we will find no shortage of 'demons' of this
kind lurking in the depths of our psyche. The unconscious is also the
repository of undeveloped potential and positive traits which have
yet · to be recognized and integrated. In a later section, we shall
examine the buried treasure hidden in our unconscious. But first we
must confront the beast ... Plutonian Crises 22 7 Facing the Beast Pluto transits entail meeting the primitive, instinctive and unregenerate side of our nature. Feelings of anger, hurt and pain from childhood; greed, envy, jealousy, and infantile desires for omnipotence
and power; unbridled sexual yearnings and ferocious destructive
urges - all these and more lie festering in the deeper recesses of our
unconscious mind. Pluto is the servant of wholeness, and to live our
wholeness we must face these primal drives and emotions. Reconnecting to what is hidden in us means reclaiming lost and repudiated
parts of our own psyche. In doing so, we also create the possibility of
freeing the energy trapped in infantile complexes, and reintegrating
it more constructively back into the personality. But before we can
transform anything in ourselves, we first have to accept that it is
there.
Much of what is buried in us stems from our infancy and childhood. Our inner world as a small child revolves around three major
states or feelings: need, love and hate. We are born helpless; we need
the love and care of someone else to survive. We feel tremendous
love when our mother or caretaker gives us the nurturing we
require for our survival. However, we also feel tremendous anger
and pain when she isn't there. If we're hungry and she doesn't
come, or if we need to be held and she doesn't respond, we fear she
has abandoned us ... we fear we are going to die. And naturally this
gives rise to fury, frustration and rage.
In the womb and for the first six to nine months after birth, we
have not yet fully distinguished ourselves as separate from the
environment and therefore our feelings are not localized. If we feel
anger, the whole world is angry. If we feel hungry and cold, the
whole world is hungry and cold. According to Melanie Klein, when
we are angry, we fantasize tearing and destroying mother's breast;
but since in our infant mind we are the same as the breast, we
actually are fantasizing attacking ourselves as well. 1 Obviously, such
a state does not feel pleasant. In fact, it is so unbearable that the only
way we can deal with these emotions is by cutting off from them.
Accordingly, our early destructive rage is suppressed, and remains
unfinished and unresolved, festering in temporary abeyance in some 228 Pluto Transits neglected comer of the psyche. The rage hasn't disappeared; it is just
on hold. Later in life, under a powerful Pluto transit, our global
undifferentiated infantile hate and anger can resurface, triggered by
an external catalyst of some kind.
Rage isn't the only emotion buried in us. We might also harbour a
deep and early sense of ourselves as bad or loathsome. These feelings
of shame and self-hate stem from a mechanism known as introjection
-the tendency as an infant to identify with the mother. If mother
can't provide us with what we need -in other words, if she is a 'bad
mother' - we introject or take in that 'badness', and we believe that
we are bad. Since we think we are the whole world, if we are bad,
then the whole world is bad. Again, it is too painful to stay with
such feelings, so we cut off from these as well. However, like our
early destructive rage, they too lurk and fester in the hidden recesses
of our psyche until a rluto transit comes along to reactivate them.
In addition to rage and self-hate, there is a whole range of other
early buried emotions and drives which important Pluto transits can
disinter. Envy and jealousy have.their roots in infantile complexes,
but they are as alive as ever in the adult psyche, and are susceptible
to a passing Pluto transit. Although they are not the same thing,
envy is commonly confused with jealousy. The main difference is
that envy involves two people, while jealousy involves three. In
terms of psychological development, envy pre-dates jealousy. Again,
according to Kleinians, we first feel envy towards the breast (or
bottle) that feeds us. We love the good things it gives us, but we hate
the breast when it fails to provide what we need - or when it is
forced on us after we have had enough. We not only love or hate the
breast, but we also are envious of the power it has over us -whether
we are happy or sad, full or empty, content or miserable, all depend
on it. Because we resent our dependence on the breast, a part of us of
us wants to destroy or spoil it, and we fantasize defecating on the
breast and tearing it to pieces. These same feelings are transferred on
to the mother: we both love and hate her, and we also envy the
power she has over our life and well-being.
We grow older and fall in love, and the same ambivalent mixture
of need, admiration, envy and destructive rage will again be activated. Closeness, dependency and anger are intimately related. The Plutonian Crises 229 closer we are to someone, the more our happiness depends on that
person, and one part of us resents being in that position. We envy
the power the other person has over us, and as a result, there may
be times we want to destroy our partner or the relationship itself.
Some of us may be so frightened of our own envy, resentment and
rage that we avoid closeness altogether, rather than risk having
these emotions aroused and exposed in the course of a relationship.
Pluto transits often revive our early feelings of envy and the anger
associated with them, only this time it.will not necessarily be directed
at the mother, but towards someone else with whom we have a
close bond, or towards any person who makes us feel 'small' and inadequate.
Jealousy is also a primal emotion. As infants, our survival depends
on the love of the mother/caretaker. If we are special to her, she will
want to fulfil our needs and keep us alive. Winning her love and
attention reassures us that she will be there whenever we need her.
. However, if we do not feel that special tie with the mother - if there
is another person around whom she loves and pays attention to
more than us - then we become anxious and threatened. What if
she gives all her care and nourishment to that person, and there is
nothing left for us? What if a hairy predator comes to eat us just at
the moment mother is busy with somebody else? Envy is a twoperson situation, an issue between us and mother. JealO!J.SY, however, involves three people: ourselves, mother and the rival for her
attention. Later in life, if our partner should pay too much attention
to another person (or a job or hobby), the frightened infant in us will
be aroused again. As adults, we are probably not totally dependent
on our partner for our survival; we can find ways to look after
ourselves, and yet the infant in us, when confronted with a rival,
will be thrown into a state of panic, a feeling of 'Help! I'm not the
most special, I'll die!' Because part of us still believes that our
survival depends on being our loved one's primary focus of attention,
jealousy triggers intense emotions of hate, fear, rage and anxiety.
These are the kinds of reactions a transiting Pluto aspect can stir
when it reawakens the jealous child in us.
Because envy and jealousy are almost universally seen to be 'bad',
we are taught not to have such feelings. Accordingly, many of us 230 Pluto Transits deny and suppress these emotions, along with a whole array of other
'sins', such as lust and greed, and we may refuse to recognize their
unconscious hold over us. But Pluto demands that we face our
shadow and confront these darker feelings. If we are to grow and
become whole, we have to expand our sense of identity to include
our primal emotions, our 'uncivilized' instincts and conflicting
desires. We need to accept that they are part of life, and not to
condemn ourselves for having them. However, contacting such
early complexes as rage, jealousy or envy doesn't mean we have the
right to act out these feelings or indiscriminately unleash them on
others. Prisons are filled with people who have attempted just this.
Our primal emotions need to be recognized and accepted, but they
also need to be contained. By admitting they are there and by
accepting them as part of our human inheritance, we can begin the
process of redirecting the energy trapped in such complexes into
more productive modes of expression. Again, we can turn to myth to
provide us with some clues as to how this is done.
Hercules and the Hydra
In his journey of individuation, Hercules has 12 tasks or labours to
perform. The eighth labour, that of slaying the Hydra, illuminates
the kinds of lessons and issues we encounter through the sign of
Scorpio and the planet Pluto. Pluto transits, in particular, often
designate a phase in our lives when we have to do battle with the
Hydra, the beast in us.
Hercules' eighth labour begins with his teacher assigning to him
the task of slaying the Hydra, a nine-headed monster which has
been plaguing the land of Lerna. But before setting out to find the
Hydra, Hercules is given a piece of advice by his mentor: We rise by
kneeling; we conquer by surrendering; we gain by giving up. Equipped
with his club and this aphorism, Hercules begins his search for the
beast. She is hard to find - like the buried emotions which hide in
the muck and slime of our unconscious, the Hydra hides in a 'cavern
of perpetual night' 2 alongside a stagnant swamp; that is, in a part of
ourselves most resistant to 'illumination' or rational explanation.
When he locates the cave, Hercules shoots his arrows inside, Plutonian Crises 2 3I hoping to lure the Hydra out, but she doesn't stir. Finally, he dips his
arrows in pitch, lights them, and sends them flaming into the
monster's lair. Outraged, she emerges from her dwelling, murderous
and vengeful. By shooting his burning arrows into the cave, Hercules
has succeeded in bringing the Hydra out of hiding,. Likewise, under
Pluto transits, we consciously or unconsciously set up situations
which force us to confront the beast in us, or in those around us.
Now the Hydra is in the swamp with Hercules standing over her.
Using his trusted club, he stands to confront the Hydra and tries to
lop off her heads, but each time one falls off, three more appear in its
place. His attempt to slay the Hydra this way mirrors how we try to
destroy our beastly emotions by severing them from consciousness.
And yet they keep reappearing, angrier and more intense each time.
Finally Hercules remembers his teacher's advice- We rise by kneeling,
we conquer by surrendering, we gain by giving up. Instead of beating
her while standing, he kneels down in the swamp, immersing himself
in its fetid slime, and lifts the monster by one of her heads into the
light of day where she begins to wilt. It is only when she is in the
swamp that she has any strength; when she is brought up into the
light, she loses her destructive power. Hercules can then cut off each
of her heads and none regrow, but after he severs all nine, a tenth
one appears; Hercules recognizes this as a jewel and buries it under a
rock.
What does all this mean? If left to fester in the stagnant waters of
the unconscious, our blindly instinctual drives and our infantile
complexes (our early destructive rage, self-hate, envy, jealousy,
greed, lust, etc.) have enormous power and control over us. But if
they are brought into the light of day, into the light of consciousness
and held there, they begin to lose their strength. What we are
unconscious of has a way of sneaking up behind our backs and
bitting us unexpectedly. However, if we are conscious of something
in us, we have a better chance of resolving it. If we do not admit to
our hidden jealousy, for instance, that jealousy will find disguised
ways to express itself. Our partners act in a manner which arouses
our jealousy, but we insist we are not feeling that way - even
though we spend the next few days acting cold and remote, or
sulking about how superficially they behave at parties. But when we 2 32 Pluto Transits lift our jealousy out of the swamp and bring it into the light of day,
we create the possibility of analysing that part of us and learning a
great deal about ourselves. Upon examination, we may discover an
Oedipal rivalry we didn't know we had, or a hitherto unacknowledged resentment towards our parents for paying more
attention to a sibling than to us. In other words, we may discover
the origins of those feelings we have about our current partner. In
doing so, we are better able to distinguish just how much of what we
are feeling is appropriate to the present situation, and how much
really belongs to unresolved emotions from the past. If we insist on
denying or cutting off from our jealousy, this kind of exploration is
not possible. The Hydra remains in the swamp and retains her
destructive power over us.
The key to conquering the Hydra is not just lifting her out of the ·
swamp. Many people unleash the Hydra from its unconscious bondage and are locked up in prisons or asylums for doing so. The key
is lifting her out of the swamp and holding her there in the light of
consciousness. Holding is a psychological term, closely related to the
idea of containment. Holding means recognizing and accepting the
whole range of our feelings, and allowing these 'space' without
acting them out indiscriminately. We can write about our emotions,
paint or draw them, or give expression to them in some form of
psychotherapy or counselling. In the course of therapy, for example,
a client may unearth some deep anger towards mother or father
which then might be transferred on to the therapist. In this way, the
therapy sessions become the vessel in which these angry feelings can
be held and contained until the client can resolve them and move on
to other issues. Without being denied, judged or condemned, the
feelings are examined and given space. (Even outside the context of
therapy, the best relationships are those which are able to contain
both the love and the hate we inevitably will feel towards the other
person. It's impossible to be close to someone and not have our early
infantile emotions aroused. A healthy relationship can withstand
and contain the good as well as the bad feelings.)
When Hercules lifts the Hydra out of the swamp and holds her by
one of her necks in the air, she loses her power. It isn't easy and it
may take some time, but the same can be done with our jealousy, Plutonian Crises 233 rage, envy, lust, and any other basic instinctive drive buried in us.
We can lift these out of the unconscious, accept them as 'part of us
(even though society has told us we shouldn't have such feelings)
and examine them in the light of day. By forming a relationship with
hitherto denied feelings, we create the possibility of transmuting
these aspects of our nature.
After Hercules has raised the Hydra and cut off all nine of her heads,
a tenth one appears, which is a jewel. The monster yields something
precious in the end. The poet Rilke touched on a similar theme:
Perhaps all the dragons of our lives
are princesses who are only waiting to see us
once beautiful and brave.
Perhaps everything terrible is in its deepest
being something helpless that wants help from us. 3
Though accepting, containing and working on our infantile complexes, we are reconnecting to parts of ourselves we have banished
and repressed. Even though these complexes reappear at first in a
negative form, the energy contained within them, once denied but
now reclaimed, will eventually become available to integrate back
into our psyche in more constructive ways. We will free not only the
energy imprisoned within the complexes, but we will also regain for
new use all the energy we have been employing to hold back our
complexes. None of this is possible until we have confronted and
admitted the beast back into consciousness. In the end, the battle
with our Hydra leaves us more fully alive and present, no longer out
of touch with the rich, instinctive side of our nature - no longer
living life just from the neck up.
Rilke also wrote: 'If my devils are to leave me, I am afraid my
angels will take flight as well.' Júpiter It is only by accepting our hate that
we can choose to love. It is only after we have accepted our rage that
we can choose to be understanding. Otherwise we are just pretending
to be nice.
The Rape of Persephone: Pluto in Love In mythology, Pluto wore a helmet which rendered him invisible 234 Pluto Transits when he left the underworld; He thus represents a force that operates
from beneath the surface level of consciousness - a facet of our
psyche that unconsciously attracts situations through which we will
fall apart in order to put ourselves back together again in a new
way. Pluto came to the upper world only twice, once to seek healing
for a wound, and the other time to abduct Persephone. Pluto transits
are often experienced most clearly through issues to do with health
and relationships. We meet Pluto in illness, when accumulated
toxins and poisons are drawn to the surface and eliminated from the
body in order for the system to function healthily again. We also
encounter the god of the underworld in relationships when emotional complexes are brought to the surface and exposed. Pluto transits
may bring new relationships or create tensions in existing ones tensions designed to arouse and reawaken what is buried in us.
Again we can turn to myth to amplify and to elaborate on the
effects of Pluto on this area of life.
In spring we find the maiden Kore playing in a field with other
virgin goddesses, happy and content in the protective embrace of her
mother, the earth goddess Demeter. Kore is young and inexperienced,
at peace living in the upper world on the surface level of life, but
Aphrodite, the patroness of sensual love, looks down on Kore from
Olympus and finds her too na'ive and innocent to be true. In her
capacity as the redresser of imbalance, Aphrodite decides to teach
Korea lesson, and she instructs Eros to pluck Pluto (who happens to
be in the vicinity) with an arrow oflove.
Unaware that it is a flower associated with the underworld, Kore
picks a narcissus. The earth opens up and Pluto appears in his black
chariot drawn by four fire-breathing horses. He abducts Kore and
takes her to the underworld where he rapes her. In one fell swoop,
she is taken from the spring meadow in the upper world into a place
that is dark and unknown - a place of passion, sex, and intense
emotion. After this, Kore's name is changed to Persephone, which
means 'the one who loves the darkness'. Initiated into womanhood
by Pluto, she is no longer a maiden. Symbolically at least, she has
freed herself from her mother's domination and is now a woman in
her own right.
Demeter, distraught over the loss of her only daughter, sinks into Plutonian Crises 235 a deep depression, and forbids the crops to grow or the trees to bear
fruit. For seven years the whole word is cold and barren, while
humanity starves. Finally, the gods, worried that no people will be
left to worship them, intercede and arrange for Persephone to be
reunited with her mother. Because Persephone has eaten of the
pomegranate fruit in the underworld (a symbolic way of saying that
blood has been spilled and she has lost her maidenhood), she is
allowed to return to the upper world only for six months each year.
The remaining six months must be spent with her husband Pluto, in
her role as queen of the underworld.
To the Greeks, this myth provided an explanation of how the
seasons came into being. Before the rape of Kore, it was perpetual
spring and summer; but now whenever Persephone has to leave her
mother and return to the underworld, Demeter mourns - the trees
lose their leaves, the crops die, and winter descends. The story also
describes a passage, a rite of initiation: the adolescent must break
away from the womb of the family or ancestors in order to become a
person in his or her own right. But no matter what age we are, the
myth portrays what happens when we become involved in a close,
passionate relationship. Like Kore, we are plunged through love into
the underworld where we meet our hidden emotional complexes.
Intimacy and closeness expose the secret inner world of the infant
still alive and kicking in our. unconscious minds - a world of passion,
rage, envy, jealousy, lust and greed. Our partner may be unable to
provide us precisely with what we need or want at a particular time,
and up comes our raging infant again. Our partner flirts with
someone else, and up comes the jealous infant inside us, fearful of
abandonment and death. There are times we feel like killing our
loved ones; and there are times we want to destroy or spoil the
relationship, because we resent the power a partner has to determine
whether we are happy or sad, fulfilled or unfulfilled. Intimacy stirs
all these emotions in us. And we were told that love was meant to be
a joyful state.
In the end, Persephone becomes the mistress of two worlds. She is
at home in the upper world, living on the surface level of life. She
can be light, easy, gay, innocent and good at small talk. But she also
is familiar with the underworld; she has contacted the darker 236 Pluto Transits emotions that live beneath the threshold of consciousness. Under an
important Pluto transit, we too may have a Persephone experience:
the experience of having to confront the underworld of our own
destructive emotions via the catalyst of a close relationship. Like
Persephone, our existing sense of self is violated by Pluto, and we
discover more about who we are and what lurks deep within us.
And like Persephone, we can be born again, a new and more whole
person. Pluto: the Balancer
In the Persephone myth, Aphrodite used Pluto to achieve her ends - to take the innocent and naive maiden Kore and initiate her into
another side of life. In this sense, Pluto acts as a balancer; wherever
this planet is transiting in the chart is where we are shown another
dimension of ourselves, a side we have ignored or denied. If we are
too identified with the 'masculine' or 'animus' principle (power,
assertion and outer achievement), a Pluto transit may strip us of our
power and drive in the name of ·putting us more in touch with the
'feminine' side of life, the 'anima' -the realm of soul, feelings and
relationship. If we are overly identified with the .anima and are
mainly deriving our identity through what another person needs or
wants us to be, then Pluto may rob us of that relationship, so that
we are forced to find out who we are in our own right; If we have
grown inflated in any way- believing we are a god or a superhuman
being - Pluto transits will cut us down to size. If we have swallowed
whole the values of our culture and society, Pluto will confront us
with choices and temptations that lead us away from the norm, and
show us (to our shock and surprise) other sides to our nature and
other ways of conducting life which are radically different from
those that parents or society have tried to instil in us.
Pluto is also the avenger of natural law. Every living thing has its
place and its limits: if we step too far beyond these limits, a major
Pluto transit will bring the Furies upon us. Pluto may do this
through illness, where pain and disease are the messengers informing
us that something has gone awry, that we are out of balance in
some way. If we have not heeded any of its earlier warnings, Pluto Plutonian Crises 237 will use the body to make us listen. Illness may be the only avenue
open to Pluto to break us down and change us. Sickness draws the
toxins and poisons hidden in us to the surface, so they can be
eliminated and our body cleansed. In some cases, a cleansing illness
of this sort can accompany or facilitate the psychological regeneration of long-standing emotional complexes and disorders.
The Dark Goddess
Persephone is just one of many mythic figures who have been
transformed through a journey into the underworld. Reputedly the
oldest known recorded myth (written on clay tables in the third
millennium BC), the Sumerian legend of the descent oflnanna 5 also
illustrates the kinds of changes associated with Pluto as it transits
important points in the chart. Inanna, an earlier form of Ishtar, is a
goddess of the heavens: she is radiant, alive, sensual and joyful, and
her life flows relatively smoothly. But she has a wicked sister,
Ereshkigal, who lives in the underworld, and whose name literally
means 'the lady of the great place below'. Greek mythology is
comparatively late, and before the Greeks, the underworld was ruled
by a goddess, not a god. In this sense, Ereshkigal is an earlier form of
Pluto.
As the story begins, Ereshkigal's husband has just died, and a
funeral is to take place in the underworld. Inanna feels impelled to
attend the funeral, to make a journey into Ereshkigal' s domain. She
has to go down into a place which she doesn't really like, a region
with which she is unfamiliar, a place that is not her realm. When
Inanna arrives at the first gate into the underworld, Ereshkigal
greets her with a dark and poisonous stare: 'How dare you come
into my realm? Even though you are my sister, I will subject you to
the same treatment that all souls receive when they enter the
underworld.' Ereshkigal is in a foul mood, and when she feels that
way, everyone is made to suffer. She doesn't stop to consider that
Inanna has come to be by her side at her husband's funeral. Ereshkigal is not concerned with being reasonable or fair. She represents
the early, global rage of the infant: when she is angry or unhappy,
everything is bad and nothing is good. 238 Pluto Transits Seven gates or portals lead into the depths of the underworld.
Ereshkigal orders Inanna to pass through these gates, and at each
portal the queen of the heaven must strip something off - her
garments, her robes, her jewels - until she arrives in the deepest
underworld utterly naked. Then she is instructed to bow before
Ereshkigal, to honour the force that has stripped her.
Pluto transits can be similar to a meeting with Ereshkigal. We
may have to let go of those things through which we have been
deriving our sense of identity. Relationships, jobs, belief-systems,
possessions or other forms of attachment can be stripped and taken
away, or they lose their validity and appeal. And yet in the myth
Inanna is forced to bow before Ereshkigal - to honour as one would
a deity the force which has stripped her. Ereshkigal is a goddess, a
dark goddess, but a goddess none the less. She is a divinity through
which a higher law operates, and in the end she must be honoured
as part of life. Being stripped of our identity and attachments is not
pleasant: it feels more like a curse than the workings of a divinity. As
.difficult as it may be to comprehend, Ereshkigal (like Pluto) serves a
higher purpose. However, the nature of that purpose is not always
immediately clear.
In fact, in Inanna's case the situation gets worse before it gets
better. As if stripping Inanna naked and making her bow low isn't
enough punishment, Ereshkigal then kills Inanna and hangs her on
a meat hook to rot. The once happy, beautiful and thriving goddess
of heaven is left to hang on a peg in the underworld like a dead piece
of meat, stewing in her own decay. This is what Ereshkigal does to
her; and this is what a difficult Pluto transit can feel like. Pluto may
banish us to a place where we feel rotten and miserable, an ugly,
nasty, depressed, alone and abandoned place. These feelings have
always been there in us, hidden away in the darker recesses of our
psyche, left over from childhood traumas or past life experiences. We
may have defended ourselves successfully against such emotional
states, but Pluto/Ereshkigal finds a way of confronting us with them.
Meanwhile, Ereshkigal - who has just lost her husband and killed
her sister, and is tom by grief and rage, is also pregnant and having
a difficult labour. Nor is she happy with her role as goddess of the
underworld. She was raped as a child and banished to the under- Plutonian Crises 239 world as a punishment, and she is still enraged at this injustice.
Ereshkigal not only represents death and decay, but also symbolizes
the outraged instincts of the angry, hurt and frustrated child which
many of us continue to carry inside, no matter how much we try to
hide these feelings from public view. With Inanna dead and the
vindictive Ereshkigal in the throes of painful labour, we reach the
low point of the story. And yet, though something has died, something new is being born. A death requires a birth; and a birth
requires a death.
Inanna, before embarking on her journey into the underworld,
had wisely instructed her servant Ninshubar to rescue her if she
hadn't returned from her sister's dark realm after three days. Inanna
knew she had to go into the underworld, but also knew that she
mustn't get stuck down there. She is willing to go down into a dark
place, but she takes precautions to ensure she will come back up
again. Three days pass. and Inanna is not back yet, so Ninshubar
desperately appeals for help. She approaches Inanna's father and
paternal grandfather to plead with them to do what they can to
rescue Inanna. Both reply they can do nothing to alter what Ereshkigal decrees. Here we have two strong masculine figures who have
no power over Ereshkigal, meaning that the 'masculine' prerogative
of force and subjugation (which by nature would try to overpower,
suppress or fight an opponent) is not what is needed to deal with
Ereshkigal. Taking a heroic stance against Ereshkigal does not work.
If we try to battle with her, she will only retaliate more angrily and
ferociously than before.
Finally Ninshubar approaches a god called Enki, Inanna's maternal grandfather, who is known as the god of water and wisdom.
He is fluid and compassionate and understands the laws of the
underworld. In some versions of the myth he is portrayed as bisexual,
both male and female: he can be tough, but he is also flexible and
yielding. Enki agrees to do what he can to rescue Inanna. Using dirt
he scrapes from beneath his fingernails, he fashions two small
figures called 'the Mourners'- tiny, androgynous, unobtrusive little
creatures. Whispering some words of advice to them, he sends the
Mourners down into the underworld to rescue Inanna. It seems
unbelievable that these tiny and insignificant figures will be able to 240 Pluto Transits deal with the mighty Ereshkigal, but it is because they are so small
that they manage to slip into the underworld unseen. They are not
apprehended by Ereshkigal's henchman along the way, nor do they
have to endure the stripping ordeal Inanna had to go through.
Quietly, the two little Mourners creep up to Ereshkigal and Inanna.
Their task is to save Inanna, but they approach this in a very
unusual way. Even though they are there to retrieve her, they
totally ignore Inanna, and concentrate first on Ereshkigal. Rather
than berating Ereshkigal for killing Inanna, they actually choose to
commiserate with Ereshkigal, to empathize with the dark goddess.
Ereshkigal, in the pain of labour, laments her fate: 'Woe is me; woe
my inside!' The Mourners take pity on her: 'Yes, you who sigh are
our queen. Woe your inside!' Then, because she hates being the
goddess of the underworld, she cries, 'Woe is me, woe my outside!'
and they reply 'Yes, you who sigh are our queen. Woe your outside!'
In line with the principles of current-day Rogerian therapy, the
Mourners mirror back to Ereshkigal what she is experiencing. In
doing so, they make her complaining and moaning sound more like
prayer or litany. The Mourners have been taught by Enki to affirm
the life-force even if it reveals itself through pain and suffering. Even
in darkness and negativity, there is still something to honour, something to be redeemed.
Ereshkigal is amazed. No one has ever honoured her in this way
before. Most people spend their lives trying to avoid pain, darkness
and everything Ereshkigal represents. But the Mourners have
accepted her; they have graciously allowed her the right to moan
and complain. Effectively they are saying to Ereshkigal, 'You have a
right to be. You can complain and carry on as much as you want,
we still accept you.' Ereshkigal, grateful for this kind of recognition,
wants to reward the Mourners and offers them any gift they would
like. They ask for Inanna back. Ereshkigal agrees, sprinkling Inanna
with new life, and the queen of the heavens is revived, free to teturn
to the upper world again.
Pluto transits often symbolize an encounter with Ereshkigal, a
time when we have to go down 'into the pit' and face that which is
painful, loathsome or ugly in ourselves. Pluto transits can bring a Plutonian Crises 241 deep despair: .everything is terrible and life has no hope. People we
thought cared about us may let us down; ideals seem hollow and
dead; what previously has given our life meaning and substance
now amounts to nothing. But the myth teaches us how to deal with
these states. Enki's Mourners are the key, the way of responding
which will help us out ofthe dark underworld when we are stuck down
there. In the same way that Enki's Mourners accept Ereshkigal, we
also can learn to accept depression, darkness, death and decay as
part of life, as part of the great round of nature. We need to be
willing to go into our depression and pain, to explore it, feel it, and
wait it out. We need permission to grieve, mourn, and feel angrynot only for people or things which we have lost, but also for lost
phases of our life and lost ideals which no longer serve us. Acceptance
allows the healing magic to work. It is only when Ereshkigal is
honoured and revered as a deity in her own right that we, like
Inanna, can return to the upper world again. This is Enki's lesson to
us; this is Enki's way of helping us through difficult Pluto transits
and bringing us back from the underworld into new life and hope.
The story ends with an interesting twist. There is a rule that if you
are freed from the underworld,· you have to find someone else to take
your place. When Inanna returns to the upper world, she seeks out
her consort Tammuz, who didn't help her when she was down
there, and says: 'Now it's your tum, you must take my place in
Ereshkigal's realm.' If one component of a system changes, then the
whole system will have to be altered in order for it to function
properly. If one person in a relationship experiences a major psychological change, unless the other person changes as well, the partnership is in danger of breaking down entirely.
Inanna was stripped of everything which had given her an identity
and was left for dead, yet she rose again renewed. The only way we
find out we have the capacity to survive our own ego-death is to go
through our own ego-death. When everything we thought we were
is taken away, we discover a part of us that is still there- that aspect
of our being which is eternal and indestructible. When what we
thought supported us is taken away, we find out what really supports
us. This is the gift ofPluto/Ereshkigal. 242 Pluto Transits Head,Heart,andBelly
Every situation we encounter in life can be experienced through the
head, the heart or the belly. For instance, let's say you have arranged
to meet a boyfriend at the theatre. You have the tickets and he is
supposed to meet you half an hour before the show begins. You are
there on time, but he doesn't appear. Ten minutes go by, IS minutes
go by, 20 minutes go by, and he still doesn't come. How do you react
to this?
If you are dealing with this situation through the head, you will
try to figure out what has gone wrong and look for a reason why he
hasn't appeared. You may check your diary to see if you have the
right place and time. You may buy a newspaper to see if there was a
train strike. The head will try to find meaning in what is happening,
so you might think: 'Maybe the cosmos intends for me to do something else tonight; that's why he didn't come' or 'I must have stood
someone else up in a previous lifetime, and now I have that coming
back to me.' In other words, we use our minds to stand back and
view the situation from a detached or objective point of view. But
there are other dimensions of our being that will be stirred by this
event.
The experience of being stood up' will also activate feelings in the
heart. The heart may worry about the other person: 'I hope he is all
right. Wouldn't it be terrible if he had an accident while coming to
meet me?' The heart may try to be compassionate: 'Maybe he had a
hard childhood, that is why he is the kind of person who can't keep
appointments on time.' Above all, the heart will feel sad: 'Isn't it the
story of my life? I was so looking forward to this and now I am let
down.' You go home, have a cry and write a poem about what has
happened. You put on sad music, pour a glass of wine, and feel sorry
for yourself or for the condition of humanity in general.
But what about the reactions happening in your belly? What do
you feel in your gut when someone you have been waiting for and
wanting to see doesn't turn up? Most likely, the area around your
belly will become agitated and tense, which is the physical body's
spontaneous response to the experience of being let down. Your gut
will churn, and you will feel angry and perhaps vindictive: 'Wait till Plutonian Crises 243 I see him again; I'll show him that he can't do this to me!' You may
be fuming: 'I knew there was something devious and untrustworthy
about him all along. Why didn't I listen to myself?' You might even
fantasize killing him. These instinctive and primitive responses originate from the belly region, and are our natural reactions to betrayal.
The belly isn't objective, it doesn't stop to analyse a situation or try to
find logical and sensible reasons for what has happened. Nor does it
respond in the same compassionate manner as the heart. The belly
may fear that something dreadful has happened to the other person
which has prevented him from getting there, but this feeling will be
accompanied by a greater degree of terror and stark horror than if it
stemmed from the heart centre.
Transiting Pluto stirs the belly in the sphere of the chart it is
transiting or in relation to whatever planetary principle it is aspecting
by transit. And in every case, when the belly is aroused, it not only
agitates over the immediate eyent which has triggered its responses;
the present situation will also activate feelings and emotions from
earlier times in our lives when we have been let down or betrayed. A
boyfriend stands us up at the theatre, and we feel angry and hurt,
but the rage and pain we are feeling are not just from that situation.
Our reactions also could stem from when we were six months old
and we urgently needed mother to come and hold us, but she didn't
come. The present disappointment will resonate with that earlier
time and expose the emotions from that experience as well. When
we are disappointed or frustrated as infants, our reactions are very
intense because our survival depends upon a caretaker being there
for us. Our life does not depend on somebody arriving at the theatre
on time, but when they don't appear as promised, it reactivates a
rage that originates from a period when another person being there
on time was a life or death situation. For this reason, the infant in
you feels as if your life has been threatened by someone not coming
as promised.
Generally, as in the example of being stood up at the theatre, we
will probably have reactions on all three levels at once. The head
will attempt to ascertain what has gone wrong and try to find
meaning in the experience; the heart will feel sad and may worry
about the other person's well-being; and the belly will be experienc- 244 Pluto Transits ing terror, anger and rage. Our head, heart, and belly fight with one
another - the head compelling us to be reasonable and mature
about the situation, the heart urging us to be compassionate and
forgiving, and all the while our belly is fantasizing ways to defend
ourselves and to take out our revenge and hurt on the other person.
Under a Pluto transit, we often try to be reasonable and understanding too quickly, at the expense of the belly. We are afraid of our gut
reactions, and use the head or heart to keep the belly at bay.
However, if this is done over too long a period of time, the pent-up
instinctive responses fester and become toxic. Unexpressed anger
turns in on itself and attacks the body. The end result could be any
number of psychological and physical disturbances - a nervous
breakdown, a cancerous growth, stomach disorders, heart problems,
skin diseases or sexual dysfunctions. This does not mean that we
should indiscriminately unleash our belly feelings on whomever is
unfortunate enough to trigger them. To do so is not really fair to the
other person, because the intensity of our anger and hurt are
actually related more to unresolved emotional issues from childhood
than to the present situation. The person who stands us up at the
theatre is just the catalyst that brings what is buried in us to the surface.
Even if we choose not to unleash our gut reactions on to another
person, we shouldn't deny the emotions which have been stirred.
We arrive again at the idea of acknowledging and accepting the
instinctive and primitive side of our natures, without necessarily
acting out this part of ourselves directly onto others. Once more, the
key is acceptance, holding and containment. We need to find ways
to give space and time to our primitive, instinctive emotions - ways
that don't require rushing out and buying a gun to shoot whoever
has triggered the beast in us. Giving our belly reactions some form of
creative expression is one means of working with them. We can take
time to write down what we are feeling - to let out on paper
whatever thoughts and emotions we are having. In doing so, we are
not only giving these feelings the space to be, but in the process we
also might discern a connection between our present reactions and
earlier events in our emotional history. Or we can paint, draw,
dance or sculpt our feelings. Any of these outlets are advisable under Plutonian Crises 245 a Pluto transit, because they give our belly-emotions room to express
themselves. Feelings which are denied at the time of a Pluto transit
will only bottle up and come back later with greater force. But if we
accept our feelings and give them a safe form of expression, they
naturally will begin to shift, change and transform themselves in
someway.
After taking time to be with our belly responses, we will discover
that other reactions to the present situation start to emerge. Our
energy can shift in a natural way from the belly to the heart: we
begin to experience glimmerings of compassion towards those who
have upset us, and to see their point of view or their perspective
more clearly. Or we gradually find ourselves looking at the situation
from a more objective stance, and we are able to perceive some
meaning in it or some greater purpose for it having happened. Pluto
transits activate the root chakra, the energy centre at the base of the
spine. Once this energy is tapped, it is possible for it to flow up into
the higher chakras. Buried Treasure Earlier I mentioned that the unconscious is not just the storehouse of
negative emotional complexes and our denied primitive drives, but
the unconscious is also the repository of undeveloped potentialities
and positive traits that have yet to be recognized, worked on and
integrated. Pluto was the god of buried treasure, and a journey into
what is buried in us will unearth hidden riches, some of which we
might not have known were there.
Before analysing Pluto transits in this respect in greater detail, we
need to examine more closely the dynamics of ego-development and
the mechanism of repre~sion in general. We are born into this world
totally helpless; without the love of a mother/caretaker we would
not survive. In order to win this much-needed support, we soon
learn to hide, suppress or deny altogether those parts of ourselves
which the environment does not condone, usually- and especiallyour aggressive and sexual urges. This process can be mapped in this
way: 246 Pluto Transits
Drive~ Anxiety~ Defence Mechanism 6 We all have certain drives which we feel are not acceptable to the
environment. Because we fear losing love, we become anxious about
these urges and defend ourselves against them. Repression is one
kind of defence mechanism that can be employed, but there are a
host of others. In this way, the ego, or sense of 'I', is generally
formed to include those urges and qualities that the environment
supports, and to exclude those that the environment disapproves.
However, it is not only our sexual or aggressive urges that are
frowned upon. It also is possible that those people on whom we were
dependent for survival were ambivalent or disapproving of our more
positive traits, such as our innate energy, curiosity or spontaneity. If
we sensed as a child that the environment was not approving of
these qualities, we would feel anxious and try to deny these traits as
well. In short, we banish them from our ego-identity and become
what is knmvn in Transactional Analysis as the 'adapted child'. We
develop a false self which is safe to show the world. And after a
while, we forget what was originally there and come to believe that
this. false self is who we really are. In doing so we are left feeling
incomplete - alienated from parts of our own being and out of
touch with our wholeness. Pluto transits break down existing egoboundaries and allow what is hidden in us to be included in our
identity, and therefore they give us the opportunity to integrate
positive potentialities which we previously have denied.
The humanistic psychologist Abraham Maslow was very aware of
how we repress our positive potentiality. He coined the term 'the
Jonah Complex' to describe the fear of our own greatness:
We fear our highest pos;ibilities (as well as our lowest ones). We
are generally afraid to become that which we can glimpse in our
most perfect moments, under the most perfect conditions, under
conditions of greatest courage. We enjoy and even thrill to the
god-like possibilities we see in ourselves in such peak moments.
And yet we simultaneously shiver with weakness, awe, and fear
before these same possibilities. 7
Why should we fear our own greatness? One reason is a fear of Plutonian Crises 24 7 responsibility. If we fully acknowledged our potential talents, resources and skills, we would have to shoulder the burden of doing
something to develop them further. We would rather avoid knowing
than face the task of taking responsibility for what is there. Another
reason for denying our full potentiality might be the fear of the
power it would give us. We wouldn't be able to be 'little' any more.
Would we use our power wisely, or would we mishandle it? Or
maybe we are afraid that if we were truly in touch with the living
our greatness, other people wopld be envious and resentful of our
achievements. Transiting Pluto, in making us more aware of what is
buried in us, may ask that we confront these fears in order to grow
into the self that we truly are.
Facing Ultimate Concerns
We have discussed how some of our infantile drives give rise to
anxiety and to the employment of defence mechanisms to quell that
anxiety. Existentialist thinkers, however, believe that it is not just
unacceptable drives that make us uncomfortable. They speak of
certain 'ultimate concerns' - basic facts of life we have to face by
virtue of existing - which also create anxiety, and therefore energize
defence mechanisms into action. Pluto transits may strip away these
defences as well, and ask that we confront directly life's ultimate concerns.
What are these ultimate concerns, these inescapable 'givens' of
existence? Irvin Yalom, in his book Existential Psychotherapy, lists
these in four main categories: death, freedom, isolation, and meaninglessness.8 We will consider them one by one.
Anything which is born will one day die. We are alive now, but
one day we will cease to exist, and although there is no escape from
death, we construct all kinds of defences against facing this fact.
Christianity suggests an after-life; esoteric philosophers believe in
reincarnation and in our soul's essential immortality. These concepts
may be true, but many existentialists would claim that such beliefs
are ways to avoid acknowledging the finality of death. One part of us
is aware of the inevitability of death, and yet another part of us is
terrified of the prospect of non-being, and wishes to continue to be. 248 Pluto Transits We assuage our death-anxiety by finding ways to make ourselves
'immortal'. The idea of becoming famous and living forever in
people's memory helps to alleviate the anxieties our egohas about
its own finite existence. Writing books, creating works of art which
will live on after we have passed away, is also satisfying to that part
of us which craves immortality. Having children is another symbolic
way of ensuring our continued existence: we may die, but a part of
us will live on after we have gone. However, under a Pluto transit,
we may be forced to face death, through being confronted with
the inevitability of our own, or with the death of someone close to
us.
According to existentialist theory, another ultimate concern is
freedom. We alone are responsible for what we do, and the state of
our lives is a result of choices we make, whether consciously or
unconsciously. We alone are responsible for these choices. If our
lives are not the way we would like them to be, we cannot blame
anyone but ourselves. We could have made other choices; we could
have handled things differently. No one is to blame but us. The fact
that we are responsible for our own lives is frightening, for what if
we make the wrong choices? In his book, Escape from Freedom, Mercúrio Erich Fromm postulates that .some people would rather live in a
totalitarian state where all their decisions are made for them, rather
than having to undergo the anxiety of making choices in their lives.
We try to coerce others into making decisions for us. We attribute
the ultimate responsibility of our lives to fate, to the gods, to our
unconscious - anything but ourselves. Under Pluto transits, we may
have to face the fact that no one but ourselves can be held responsible
for the choices we make in life.*
Another basic given of existence which we find frightening is the
fact that no matter how close we are to other people, certain
unbridgeable gaps still remain. No one can ever fully know us, nor
can we fully know another person. We are born alone and we die
alone. We attempt to defend ourselves against feeling our existential
isolation by seeking love and relationship, especially symbiotic
*Olivia's case study (pp. 36o-8) is a clear example of how Pluto transits can work in
this way. ·Plutonian Crises 249 unions where we merge or blend with another person. We exist
alone, and yet yearn to be part of something greater. Under Pluto
transits, we may lose relationships or people we thought would
never let us down and as a result have to face our basic alone-ness in
life.
Finally, there is the issue of meaninglessness. Most existentialists
believe there are no ultimate truths - that the universe has no
meaning, except that which we attribute to it. 'The only true absolute
is that there are no absolutes.' 10 If this is the case, why are we here
and how should we live? Even though there may not be any preexisting truths, as human beings we need meaning in order to give
purpose and direction to our lives. We need something to live for,
guidelines by which we can steer a course through life. Under Pluto
transits, we may find that the way we have given meaning to our
life doesn't work any more: a belief-system, religion, philosophy or
set of ideals could crumble into insignificance. We may have to face
the possibility that the universe has no pre-ordained meaning, or we
are forced to re-evaluate and redefine the way in which we give our
existence purpose and relevance.
Pluto and Power Struggles Wherever Pluto is transiting in the chart, our existing ego-identity is
in danger of being destroyed through the affairs of that house or
through the principle symbolized by the planet Pluto is aspecting by
transit. The ego, whose main desire is to maintain itself, attempts to
resist destruction by trying to exert power and control in that area of
life. For instance, if Pluto is transiting the seventh house, we may be
frightened that something our partner might do will be too much for
us to cope with and will somehow endanger the relationship. Therefore, in an attempt to keep trouble at bay, we try to control our
partner or the relationship itself. We hope that by dominating or
manipulating the other person (often through guilt) we can avert
disaster. Ultimately this doesn't work. Whether we wish to or not,
Pluto will find a way to force us to confront changes in that area of
life. These changes needn't signify. the end of the relationship, but
probably do require some alteration to the nature of the partnership, 2 so Pluto Transits or a need on our part to face some of our worst fears in that area of
life.
As a general rule, power-struggles are common in whatever
house Pluto is transiting, or in connection with whatever planet
Pluto is aspecting by transit. These conflicts may be motivated not
only by the ego's desire to preserve itself (as explained above), but
also from a need oh our part to strengthen, affirm and to define
further our identity by battling with another person or group who is
taking a different stance from us.· Therefore. if Pluto is transiting the
third or making an aspect by transit to Mercury, we may fight with
siblings or neighbours. If Pluto is transiting the tenth or making an
aspect to Saturn by transit, power-struggles could ensue
with authority figures such as the government, bosses or parents.
Pluto and Past Lives Reincarnationists believe that the human soul is on a journey
towards perfection which takes many lifetimes to achieve. With
each new incarnation, we carry our karma- the harvest of experience
from previous lives - with us. The actions we have performed in
prior existences affect what we will meet in the present one.
U is not my purpose in this book to debate the truth of the
philosophy of karma and reincarnation. However, those people who
do believe in the theory may be interested in exploring Pluto transits
in terms of the karma we are bringing over from past lives. I have
discussed at length the fact that Pluto activates deep-seated drives
and complexes rooted in childhood, but reincarnationists would
assert that the kinds of emotions and feelings stirred by Pluto stem
not only from childhood, but from experiences in previous lives as
well. For instance, when transiting Pluto aspects our Venus, if we
meet someone to whom we are powerfully attracted, it may signify
that this is a person we knew in a previous incarnation. This person
has come back into our lives because we still have something to
resolve with him or her from the past. Or under this transit, a
present partner could be the agent through whom karma returns to
us: he or she walks out on us or cheats on us, because in a past life
we were the one who abandoned or deceived others. Transiting Plutonian Crises 251 Pluto aspecting the Sun could bring karma back to us through our
father or through men in general. If our father is cruel to us under
this transit, reincarnationists may interpret this as our own cruelty
as a father in the past coming back to us. Transiting Pluto aspecting
the Moon could symbolize our meeting a woman with whom we
have karmic ties, or attracting experiences via the mother which are
related to occurrences in past lives.
The house Pluto is moving through will also indicate the area of
life through which we are meeting past karma. If it is transiting the
eleventh, for example, a group involvement or a situation with a
friend could stir painful issues from previous lives. Transiting Pluto
through the fifth could bring past karmic difficulties back to us
through children. One woman with this transit was terrified of
becoming pregnant: she was beset by an irrational fear that she
would die if she tried to have a baby at this time. She sought the
advice of a psychic, who told her that in a previous life she had in
fact died while giving birth to a child. The psychic reassured her that
the apprehension was there because it had happened in the past,
and since it had already happened, it was not likely to repeat itself.
Once the woman in question was able to pinpoint her fear and
attribute it to something specific she had gone through before, her
present concerns about getting pregnant were eased.
Not all karma is bad karma. Abilities, strengths, talents and
resources we have developed in previous lives can also be carried over
into our present existence. A Pluto transit could bring these to the fore
in connection to whatever planet or house it is affecting by transit. For
instance, when transiting Pluto moves through the sixth house, we
may rediscover a skill or talent which we have developed in a past life.
Or when transiting Pluto aspects Mercury, we could gain access to
knowledge or wisdom we have accrued in other incarnations.
Seen in terms of karma and reincarnation, both the positive
events and the catastrophes we meet in life are not random or
accidental, but reflect the working of divine justice, and serve the
soul in its journey of evolution and return to its divine source. For
many people, understanding present difficulties in the light of this
philosophy helps them give meaning to what they are having to
endure. Because they can discern some reason or purpose why they 252 Pluto Transits have to meet these tests and challenges, they are better able to find
the strength and resolve to deal with them constructively. Whether
the theory is true or not, if it is understood wisely and approached
with common sense, it can be of great value to people in times of
crises.
Externalizing Pluto
Our discussion so far has emphasized the kinds of inner, psychological adjustments associated with Pluto transits - the death of
an existing ego-identity and the reclaiming of lost parts of the self. It
also is possible to externalize transiting Pluto's urge to tear down
and rebuild through finding things in the outer world which need to
be changed or transformed. Joining a cause or group which attempts
to regenerate society by promoting needed social reform is one way
of expressing Pluto's energy externally. Battling famine and disease
in a Third World country could be another 'outer' manifestation of a
Pluto transit. And Pluto's impetus to face darkness and expose what
is hidden could express itself outwardly in medical and scientific
research or any form of investigation into the mysterious and unknown.
Pluto asks that we confront what is raw, primitive- or instinctive
in us. This too can be approached externally by pitting ourselves
against nature and the elements. Living alone in a jungle for a
month, for instance, would teach you a great deal about the more
primitive or instinctive side of life. Pluto is a boundary-breaker, and
this too can be expressed outwardly in any attempts to stretch
ourselves beyond our usual limits in some way. We could look for
the highest mountain to climb in difficult weather conditions. We
could try to beat a personal athletic record, or effect a major change
in ourselves physically through a strict diet or body-building or
other forms of strenuous exercise.
However, if we do express a Pluto transit by battling darkness or
negativity in the world, we should be careful that in the process we
are not disowning and then projecting what we don't like in ourselves on to others. It is a fact of life that what we despise most in
others is what we are most intolerant about in ourselves. If we are Plutonian Crises 2 53 unwilling to acknowledge and deal with our own capacity for jealousy, envy, deceit, treachery, violence, lust or greed, then we will
dislike anyone or anything displaying these qualities. In our intolerance, we may embark on causes and crusades to eliminate such
negativity from the world; but to do this before we have looked at
our own dark side or unconscious compulsions is both fake and
hypocritical-like shouting for peace while brandishing a sword.
If, under a Pluto transit, we find ourselves involved with others
who deceive or betray us, or with people who are jealous, possessive
or envious of us, we had better ask ourselves 'Why?' Why do we
keep running into the Hydra around every corner? Why do we act
as a magnet for these kinds of people? Are we unconsciously setting
up these situations? Are we unconsciously provoking other people
into these states? The nature of life is wholeness. Whatever we are
not conscious of in ourselves, we will draw to us from the outside, as
if by fate. If we are repeatedly meeting treachery, anger or envy in
others, then we need to look inside and explore our own denied or
repressed capacity to behave in any of these ways. Also, if at the time
of a Pluto transit, we attract disruption and change via external
calamities or through other people's behaviour, then we need to
look inside for that part of us which doesn't want to remain in an
existing mould or structure. Again, this doesn't mean we have to act
on our destructive drives, but it does ask that we become more
aware and understanding of aspects of ourselves which we are
suppressing. If we totally deny Ereshkigal in us, she grows very
angry and retaliates by sending her minions our way.
Attracting Plutonic people or situations into our lives often brings
out what is Plutonic in us. A Mexican woman who had emigrated to
England came to me for a reading, and her natal chart revealed Sun,
Mercury and Venus all rising in Aquarius, opposite Pluto in Leo on
the cusp of the seventh. She identified primarily with her Aquarian
qualities, and saw herself as fair, just and principled, but was not in
touch with the Pluto in Leo opposing her Aquarian planets, and
adamantly denied any capacity to act treacherously or in a cold,
underhanded way. Other people might be that way, but not her! I
saw her again a few years later when transiting Pluto in early
Scorpio was squaring her Sun, Mercury and Venus in Aquarius, and 254 Pluto Transits coming up to square her natal Pluto as well. At the time of this
transit, her father died and she discovered that her brothers and
sisters (who still lived in Mexico) had devised a plot to take advantage
of her absence to cheat her out of her share of what the father had
left to the family. When she told me this story, her face turned cold
and bitter. She was determined to do whatever she could to punish
them for their injustice to her. The Pluto transit, working through
the treachery of her siblings (transiting Pluto was squaring the natal
Mercury-Pluto opposition), had managed to expose a revengeful side
to her own nature which she had never known was there. Pluto Transiting the Planets: an Overview*
The first part of Chapter Mercúrio on Pluto transits to the planets is designed
to give the reader guidelines on what to expect under each transit,
and some suggestions as to the best ways to use the transit constructively. A number of other books also contain excellent material
on Pluto transits. Robert Hand's Planets in Transit, Betty Lundsted's
Transits: The Time of Your Life, Stephen Arroyo's Astrology,~Karma and
Transformation, Liz Greene's The Astrology of Fate, and Tracy Marks's
The Astrology of Self-Discovery, (see Suggested Reading at the end of
this book), all include sections on Pluto well worth reading. Donna
Cunningham's book Healing Pluto Problems deserves special mention:
entirely dedicated to issues to do with Pluto, her warmly written
book provides a deep insight into the nature of this planet and the
kinds of difficulties, traumas and rewards Pluto transits offer. She
also recommends specific healing techniques - Bach Flower
Remedies, California Essences, meditations and chants - which can
be employed for the various issues raised by diii'erent Pluto transits.
Even when transiting Pluto trines or sextiles a natal planet, we
may not have an easy time. These transits can bring as much
upheaval as the transiting conjunction, square, opposition or quincunx. Generally speaking, however, with the transiting trine or
sextile we may be more in touch with that part of us which is
*See also p. 2 59 for a brief summary of how transiting Pluto affects natal planets. Plutonian Crises 2 55 demanding a change or rebirth, and therefore we offer less resistance
to what wants to happen.
Because of Pluto's slow movement and its periodic retrogradation,
any transit of Pluto to a natal planet or angle will last between two
to three years, sometimes longer. Sensitive people may feel the
reverberations of Pluto even when it is as far away as Júpiter or 5 degrees
from the exact transiting aspect. As Pluto approaches an exact
aspect by transit, the stage is being set for needed changes or
breakthroughs. Mter aspecting exactly, it will then change direction
and go retrograde, during which time the process initiated with the
advent of Pluto may slow down, and we feel stuck or held back in
some way. Finally, when Pluto turns direct and completes the aspect
for the third time, the process moves forward to some sort of resolution. For example, as Pluto approaches and makes the first square
to your Moon, it could become obvious to you that you need to alter
your living situation. But when Pluto goes retrograde and makes the
square again, you may find that all your efforts to move are thwarted
or blocked. When it moves direct again and squares the Moon for
the third time, you are more likely to succeed in making the necessary
change.
However, we shouldn't expect everything to fall back into place as
soon as Pluto has finished transiting the third time. There is usually a
period of 'fallout', a phase of adjusting to the effects of the transit,
which can last until Pluto is 2 or 3 degrees beyond the exact aspect
to the planet in question. We might not realize just how much the
transit has changed us until a year or so after it has passed and we
can look back over the whole period more clearly. As a general rule,
Pluto transits often exhibit two separate stages: the first half of the
transit involves breaking us down in some way, and the second half
is the rebuilding phase. Or we could say that the first half of the
transit involves journeying down into Ereshkigal's realm, and the
second half entails returning from that place, we hope renewed and
wiser as a result of what we have experienced. Mercúrio Transits of Pluto to the Planets and Through the
Houses Pluto-Sun Pluto-Sun transits radically alter our basic sense of identity. Our old
self and old ways of being will no longer be viable at this time. In
particular, false or outdated aspects of our personality need to be let
go of and changed.
··
These transits put us more closely in touch with the qualities
represented by our Sun sign. If for any reason we haven't been living
our Sun sign characteristics, we will be compelled to develop these
traits. Take the case of Christopher, for example, born with the Sun
in Taurus in the eleventh house, but with a strong water component
in his chart (a Jupiter-Venus conjunction in Pisces on the MC, and
the Moon rising in Cancer square to Neptune). For the first 34 years
of his life, he was much more identified with and ruled by his watery
and Neptunian side. Moody and changeable, he drifted from one job
to another, and after leaving the family home at 22, never lived in
one place for more than a few months. Transiting Pluto entered
Scorpio and came to oppose his Sun in the early degrees .of Taurus.
Through a new relationship which started at this time, he became
interested in psychology and embarked on a three-year training
course in psychotherapy - a course which involved a great deal of
self-examination both individually and within groups (note that transiting Pluto is moving through the fifth house of romance opposing
and activating- his natal Sun in the eleventh, the house of groups).
One result of the training has been to make him aware of his deep
256 To the Planets and Through the Houses 257 desire to put down roots, build more lasting structures in his life
and earn a decent living. In this way, transiting Pluto awakened
his Sun in Taurus, enabling him to discover more fully a central
aspect of his identity.
However, if we are already fairly in touch with our Sun sign,
transiting Pluto aspecting the Sun may ask that we explore dimensions of that sign we have not yet expressed. For instance, a
woman with the Sun in Sagittarius who had already travelled
extensively turned her attention to another level of Sagittarius and
began to study philosophy and religion when transiting Pluto
squared her Sun. A man with the Sun in Pisces who had spent
years living out the victim side of Pisces as an alcohol- and
substance-abuser, found that transiting Pluto in Scorpio trilling his
Sun provided him with the strength needed to free himself from
these addictions. He now works counselling others with drug problems: the Pluto transit shifted him from the victim to the healer
level of Pisces.
In other cases, a transit of Pluto to the Sun actually could exaggerate the expressions of one's Sun sign qualities. Pluto deals in extremes
and brings out the very best or the very worst of whatever planet it
touches by transit. Some people with transiting Pluto conjunct their
Scorpio Suns could find themselves overwhelmed by previously latent
sexual compulsions, or obsessed by intense feelings of rage or hate
they never suspected they had. Transiting Pluto square the Sun in
Aquarius could arouse a person's ideals and convictions to such a
degree that any means would be advocated to achieve a political or
social aim. Transiting Pluto square a natal Leo Sun could expose a
lust for power or an overwhelming need to be famous or special.
Although such states of mind are extreme, dangerous or unpleasant,
Pluto is working to reveal qualities in us which need to be better
understood, worked on and healed. Extremism under Pluto transits
almost certainly will invite a fall, and yet as a result it is possible to
learn from the experience: we can pick ourselves up again, perhaps a
little wiser and more balanced.
The Sun represents the animus principle of power, assertion and
self-expression. Any Pluto-Sun transit in a woman's chart is a chance
for her to become more aware of her need to have an identity in her 258 Pluto Transits own right, rather than solely defining herself through those to
whom she is close. If over a long period of time she has allowed
herself to be dominated and defined by others, a transit of Pluto to
her Sun could increase her unhappiness and frustration to such a
degree that she may have no choice but to let go of this pattern,
often in a dramatic and decisive fashion. This is the kind of transit
that prompts a woman to leave her husband and sometimes her
children behind, in the name of discovering who she is in her own
right. However, it isn't true to assume that Pluto-Sun transits in a
woman's chart only indicate the need for her to contact her own
power and self-assertion. More generally, Pluto operates to change
the way we have defined who we are. Pluto transits to the Sun
revolutionize the self: if she has always maintained that she would
never marry, have children or settle down, she may find herself
doing just those things under these transits.
For some women, transiting Pluto aspecting the Sun (and this
applies to the transiting trine and sextile as well) could describe
changes or difficulties men in her life are going through. I have seen
many instances of women with these transits whose husbands are
experiencing crises in the form of business or financial upheavals,
health problems or major life-transitions such as redundancy, retirement or the death of a parent. In these cases, the woman meets
Pluto indirectly through the man, and one way or another she will
be changed as a result of what he is experiencing.
Encountering a Plutonic or Scorpionic type man (or sometimes a
female of this nature) who transforms her life is another possible
manifestation of a Pluto-Sun transit for a woman. Someone she
meets could exert a powerful, almost spellbinding influence over her,
and there may be little she or anyone else can do to stop this
attraction. The new person will mirror or help her contact qualities
in herself which are ready to become conscious during this period.
A man with transiting Pluto aspecting his Sun will have to
confront issues to do with power, identity and assertion. If he has
not yet developed or expressed his will or authority, these transits
can help him do so. In charts I have seen where this is the case, the
Pluto-Sun transit brought opportunities to exercise greater power
and assertiveness in a work situation, as if the outer world is To the Planets and Through the Houses 259 encouraging him to discover this side of his nature at this time. He may
at first mishandle his newly found authority, and yet it is only by
having power that he can begin to learn to use it wisely. However, if a
man has been accustomed to positions of power and control, and has
chiefly determined his identity through his office in .life, a transit of
Pluto to the Sun could have a very different effect. In other words, if he
has already risen to the top and demonstrated his authority both to
himself and the wodd, it may be time for him to change directions. He
may wish to employ his energies in an entirely new arena, switching
from one line of work to another. Or he might divert altogether from
positions of power and responsibility in order to tend to other sides of
his nature, and turn his attention towards his personal life or to the
development of latent artistic or creative urges.
From these two contrasting examples- the man who is catapulted
into learning about power, and the man who already has power and
feels the need to alter his course - we can detect an underlying
modus operandi of any Pluto transit. Whenever transiting Pluto
aspects a planet, it can work on the sphere of life represented by that
planetary principle in three different ways:
If we have been out of touch with the sphere of life symbolized by
the planet Pluto is aspecting by transit, we have a chance to
reconnect to and develop that side of ourselves. In the case of the
Sun, this means further developing our power and authority.
2 If we are already involved to some degree with the sphere of life
designated by the planet transiting Pluto is aspecting, then the
transit suggests that this is a time when we need to refine,
deepen or improve how we are expressing or relating to that
principle. In the case of the Sun, this means learning how to use
power more wisely and skilfully.
3 If we have over-identified with the side of life associated with the
planet Pluto is transiting, Pluto will ask that we develop ourselves
in some other way, rather than adhering to the direction we
have followed so far. Pluto will bring about changes by choice
(we decide to change), or by coercion (the outside decides it for
us). In either situation, it is time to explore other levels or
dimensions of the principle represented by the planet Pluto is I 260 Pluto Transits contacting. In the case of the Sun, instead of exercising our
authority in an already existing career, we may need to find
another outlet through which to define and express ourselves.
For either sex, the relationship with the _father could come into
focus. A child or young person with this transit might experience
problems with the father - power-struggles with him, violence,
incestuous undercurrents, the father moving out of the family home,
and in smne cases the father's death. Any of these issues will
profoundly affect the child's character and identity later in life.
Unattended wounds from this period will leave deep scars on the
psyche, and a young person needs extra care, help and understanding at the time of a difficult Pluto-Sun transit.
Regardless of age, if we have been overly identified with, attached
to or controlled by the father, this transit indicates the need to break
that tie and to free ourselves from his dominance in order to discover
ourselves in our own right. Battles with the father could occur at
this time. He may want us to take one direction, but we feel the need
to go in another. He believes in one thing, but we assert our belief in
something else. These power-struggles may be necessary as a way to
draw clearer boundaries between the self and the father, and to
establish greater autonomy and independence. In some cases, this
transit denotes a fairly radical severing of ties with him, a feeling
that we need to burn our bridges behind us. After the transit passes,
we may change our mind and seek a reconciliation.
A total break with the father is one way a Pluto-Sun transit might
manifest itself. However, the opposite situation is also possible under
these transits. Pluto changes our relationship to whatever principle
it touches. If there have been long-standing difficulties with the
father, a transit of Pluto to the Sun could alter these circumstances.
We have a chance to bring to the surface and work through old
problems with the father and improve our relationship to him. Pluto
sometimes agitates problems, but it also gives us the opportunity to
transform existing patterns, even ones that have been with us for a
very long time.
In some cases, Pluto-Sun transits may indicate the father himself
experi~ncing a difficult or disruptive period - illness, retirement, or To the Planets and Through the Houses 26 I various other emotional and psychological crises. Sometimes these
transits correlate to the death of the father - an event that inevitably
will have a profound effect on us. When a parent dies, all the old issues
and conflicts surrounding that parent come to the surface. We will
need time not only to mourn the loss of the father, but also to grieve for
the passing away of the chance to resolve some of our problems with
him while he was alive, or the loss of the opportunity to demonstrate
our unexpressed love or gratitude to him. Feelings of anger, resentment or guilt to do with the father may re-emerge, and it is essential to
give ourselves the time and the space to be with these feelings. In her
book Healing Pluto Problems, Donna Cunningham suggests that it is
still possible to confront and deal with unresolved emotional problems
with our parents even after their death. 1 This could be facilitated
through some form of bereavement counselling, and, in certain cases,
with the help of a competent medium or psychic. The death of the
father, properly mourned, also can free us to express ourselves in
ways which were not possible when he was still living.*
Although there is no substitute for the grieving process, a belief in
the immortality of the soul can be of great consolation in situations
such as these. Spiritualists talk of 'the other side', the plane of
existence on which our soul resides in the after-life. It is believed that
the deceased, once comfortably settled on the other side, are able to
view events on the earth plane, and even may try to contact or pass
messages on to us. These messages can come through dreams or
through the vehicle of a medium. A father who has passed on and
who is released from the encumbrance and rigidity of the physical
body, may be able to offer us love, support and understanding in
ways which he couldn't have done when he was alive.
Pluto destroys forms, but it also can create new ones as well.
Under Pluto transits, births occur as frequently as deaths. When
Pluto transits in aspect to the Sun in a man's chart, he could
become a parent, perhaps for the first time: he dies as the son to be
reborn the father. *See Suggested Reading (p. 386) for a list of books dealing with death and the
grieving process. 262 Pluto Transits Pluto-Moon Whereas Pluto-Sun transits concentrate on issues to do with assertion, power and authority (animus issues), Pluto-Moon transits more
directly affect the realm of emotions and feelings (the anima). Pluto
transits to the Moon activate deeply ingrained images and patterns
left over from childhood. As children, we form 'opinions', based on
our interaction with mother and the environment, about what kind
of place the world is and what kind of person we are. For instance, if
mother is attentive to our needs, we will form the opinion that the
world is a safe place to be in. We develop a basic trust in life, the
feeling that life will provide us with what we need, that it is on our
side. What's more, we introject or identify with the good mother,
and this will contribute to a positive self-image: 'Mother loves me
enough to look after me; therefore I must be a good person.' However,
if mother or the early environment are not receptive to our needs,
we will form an opinion, life-statement or script which views the
world as unsafe. In this case, we will introject the bad mother, and
deduce that we must be lacking or inadequate because mother does
not care about us.
Our childhood experiences leave a deep tmpression - even though
we don't consciously remember these formative experiences, their
effects reverberate on an unconscious level. They are part of our
personal mythology, a set of beliefs and expectations about ourselves
and life in general. We carry them around inside us, and we continue
to interpret later events through the lens of these early images and
assumptions. An experiment illustrates this principle. One group of
young pups were subjected to an escapable electric shock, while
another group was given electric shocks they couldn't avoid. Later,
both sets of dogs were given escapable shocks. The dogs who had the
earlier experience of being able to avoid a shock were easily able to do
so again; however, the dogs who originally experienced an inescapable
shock were not able to find ways to avoid the escapable ones. Their
previous experience taught them that shocks were unavoidable although this was not the case in the latter experiment, they were still
governed by their old expectation or pattern. Their earlier framework
obscured their ability to find new possibilities in the situation. 2 To the Planets and Through the Houses 263 Likewise, as humans our childhood experiences set up certain
expectations, and a predisposition to perceive later events in life in
ways which confirm our earlier beliefs. If we have a positive expectation or belief about ourselves, we selectively perceive or filter out
from experience those things which fit what we expect to see. If our
self-image is negative or we hold the belief that the world is dark and
threatening, this is precisely what our observations will mirror back
to us. Life has a way of obliging our expectations.
How we experienced mother, the environment and ourselves as
children is shown in part by the sign placement and natal aspects of
the Moon in our charts. If the Moon is trine to Venus or Jupiter, let's
say, then the image of mother and the early environment will
probably include some positive feelings and associations. However, if
the Moon is in difficult aspect to Saturn, Uranus, Neptune or Pluto,
the likelihood of early bonding problems is increased, because the
stressful aspects of these planets describe difficulties in the relationship with the mother and with problems in successfully satisfying
our early needs. Later in life, when transiting Pluto aspects the
Moon, it will reactivate any of these early patterns, often through
problems - sometimes quite threatening - in a present relationship.
For this reason, Pluto transits to the Moon - especially when the
Moon has hard natal aspects - are not always pleasant. And yet
these transits do offer us the opportunity to discover and learn more
about our deep-seated complexes. Used wisely, Pluto-Moon transits
can initiate a process that enables us to understand and perhaps
resolve detrimental emotional patterns which have dogged us since
childhood. How can we best facilitate this possibility?
We can't go anywhere until we accept where we are. We first
need to allow into awareness whatever emotions are surfacing at
this time. After we accept our feelings, we can begin to analyse them
more closely. We can ask ourselves what early experiences would
have contributed to our developing these kinds of patterns and
beliefs in the first place. Pluto-Moon transits not only activate early
complexes, but in accord with the investigative and penetrating
nature of Pluto, these transits also allow us to examine our emotions
in greater depth. Insight doesn't automatically bring change, but it
heralds a step in that direction. 264 Pluto Transits For example, take the case of a man born with the Moon square
Saturn. This suggests an inner image of difficulty (Saturn) around
the mother (the Moon), as well as problems (Saturn) having one's
most basic emotional and physical needs (the Moon) met. He came
from a poor family and his mother had to work to supplement his
father's income. As a child, this man would cry out for her, but she
often wasn't there for him at those times he most wanted her.
Accordingly, he formed an inner image or belief that he wasn't
worthy of love and that the world was not conducive to fulfilling his
needs. The feelings associated with not having his needs met were so
painful that he soon learned to protect himself in the only way he
could as a child: he simply denied his need. Eventually, after repeated
failure, he stopped reaching out for her.
When transiting Pluto came to conjunct his Moon, it triggered off
the natal Moon-saturn square. The images and issues associated
with this natal square were revived again. At this time, he tentatively
formed a relationship with a woman, but he was terrified to open up
to her and show his feelings. Experiencing him as cold and withdrawn, she broke off the involvement. Our deep-seated complexes
have a way of proving themselves true: his personal myth told him
that he was someone who doesn't get what he needs and therefore it
is better not to admit to feelings; but his reluctance to display his
emotions was what, in the end, drove the woman away. The disappointment he encountered when transiting Pluto brought out his
Moon-saturn square awakened the same kinds of emotions he experienced with his mother. In this case, he was so devastated by the
failure of his latest attempt at a relationship that he sought the help
of a psychotherapist. Here we see transiting Pluto's ability not only
to expose complexes, but to enable us to begin to change them as
well. By admitting he needed help (admitting to a need), he was
making his first step towards altering his pattern.
For both sexes, Pluto-Moon transits can reawaken a whole range
of feelings from the past: the love and hate we felt for mother, our
envy of her power, our early rage, frustration, sadness and depression. No matter how much psychological work we have done
on ourselves previously, we can still do more under these transits.
We might have tried for years to shift some of our emotional To the Planets and Through the Houses 265 baggage, but it won't move until we have the right transit to help it
along. There isn't a better time for emotional house-cleaning than
under a Pluto-Moon transit.
For men, a Pluto-Moon transit can be very important because it is
an opportunity for them to delve more deeply into their feeling
nature. A man is likely to feel unusually touchy, over-reactive and
over-sensitive at this time. He might be surprised at the kinds of
emotions he discovers in himself. Previously, he confidently stepped
out to meet life, but then this transit hits, and he feels anxious,
moody, irritable, distracted and no longer so sure of himself. In
short, his feelings overwhelm him at the expense of his rationality,
intellect and common sense. Like the Hydra's heads, the feelings
activated by a Pluto-Moon transit cannot be dealt with by trying to
clobber them to death. However, most men are not accustomed to
spending time with their feelings: they will try to rationalize emotions
out of existence or seek ways to rise above feelings and put them in
their 'proper' place. When Pluto is aspecting the Moon, this may not
be possible. Ereshkigal is demanding to be acknowledged and given
attention, and she doesn't take kindly to being shut up or denied.
Men with these transits need time to be with and explore their
feelings - even if this isn't considered the 'manly' thing to do and
their normal efficiency is undermined in the process. If a man runs
away from his emotional problems now, they will reappear later
with more force than ever, often taking the form of physical illness.
A man also can experience this transit through a woman in his
life: his mother, wife, girlfriend or daughter could be undergoing a
difficult time. Or a man may meet a woman now whose nature is
coloured strongly by Pluto or Scorpio, and she will have the effect
of transforming him in some way. For either sex, it may signify
the death of the mother.* Women with this transit also may find
that at this time they attract or are around women who are of a·
Scorpionic or Plutonic nature, or who are going through a 'Plutonic' phase of some sort. A mother, daughter, sister, female friend
or co-worker could be the agent through which Pluto in any of its
forms is met.
*Seep. 261 for a discussion on coping with the death of a parent. 266 Pluto Transits The Moon is one of the astrological significators for the physical
body, and when Pluto transits the Moon, the body itself can go
through many changes. This is especially true for women. In some
cases, Pluto-Moon transits may indicate problems with the feminine
organs, the womb or breasts. Anything to do with feminine functions
- menstruation, pregnancy, etc. - is prone to complications when
Pluto transits the Moon. Hidden problems which have previously
escaped detection could be seen and diagnosed now. This transit can
manifest in other ways beside physical disorders, and my intention is
not to frighten women about it. However, if you will be under a
Pluto-Moon transit within the next five years or so, it makes sense to
maintain a programme of regular yearly examinations in order to
detect any possible trouble in its early stages. Most of the potential
health threats of this transit, if spotted soon enough, can be treated
successfully.
A woman's relationship to her own femininity can change when
Pluto transits her Moon. She may become pregnant and bear a child
for the first time; no longer just a daughter, she is now a mother.
Pluto-Moon transits sometimes correlate with abortion, so care should
be taken to avoid unwanted pregnancies at this time. 3 Pregnant
women with this transit are best advised not to overdo things: plenty
of time is needed to rest and adjust to the changes the body is going
through. For older women, Pluto-Moon transits sometimes correlate
with the need to transform how they have been expressing their
Moon function. As children grow up and begin to lead their own
lives, mothers may have to find other ways besides just caring for
their own offspring to satisfy their nurturing desires. When Demeter
lost Persephone to Pluto, she went into a deep mourning, but later
she adjusted to her changed status by establishing a school to teach
her mysteries. Mothers whose children have grown and left home
can follow Demeter's example. Time is needed to grieve for the phase
of life which has passed, but then they can search out new outlets
that will fulfil them emotionally. Some women may find work which
involves caring and looking after others, and in this way express
their Moon function on a more impersonal scale. Others may turn to
study, and enrol in courses which provide food for the mind and
soul. In some cases, Pluto transits to the Moon manifest physically in To the Planets and Through the Houses 267 the menopause and the need for a hysterectomy. If this is the case, it
will be necessary to mourn for the passing of a phase of life and the
loss of part of the self until a new sense of one's own worth and
identity as a woman can be found.
Children with a difficult Pluto-Moon transit will normally experience it through the mother. She may be going through a major
change or disruption, and as a result the child's sense of security is
threatened. Children or young people having these transits may
need extra care, understanding and reassurance. For adolescents,
Pluto-Moon transits correlate with the radical transformation of the
body at puberty. For either sex at any age, a transit of Pluto to the
Moon can signify an important move or change of home, the pulling
up of roots and the need to re-establish the self in a new environment.
Some people will express this transit on a very practical level and
undertake redecorating the home. It is likely that these outer alterations reflect inner, psychological changes.
Pluto can bring out the best or the worst in whatever planet it
touches by transit. I have emphasized some of the more problematic
emotional complexes and patterns which both the harmonious and
hard transits can stir, and the potential for transformation and
psychological growth these present. Pluto-Moon transits also can
activate some very powerful positive feelings. I have seen many
cases of individuals under these transits who tap depths of feeling
they never knew existed in themselves. Fuelled by renewed emotional
strength and conviction, their capacity to appreciate life and to love
and empathize with others is experienced more strongly than ever.
On some very deep level, they have never felt so alive.
Pluto-Mercury
Pluto's realm is the underworld far beneath the surface level of life,
and this is where transiting Pluto beckons Mercury. One of the most
obvious effects of a Pluto-Mercury transit is the urge to delve more
deeply into the nature of reality, both inner and outer. A superficial
understanding of life isn't what satisfies Pluto- more than any other
planet, Pluto represents the urge to get to the bottom of things.
When it transits Mercury, it asks that we use our mind and intellect 268 Pluto Transits to probe and explore as thoroughly as possible into whatever issues
concern us.
For this reason, a Pluto-Mercury transit would obviously lend
itself to study and research work. Hours, days, weeks_and years can
be spent investigating a specific field or topic. Pluto is a planet
associated with intensity and passion, and the mind needs something
to be stimulated or excited about when it transits Mercury. In
general, it is an excellent time to pursue knowledge or embark on a
course of study - anything that will engage or captivate the mind.
Any Pluto-Mercury transit is easier to handle if Mercury has something constructive to focus its attention on.
Pluto beckons Mercury to explore and learn more about what is
hidden and less obvious in life - to ferret out secrets and probe into
mysteries. This could mean anything from investigative journalism
or scientific research to a study of the occult. To some degree,
knowledge confers power, and understanding how something works
is the first step in gaining mastery over it. Under a Pluto-Mercury
transit, the underlying motivation to master a field of study could be
linked to this desire to have power and control in that sphere of life.
In many instances, this is an admirable and healthy endeavour.
Medical researchers need to understand what causes a disease before
they can find a cure or prevention for it. In other cases, however,
seeking knowledge for the sake of power can easily be corrupted.
Under a Pluto-Mercury transit, the temptation to use knowledge in
a negative way - as a means to manipulate or blackmail others may be a path some people can't resist following. Black magic is
more than just the theme for countless movies of a certain genre: it
actually exists, and is practised far more widely than many people
assume. With Pluto-Mercury transits, the whole issue of the uses to
which we put knowledge comes into question. _
As we have seen, Pluto lends power to whatever planet it touches
by transit. Mercury is not only associated with the mind, but also
with speech, writing and other forms of communication. When
Pluto transits Mercury, it isn't only mental power which is increased:
the ability to influence and sway other people through speech and
writing is also enhanced. Conversely, our own opinions and ideas
are open to change when Pluto transits Mercury. Pluto tears down To the Planets and Through the Houses 269 and rebuilds whatever it touches, and when it contacts Mercury,
someone we meet or something we read or study could revolutionize
our beliefs and our usual ways of thinking and looking at life. The
significance of a change in belief or attitude is not to be underestimated. Albert Schweitzer once wrote: 'the greatest discovery of any
generation is that human beings can alter their lives by altering
their attitudes of mind'. Júpiter Werner Heisenberg, a researcher into the
field of atomic physics, also demonstrated that 'the act of observation
itself affects that which is being observed'. 5 Over two thousand years
ago, the Greek philosopher Epictetus observed: 'We are not troubled
by things, but by the opinions which we have of things.' 6 Our mind
thus plays a crucial role in determining what the world is like for us.
Under a Pluto-Mercury transit, the way we perceive life changes,
and therefore our whole world changes.
In the geography of the psyche, one boundary-line stands out
above the rest: the division between what is conscious and what is
unconscious. Pluto is associated with what is hidden or buried in the
unconscious recesses of the psyche. When it transits Mercury, Pluto
compels us to turn our attention towards that region, to probe what
is down there in us. Pluto dispatches Mercury to act as a messenger
between the unconscious and conscious minds. These transits ask that
we delve into our unconscious in order to bring what we find there
back up into conscious awareness. For this reason, any Pluto transit
to Mercury is an ideal time to explore what makes us tick. Pluto
enables Mercury to go deeper than usual, and this is a period during
which psychotherapy, meditation, introspection or, dreamwork could
serve to open up the mind in ways not previously possible. Under
Pluto-Mercury transits, Pluto is capable of leading our minds into
places inside ourselves which we really haven't examined up to
now, and some of what we discover in the depths of our psyche may
not be all that pleasant to face.
Impressions and memories from early life, consciously remembered
or not, distort and obscure how we see life in the present. The
experience of being unloved or repeatedly pushed away as a child
predisposes us to expect rejection later in life. As an adult, we will
interpret other people's behaviour and attitudes towards us in light
of the expectation or belief that they won't like us. They may not be 2 70 Pluto Transits rejecting us; but because this is what we expect, this is preCisely how
we will view their actions in relation to ourselves. In this way our
earlier beliefs are reinforced. It's a vicious and painful cycle, and one
that is hard to break. However, when Pluto transits Mercury, our
minds can probe more deeply than usual, allowing us the opportunity to catch a glimpse of some of our deeply rooted unconscious
beliefs and life-statements. In doing so, we become more aware of
the scripts and patterns that govern the way we perceive, digest and
interpret experience. Becoming aware of these unconscious scripts is
the first step in doing something towards changing them.
Sometimes a Pluto transit to Mercury (especially the conjunction,
square or opposition) manifests in the form of depression. For much
of the time during these transits, our mind may be heavier or more
serious than usual. Thoughts or feelings we were once able to shrug
off easily will cling to us, even obsess us. It is not uncommon to be
obsessed with the thought of death during this period. (Pluto, the god
of death, is touching Mercury, the mind). Dream-s or fantasies about
accidents or illness and other frightening thoughts and premonitions
may intrude into consciousness, awake or asleep. The mind may
periodically be taken over by images of an instinctive or primitive
nature - overwhelming sexual images, powerful aggressive urges,
angry and destructive thoughts and impulses. Pluto grips the mind,
and draws forth images and thoughts that we have usually managed
to keep hidden or have previously denied were there.
Many of us may be shocked by what we are thinking and imagining now, and this can be a disturbing time, especially if we haven't
thought of ourselves as the kind of person who entertains such
compulsions. It may be difficult for us to see anything constructive
in what is happening, but it would help if we realized that Pluto is at
work to bring to the surface parts of ourselves we need to confront in
order to be more whole. Again, as we have discussed earlier, Pluto is
not asking that we act out these thoughts and urges. But in order to
deal effectively with our subterranean impulses and images, they
first need to make themselves known - and that is what Pluto
transiting Mercury does. After they are recognized, we can then
work with the energy contained in these compulsions and complexes.
Working with them - perhaps therapeutically with a counsellor or To the Planets and Through the Houses 2 71 analyst or on our own in some way - means accepting and coming
to a better understanding of the motivations behind these urges.
Taking time to write down our thoughts or to give them some sort of ·
creative expression though drawing, dancing, etc., could help us
deal with them more productively. Bach remedies or various kinds of
body therapies - shiatsu, homeopathy or acupuncture, for instance
-could also enable the body to cope more efficiently with the changes
Pluto-Mercury transits are trying to effect. These transits sometimes
coincide with a temporary mental or creative block, which we have
to face and endure before new energy makes itself felt.
The unconscious is not only a storehouse of early scripts and
patterns: it is also the reservoir of untapped potential and abilities
awaiting to be developed. A journey into the unconscious means the
possibility of contacting talents and facilities which are yet to be
more completely realized. In particular, Pluto transits to Mercury
could serve to reveal latent mental or verbal skills that are not being
utilized to their fullest. We could discover a flair for languages, an
intellectual capacity, or an ability to write and communicate.
Mercury is associated with routine and day-to-day interactions
with the immediate environment. Popping out to the local shop for
more milk, a letter or phone call to or from a friend or relative, a
conversation or chat with the neighbours, a week-end jaunt to the
country:- these all come under the domain of Mercury. During a
Pluto-Mercury transit, it's possible that something fairly routine or
ordinary might end up embroiling us in more complications than
expected, or even could develop into an event of major significance.
In particular, negative undercurrents and unresolved problems
with siblings or other relatives often come to the surface when Pluto
is transiting Mercury. A present concern or situation might be the
agency through which childhood resentments and jealousies reemerge. Pluto brings them out into the open, where they have more
chance of being resolved. Unfortunately, this is not always the endresult, especially in the case of the hard Pluto-Mercury transits.
Some people are unable to transmute the hate, pain or hurt they feel
towards a sibling, or they can't deal with the feelings a sibling has
towards them. If this is the case, they may break off relations with
the relative in question at this time. But, besides describing a direct 272 Pluto Transits conflict between ourselves and a sibling, Pluto transiting Mercury
in one's own chart could signify siblings or relatives who are
facing a difficult period or phase of life. A relative may suffer
emotional or financial setbacks or could fall ill. In some cases, these
transits, particularly if linked to the fourth or eighth houses, indicate
the death of a relative. As with any death, a time to grieve is
necessary. Grieving may involve not only working through sadness,
but also confronting feelings of guilt ('Why didn't I do more?'), or
anger and resentment ('Why did you die now before we could sort
out our problems or do the things we wanted to do together?').
Generally speaking, Pluto-Mercury transits are a time when exploring issues to do with death can lead us to a deeper understanding of
it.
Pluto-Venus The planet Venus is linked to three basic spheres of life: relationships,
creativity and values. When transiting Pluto makes an aspect to
natal Venus, it is within these three areas that change, disruption or
transformation are most likely to occur. We'll examine each separ_
ately.
In terms of relationship issues, Pluto-Venus transits manifest in a
number of different ways. If we are already married or involved in
an important relationship, transiting Pluto will test the strength or
truth of the union, forcing us to look at what is wrong in the
relationship. Things we have been unhappy about in the partnership,
but have never acted on or paid much attention to, make themselves
felt with such an intensity that they have to be acknowledged and
confronted. For instance, a woman came to see me when transiting
Pluto was squaring her natal Venus. For years she had been sexually
frustrated in her marriage, but she kept pushing aside her dissatisfaction. The relationship worked well in so many other ways that she
tried to ignore the sexual problems. However, with transiting Pluto
square her Venus, she could no longer contain her frustration,
although she was afraid to tell her husband and risk stirring trouble
between them. In the end, she found the courage to share her
feelings with him, and they were able to work through their sexual To the Planets and Through the Houses 2 73 problems. As a general rule, if we can face and successfully resolve
the kinds of concerns that Pluto raises when it aspects Venus by
transit, there is a good possibility the relationship will deepen and
grow stronger as a result. What is potentially undermining and
threatening is brought to the surface and cleared. In this way,
Pluto cleanses Venus and purifies the relationship. The relationship
dies as it has been, and is reborn on to a whole new level or way
of being.
In some cases, however, a Pluto transit to Venus (even the transiting trine or sextile) could stir up difficulties or issues which prove
insurmountable. Pluto may reveal such deep-seated differences that,
even with the best intentions, the union cannot survive. One or the
other of the partners may be unwilling to admit to the problems in
the relationship, or may simply be unable to change his or her
habitual patterns of relating. If Pluto is making a conjunction or
square by transit to our Venus, we are often the one who initiates
the break-up. If transiting Pluto is opposing our Venus, then the
other person may end the relationship. However, in practice, even
with a transiting conjunction or square, it may be the partner who
walks out or finishes things. As with any of the transits of the outer
planets to Venus, we will meet change or disruption by choice or by
coercion. If we are unwilling to face the truth in a relationship or are
reluctant to deal with problems that need to be brought to the
surface, then our partner may act in a way which forces us to
confront what we have been avoiding or denying.
A Pluto transit to Venus also could indicate a partner or loved one
experiencing a very difficult and challenging phase of life. He or she
may fall ill, or there could be serious psychological troubles, or
problems with work. In these cases, we are put through tests and
changes as a result of what the partner is facing. In our efforts to
support the other person, we may find resources in ourselves we
didn't even know we had. Finally, in some instances, a Pluto transit
to Venus coincides with the actual death of a partner.* If it is the
relationship itself which 'dies' under this transit, it will need to be
*See Suggested Reading (p. 386) for a list of books dealing with death and the
grieving process. 2 74 Pluto Transits mourned in the same way we would grieve for a person who has
died.
When Pluto transits Venus, present relationship problems act as a
catalyst to awaken deep-seated emotional complexes left over from
childhood. For example, if we discover that our partner is having an
affair, we will not only feel the hurt and betrayal associated with the
immediate situation, but we also will reconnect to emotions still
lurking inside us from infancy when we were threatened by our
caretaker paying more attention to another person. As a child, our
life depends on having someone there to take care of us; not being
the central focus of our caretaker's attention is very frightening, and
gives rise to fears of being neglected, abandoned, or left to die. These
early-life insecurities and traumas can be triggered again by our
present partner's infidelity. This is not to say that the immediate
situation of a partner's indiscretions isn't upsetting in itself: we have
been tricked, deceived and let down, and this alone will provoke
strong reactions. But these natural responses increase in complexity
and intensity when they become entangled with childhood fears of
abandonment and death. Most likely as an adult, our actual physical
survival doesn't depend on our partner's fidelity, and yet the frightened child who lives inside us will react to our mate's unfaithfulness
as if our lives were really at stake.
If this is the case, it's understandable that our reactions to the
situation are going to be more fraught and extreme; we even may
feel like murdering our partner or the other person involved. The
young child who fantasizes destroying a bad parent isn't capable of
carrying through the act, but the adult whose inner child is stirred
in this way is physically mature enough to turn destructive fantasies
into reality. Transiting Pluto to Venus in itself probably wouldn't
evoke a reaction ferocious enough to lead to murder or violence, but
if this transit (or another significant one happening at the same
time) also activates natal Mars, it might provide the necessary impetus
to lead to such extremes. Actually taking it this far - although it
happens - is fortunately not the norm. But it still leaves us with the
question of what can we learn from these situations - what value is
there in having our unresolved infantile complexes brought to the
surface? It is only through reconnecting to complexes buried in our To the Planets and Through the Houses 2 75 unconscious that they can be reclaimed and eventually transformed.
The present difficulties with a partner that occur under a Pluto
transit to Venus serve to bring these complexes to the fore. Once
they are brought to the surface level of awareness, they can be more
fully explored, which is the first step towards working productively
with them. Once freed, the energy trapped within a complex can be
reintegrated into the psyche in more constructive ways. Counselling,
therapy, meditation or certain forms of healing- such as homeopathy,
Bach Flower Remedies, acupuncture, etc. -will aid the process.
We have been discussing Pluto-Venus transits in terms of a
partner arousing our jealousy and anger. However, in many instances I have seen, these transits (especially when transiting Pluto
opposes Venus) manifest in our being on the receiving end of somebody's rage and jealousy. We may be the one who is threatening the
existing relationship, and in doing so, act as the catalyst to activate
our partner's jealousy, envy or rage. (Even if we are completely
innocent, our partner might be imagining that we are engaged in
some kind of deceit, and read his or her worst suspicions into what is
innocuous behaviour on our part.) When Pluto transits Venus, it
asks that we encounter intense emotions and feelings through love
and relationship; if it is not our own feelings that are stirred, we will
then find ourselves the target for someone else's. Again, we must ask
ourselves why have we attracted such a situation. Is there any truth
to our partner's accusations; if so, what needs to be looked at and
discussed in the relationship? Or are we somehow provoking a
partner to express and act out feelings inside ourselves which we
have disowned and projected?
Whether or not we are already involved in a relationship, PlutoVenus transits could bring a new person into our lives for whom·we
feel a strong, irresistible attraction. Something deep is touched and
there may be little choice but to go with our feelings, even if it means
endangering an existing partnership. With Uranus-Venus transits, a
new relationship could serve as a catalyst to change our lives in
some way and then end as suddenly as it began. With NeptuneVenus transits, a new relationship could let us down and disintegrate
within a number of years. But if a new relationship develops under a
Pluto-Venus transit, there is more likelihood it will last and replace 2 76 Pluto Transits an already existing one. The kind of person we fall for under these
transits often is someone-whose natal chart shows the planet Pluto
or the sign of Scorpio prominently configurated. Given the strong
feeling nature of such a person, it's not surprising that these relationships are very intense and call for more commitment and involvement than a partnership that develops when Uranus or Neptune are
transiting in aspect to Venus.
Pluto transits to Venus are times of discovery -we are meant to learn
about parts of ourselves we haven't been fully in touch with before. For
a young person who is new to the whole sphere of relationships, this
transit could mean a fiery, passionate, all-consuming involvement,
and an initiation into the arena of sex and intimacy. For someone who
has had previous experience of relationships, there is still something
new, exciting and more complete about a partnership which is begun
when Pluto is affecting Venus .. In either case, the relationship is likely
to stir parts of us that other relationships haven't touched, and to
arouse our deepest feelings, emotions and complexes. Those of us who
have prided ourselves on our calm, rational and controlled nature may
be in for a surprise.
If we are involved in artistic or creative outlets, these also will be
affected by Pluto transits to Venus. In some instances, the medium in
which we are accustomed to work changes: actors turn to directing,
non-fiction writers take up fiction, and dancers become choreographers. The medium may remain the same, but the message could
alter significantly, reflecting a major shift in philosophy or beliefsystem taking place at this time. In a few cases, a Pluto-Venus
transit has coincided with a person abandoning his or her career in
a creative field in order to pursue some other kind of profession; but
it is more likely that creative people will experience an increase in
artistic inspiration under Pluto-Venus transits. An idea, image, or
theme totally absorbs them, and they are obsessed with giving it
some form of expression. Anything creative which is worked on at
this time will stir powerful emotions, and force artists to face deep
complexes or hitherto buried and unresolved feelings.
However, bttfore new creative inspiration is tapped, it may be
necessary to go through a period in which our creativity is apparently
blocked or stifled. This is because the energy normally used to drive . To the Planets and Through the Houses 2 77 the creative process has been temporarily appropriated by the psyche
for other reasons - probably to effect and support important psychological changes that need to take place at this time. In other words,
our libidinal energy turns inward, and we have less at our disposal
to continue creating in our usual fashion. It's best just to go with
this process - once the inner changes have been effected, a new
influx of creative energy will be available and the whole period can
be looked back upon as a necessary pre-creative depression. Unfortunately, many people, frightened and disturbed by a block of this kind,
may try to force themselves to carry on working during this period,
only to find that the end-results are far from satisfactory. Others may
turn to alcohol or drugs as a way of soothing their frustrations, or in
the hope that these substances will somehow renew their inspiration.
While it's quite natural (and even part of the process) to fight a
creative block in this manner, we will serve our work best by flowing
with a temporary lull in creativity. A non-productive phase may be
necessary in order to give the psyche the time and space needed to
effect the changes dictated by the deeper levels of the unconscious at
this time.
The planet Venus is also associated with the whole issue of values:
what it is we value, find beautiful or hold dear in life. The value of
something is very often determined by its fin~cial worth -therefore
Venus is traditionally linked with money and wealth. Accordingly, a
Pluto transit to Venus could change our financial status; depending
on the nature of the transiting aspect {trine, square or opposition,
etc.) and other factors in the natal chart, extreme reversals of
fortune either way might occur at these times. More broadly, a Pluto
transit to Venus often indicates a shift or change in our value-system
in general: what we previousl}'· valued, treasured or hoped to gain
no longer seem so worthwhile or attractive. When Pluto transits
Venus, our old values slowly fall away and die, and for a while we
may be left confused and uncertain, no longer sure what it is we
really want or desire. An uncomfortable period could ensue during
which we know what we don't want, but don't know what it is
that we do want. By the end of the transit, however, new values
and desires will emerge to replace the old ones.
Our value-system dictates the kinds of choices we make in life. If 278 Pluto Transits we value money, we make choices for money; if we value freedom,
we make choices which would lead to greater freedom; if we value
security, we opt for whatever would give us more security. A change
of values has a far-reaching effect. We may have achieved admirably
in terms of our old value-system, but if these things are no longer
what we find fulfilling, then major adjustments have to be made. In
this way, a Pluto transit to Venus can dramatically undermine the
foundations on which much of our life has been built.
Probably the most important and dramatic change we could
experience under a Pluto-Venus transit is that of learning to love
and value ourselves more. This is easier said than done, and usually
involves having to explore our early life, and those situations, people
and events that contributed to our forming a negative self-image in
the first place. If we don't value ourselves, we are likely to make
choices in life that don't make us very happy. If we come to love and
respect ourselves for who we are, we will naturally make choices
that reflect and support a healthy self-esteem. The kinds of crises
associated with Pluto-Venus transits are far from easy; but if in the
end these enable us to find a greater sense of our own value, our
struggles would certainly not have been in vain.
Pluto-Mars When transiting Pluto aspects Mars, it is a time for us to learn more
about our aggressive drives, power urges, desire-nature and sexuality. In many cases, the effects of these transits can be quite dramatic, especially when transiting Pluto conjuncts, squares or opposes
Mars. Transiting Pluto trine and sextile Mars generally are easier to
handle.
Pluto burrows beneath our usual boundaries and defences: it will
thus bring out of hiding and force us to confront any planetary
energy it aspects by transit. If we have not been in touch with our
aggression, a Pluto transit to Mars will force us to come to terms
with this part of our nature. Just as the sexual drive is an essential
part of our human instinctive behaviour, so too is aggression; the
natural or root aggression we are born with makes it possible for us
to grow and to master life, and is a force that provides the impetus to To the Planets and Through the Houses 2 79 move forward, learn new skills, and evolve into all that we could
become. If we have been lazy and have allowed other people to tell
us what to do and where to go, a Pluto transit to Mars can have the
effect of waking us up. Something happens and we discover a drive
for power or urge for self-expression we didn't know was there.
Under these transits, we may find, perhaps for the first time, what it
is we really want in life and connect with the will and energy needed
to implement and realize these desires. Suddenly there are goals we
are determined to achieve, places we are determined to go, things we
definitely want to learn and do, and people we no longer will allow
to stand in our way.
However, if we already have a grip on our Mars and for years
have been forging ahead in a definite direction, a Pluto-Mars transit
could actually stop us dead in our tracks. External circumstances
may come and block us, and it is impossible or just not feasible to
carry on in the direction we have been heading. Or we lose interest
in our present endeavours - what we have been seeking no longer
seems relevant: something inside says 'Hold on, it's time to take
stock and reconsider your drives and desires.' During this period, it
may feel as if we have no goals or desires at all, but this is an inbetween stage, when the old isn't working but the new hasn't yet
made itself felt. We may just have to sit and wait until new drives
and fresh desires take hold.
Like the Sun, Mars is an animus principle and represents that part
of us which seeks to express our individuality through action, assertion and power. In a woman's chart, a Pluto transit to Mars could
serve to put her in touch with animus energy inside her. If she has
been too passive and submissive, Pluto-Mars transits most likely will
make her more aware of a need to assert herself in her own right.
Dreams about male figures -especially ones who are violent, or who
chase and try to attack her - are indications that the animus is
awakening. However, if she has been too dominated by her animus
side, Pluto-Mars transits could have the effect of blocking or stifling
(temporarily) her aggression and assertion in an attempt to help her
discover ways to relate to the world other than through her Mars.
Pluto-Mars transits also activate animus issues for men, and if a .
man has not been living out his assertive side, he will probably 280 Pluto Transits discover it under these transits. However, if he is too animus-driven,
then Pluto-Mars transits could be the time when he needs to learn
how to alter or temper his overpowering drive or ambition.
So far, we have discussed two different ways in which Pluto
transits act on Mars. In the first instance, these transits awaken a
previously latent or hidden assertive nature, whereas in the second
case, our assertive side is already active, but Pluto changes the focus
of our aims and drives, or modifies the manner in which we vent our
aggression. As a general rule, transiting Pluto will (r) intensify
whatever planetary energy it aspects by transit, or (2) will challenge
and transform the usual way we express the principles represented
by that planet. For example, consider the effects of Pluto-Mars
transits on the expression of anger or aggression. If up to now we
really have not been in touch with our anger, a Pluto-Mars transit
could reveal a bottled-up rage which we hadn't even suspected was
there. Some degree of anger in life is healthy - we need it to fight
injustice or to deal with people and things that are blocking us
getting on with what it is we feel we have to do. But a Pluto-Mars
transit (in particular transiting Pluto conjunct, square or opposing
Mars) will often reveal a different kind of anger - a much earlier,
more primitive infantile rage that has been buried deep inside us for
a long time. And this kind of rage is anything but civil*
However, for those of us who always have exhibited a tendency
towards anger and rash behaviour, Pluto-Mars transits will serve a
different purpose. We don't need to discover our deep rage - we
already know it's there and are frequently taken over by it. Instead,
our lessen is to transmute or redirect that destructive anger into more
useful or constructive channels. In these instances, Pluto-Mars transits have an uncanny way of stirring anger at the same time as
creating circumstances which make it impossible or impractical to
express our venom. Rather than unleashing our rage and attacking
other people, we have to find alternative ways to give expression to
our anger, or to find the root cause of our anger and frustration in
order to eradicate it.
*For a fuller discussion on the nature of infantile rage and how to work with it, see
ch. 8, pp. 226-33 and pp. 242-5. To the Planets and Through the Houses 281 For example, a woman came for a reading who had transiting
Pluto in Scorpio conjuncting her natal Mars. She was not someone
who needed to discover her belligerent side, since all her life her
immediate response to people who frustrated or hurt her had been to
hurl rage and abuse at them. In the course of 3 5 years, she had
managed to accrue two broken marriages, a whole string of friendships that had ended badly, numerous jobs she had stormed out of,
and three lawsuits lodged against people she felt had maligned her.
At the time of our reading, she was very angry at her father over a
remark he had made about her. However, he was so ill and in such a
confused state that she didn't feel right about expressing that anger
directly to him. She found herself in an awkward situation: her
normal pattern would be to act out her rage, but in this case she felt
that the circumstances prohibited her from doing so. The PlutoMars transit was asking that she deal with her anger differently than
she would have done in the past. Pluto wanted her to transform the
use of her Mars energy, to contain it and sit with it rather than
unleash it. Over the following few months, she joined a dance and
movement class which allowed her some physical expression of
these emotions. She took time each day to write about her feelings
and explore the kinds of frustration and hurt she carried in her from
childhood. In doing so, she not only physically discharged her anger,
but she was also able to use her rage as a way of looking more
deeply into her psyche and early complexes.
When transiting Pluto conjuncts, squares or opposes natal Mars,
we may be feeling violent, although many of us will do what we can
to deny it. However, if we try to suppress these feelings, we increase
our chances of provoking others to be violent towards us (this is true
of any hard transit of Pluto to Mars, but especially in the case of
transiting Pluto opposing Mars). What we deny in ourselves, we
tend to attract from others. Denying our violent feelings also can
result in these emotions turning inward against the self, manifesting
in the form of self-destructive urges and behaviour (more likely in
the case of transiting Pluto conjunct or square Mars) or even illness.
If we can find the courage to face our anger and rage, we lessen the
risk of attracting it from the outside and stem the dangers inherent
in allowing it to fester inwardly. Again, owning our violence does 282 Pluto Transits not mean having to live it out; once it is acknowledged, we have the
opportunity to find other ways to work with or direct that energy.*
Under Pluto-Mars transits, we can sublimate, redirect or learn
more about our Mars energy through various kinds of external
outlet. For instance, the aggressive urge and need to exert power
and influence could be satisfied by joining causes and organizations
in which we fight for changes we feel need to be made in society.
Some people may become involved with projects designed to battle
poverty or disease. Or we could test our assertiveness and power
through body-building, competitive sports or by pitting ourselves
against the elements -camping, climbing or sailing.
It's not only assertiveness and aggression that Pluto transits to
Mars stir and alter. These transits can also affect our sexual nature
and drive. There are a few general rules we can apply here: (I)
people who have been out of touch with their sexuality could wake
up to its existence; and (2) people who are already venting their
sexual drives quite openly or freely may find that a Pluto-Mars
transit inhibits or blocks their usual mode of expression and ultimately changes the way they relate sexually to others~ Obviously,
how these transits manifest depends a great deal on age. If we are I 5
years old and transiting Pluto aspects Mars, it is likely to manifest in
issues related to the awakening of sexuality. Teenagers under these
transits could become obsessed with sex or frightened by the strong
feelings and compulsions it arouses in them. In certain cases, they
may be the victims of sexual abuse. 7
In adults, Pluto-Mars transits can also indicate the need to confront and to understand better their sexuality. These transits may
force people to acknowledge sexual frustration and difficulties. One
woman who came for a reading had been married for 20 years and
had never felt sexually satisfied with her husband. She had put up
with the problem for all that time, but when transiting Pluto squared
her Mars she could no longer tolerate the situation. Unable to
resolve the sexual problems with her husband, she left him and soon
after became involved with a man with whom she found a fulfilling •see ch. 8, pp. 242-5. To the Planets and Through the Houses 283 physical relationship. In another case, a man had been celibate for
most of his life, but when transiting Pluto conjuncted his Mars he
finally acknowledged his homosexuality and joined a group through
which he could meet other men. These examples illustrate how
Pluto compels us into the sphere represented by the planet it is
aspecting by transit.
·
However, Pluto also can have the effect of blocking, inhibiting or
altering sexual expression - especially if our tendency has been to
misuse or overdo that energy. Previously celibate people may discover sex under these transits, but the converse is also true: if we
have a pattern of promiscuity or have been dominated by our sexual
drives and appetites, a Pluto transit to Mars could bring experiences
which result in our changing these trends. One stage of the process
of change may involve temporarily losing our sexual drive. We
might fear that it is gone forever, later to discover that it returns, but
with a different quality.
Pluto-Mars transits can affect our sexual expression, aggressive
urges, the animus side of our nature, or the way we pursue our
goals. Transiting Mars conjunct, square or opposing natal Mars in
particular can be very difficult and not everyone will succeed in
handling these times in a positive way. But if we can face and
successfully deal with such transits, they offer a tremendous opportunity for psychological growth, personality development and for
the wise and judicious use of our strengths.
Pluto-Jupiter
Faced with a world which often seems indifferent or chaotic, we
search for ways to give meaning to our existence. We feel more
secure if we can make sense of what happens to us in life by fitting
our experiences into some larger pattern or all-encompassing explanatory framework. The planet Jupiter is associated with the
symbol-making capacity of the psyche - the inclination to attribute
meaning to events and random incoming stimuli which we encounter in the course of daily living.
Because Pluto tears downs and rebuilds whatever it touches,
when it aspects Jupiter by transit, we may find ourselves disillusioned 284 Pluto Transits or let down by what we have previously believed in. The way in
which we have been finding meaning in life or making sense of the
world may no longer work, and anomalies in our belief-systems
become apparent, or we question our image of God. Is there a God at
all? If God exists, how could He allow the kind of suffering and pain
we see all around us? The death of a philosophy or religious conviction can leave us shattered, bereft and confused: the ground is taken
from under our feet and we don't know what to believe in any more.
The loss of a dearly held belief-system needs to be mourned in much
the same way as any death. We will not only feel sad and aimless,
but we also could feel angry and betrayed by our faith, or guilty and
punishable for no longer believing in it. Eventually, after an empty
period during which our old beliefs aren't working but no new ones
have yet been found, we can emerge renewed and with a restored
vision of life and its meaning.
However, Pluto can also arouse and bring to life the principle
represented by the planet it is aspecting by transit. If up to now we
have not been very concerned with the overall meaning of existence,
a Pluto-Jupiter transit could change all this. A book we read, a
lecture we .attend, a 'chance' meeting with someone who opens us
to new ideas could plunge us into the whole realm of metaphysics,
philosophy and religion. Under these transits, our lives could change
radically as a result of a new faith or belief-system that grips us
intensely. The effect is similar to a conversion - we sometimes
become totally absorbed with our newly found beliefs or with the
entire sphere of philosophy and religion in general. Neither Jupiter
nor Pluto does things by halves, and when these two planets are
linked by transit we go to extremes- we can't read enough, we can't
study enough, we can't devote ourselves enough. Suddenly there is
an urgency, a pressing need to probe the 'whys and wherefores' of
existence, to find the truth and to live it. Friends and family may
look on in amazement, wondering what has come over us.
A change of philosophy that occurs under a Pluto transit to
Jupiter is likely to take hold and last for a long time. Transiting Pluto
conjunct or square natal Jupiter are the clearest indications of major
changes in our belief-system or the discovery of a new philosophy
that obsesses us. When transiting Pluto opposes Jupiter, difficulties To the Planets and Through the Houses 285 could also come through external agencies: other people challenge
and oppose our views or we are victimized for our religious convictions, whereas transiting Pluto trine or sextile Jupiter will not usually
affect us as dramatically: changes will come but normally they will
be easier to accommodate.
Jupiter is also associated with travel and long journeys. When
transiting Pluto aspects Jupiter, it means that we will meet Pluto
through this area. Since Pluto is the deity associated with death, in a
small number of cases, it's possible that travelling under difficult
Pluto-Jupiter transits coUld entail facing danger, intrigue, risk, or
even a life or death situation. However, rather than an actual
physical death, these transits are more likely to manifest in our
going through a major psychological death and rebirth: our whole
lives and way of seeing the world could be drastically changed as a
result of a journey we make. This could happen in a number of
different ways, but one thing is certain - while travelling or visiting
abroad, we will attract experiences that profoundly affect us. Under
these transits, we might fall deeply in love with someone we meet
while travelling, or come across people who open up our lives in a
new way. We may have a life-changing inner experience on a
journey, moved by the site of an ancient ruin or a visit to a holy land
or temple. The culture and philosophy of the country we are touring
could stimulate whole new ways of thinking and looking at ourselves
and the world. If we travel when transiting Pluto is aspecting
Jupiter, we are not likely to return home the same person as when
we left- if we return at all. Under a Pluto-Jupiter transit, we might
leave our homeland and emigrate to another country. This could
happen by choice or because political, social or economic circumstances force us to do so.
With a difficult natal aspect between Jupiter and another planet in
our birthchart, we sometimes express the principle represented by
the planet Jupiter is aspecting in a rather extreme fashion. For
instance, if we have a hard natal Jupiter-sun aspect, our ego or
sense of self will be over-inflated at times. If Jupiter is squaring the
Moon at birth, we are prone to excessive displays of emotion: we go
overboard with our feelings or experience dramatic mood swings,
one day very high, the next day very low. Stressful natal Jupiter 286 Pluto Transits aspects to Mercury indicate a proclivity to live too much in the head
- to overdo cerebral activity - or the tendency to talk too much, and
to embellish or exaggerate what we communicate. When transiting
Pluto makes an aspect to natal Jupiter, it will also trigger any planet
which Jupiter aspects in the birthchart - therefore the transit will
also bring out our tendency to go to extremes in the sphere of life
represented by that planet. As a result, we are given an opportunity
to learn about that part of our nature, and possibly to do something
to alter or transmute our pattern of overdoing in this area.
An example will help illustrate how this works. A young man of
22 was born with a natal square between Venus and Jupiter. When
transiting Pluto conjuncted his Jupiter it also squared natal Venus at
the same time. In effect, the Pluto transit brought out the VenusJupiter square, which in him manifested in his getting carried away
in romantic situations. As might be expected, he fell in love under
this Pluto transit, but this was no ordinary romance- it was the love
to end all loves. Nor, to him, was she an ordinary woman, but a
goddess whom he idealized and worshipped. He totally centred his
life around her, giving up a promising career and abandoning his
friends and social circle in order to move to the city where she lived.
By the end of the first year of their relationship, she was finding it
increasingly difficult to cope with his passionate and intense nature,
and she began to feel unbearably cramped and suffocated. As she
grew more irritated and distant, he reacted by holding on even
tighter. Finally, after r8 months of living together, she asked him to
move out. Devastated by the break-up, he sank into a deep depression
and finally sought the help of a psychotherapist, with whom he was
able to examine and better understand his behaviour, and what in
his nature and background contributed to his tendency to overidealize women and glamorize his relationships with them. Transiting Pluto brought to the surface the Venus-Jupiter square in such a
way that he was broken down, changed and transformed through
the experience.
Sometimes the kind of obsessiveness indicated by Pluto-Jupiter
transits can be highly productive. A woman came to see me while
transiting Pluto was conjuncting her Jupiter. Her natal Jupiter
squared Mercury, so the Pluto transit was also activating this Square, To the Planets and Through the Houses 287 and the overall effect was to stimulate her mind in a way it had
never been aroused before. She would wake up in the middle of the
night, her mind afire with revelations and insights into different
situations in her life, both past and present. Under this transit, her
perception was heightened and she was able to understand concepts
that previously had eluded her. She started to keep a journal at this
time and in doing so discovered she had a talent for writing.
Jupiter represents a principle which encourages us to look towards
the future - to our aims and direction in life. For instance, during a
Jupiter return (when transiting Jupiter comes back to its natal
placement), we often become excited about new prospects or possibilities we see for ourselves in the near future. However, when
transiting Pluto forms a hard aspect to Jupiter, we are likely to go
throughaperiodduringwhichouralreadyexistingaimsarequestioned
or challenged. What formerly enticed us or pulled us forward may no
longer seem so desirable, or we could meet insurmountable blocks that
force us to rethink the direction in which we have been heading. We
may experience a phase of not knowing what our goals are - a
depressing feeling of being lost: we used to know where we were going,
but now it seems we have no future and nowhere that beckons us. Or
we see a future, but it looks doomed, dark, frightening and bleak, as if
something threatening and ominous awaits us around the next
corner, maybe even death itself. Our immediate reaction may be
thoughts of suicide and ending it all. But the best advice is to wait it out,
while our psyche reorganizes itself. As with any death or loss, we need
time to mourn for our lost future, for those possibilities we hoped to
realize but which have now betrayed us. We may have little choice but
to stay stuck in this dark place for a while, since Pluto might
temporarily force Jupiter and our sense offuture 'underground'; but,
given time, new directions and aims will emerge and we will act from
greater conviction and a deepened sense of purpose.
Pluto-Saturn In order to understand the effects transiting Pluto has on Saturn, we
have to remind ourselves about the nature of Saturn in the chart. In
general, Saturn shows our weak spots, those spheres of life in which 288 Pluto Transits we are insecure, vulnerable and easily wounded. We all worry about
something- whether we are lovable enough, pretty enough, masculine enough, smart enough, etc. Saturn reveals where we are afraid
to be seen as stupid, ugly, inadequate or inept. For instance, if
Saturn is in Gemini (or in difficult aspect to Mercury or in the third
house), we are concerned about our intellectual abilities as well as
our capacity to communicate and to be articulate. If Saturn is in
Libra (or in difficult aspect to Venus or in the seventh house), we feel
uneasy in close relationships; we fear others won't like us or that we
are incapable offorming satisfying partnerships. Sometimes we compensate for our Saturnian insecurities by trying to improve ourselves
in the area in which we feel weak. Saturn in the third, for instance,
could make a great deal of effort to develop the mind. Saturn in the
seventh may work hard to improve the quality of relationships. In
the end, through hard work and perseverance, we become increasingly adept in the area of our chart Saturn influences.
Gaining mastery and security in Saturn's domain takes time, and
until we do achieve this (if ever), many of us will attempt to hide or
deny where we feel weak and vulnerable. As a way of protecting
ourselves against hurt, we erect defences in those areas. We don't
enjoy having our weaknesses and. inadequacies exposed, so we
carefully try to avoid any situations which could trigger them. We
put on a good show, doing our best to appear fulfilled, happy,
attractive, intelligent or whatever. Such endeavours to conceal our
pain and insecurities could succeed for a while; but when transiting
Pluto aspects Saturn our defences will be challenged and we may be
forced to face what we are most afraid of looking at in ourselves.
Saturn builds barriers; Pluto, however, tears them down.
Transiting Pluto trine or sextile Saturn tends to do this more
gently and with less upheaval, but the conjunction, square or opposition often hit very hard. They strip away our masks and expose that
part of us which is most vulnerable and raw. In some cases, this is
akin to a breakdown - the devastated ego is laid bare, and we may
find it difficult to function as usual in everyday life. We might look
for ways to fight or escape from the pain we are feeling, but the real
healing can come only after the pain is accepted and faced. A brief
case history will help to clarify how this works. To the Planets and Through the Houses 289 Jim was 3 I when transiting Pluto first conjuncted his natal tenthhouse Saturn in the early degrees of Scorpio. He had worked hard to
establish himself in a business career, and had hopes of advancement
within the company that employed him. However, when the post he
had his eye on became vacant, another person was given the job.
Jim was shocked and hurt. He had never readily expressed many of
his feelings, but this situation triggered an overwhelming reaction,
and he couldn't hide the anger, outrage and jealousy he felt. Transiting Pluto over his Saturn broke down his 'nice guy' favade, and
revealed an array of intense 'Scorpionic' emotions beneath the surface. He sank into a deep depression, at which point he sought
astrological counselling.
Through the chart reading, Jim became aware of a sense of
inadequacy and fear of failure he had carried inside all his life. As
long as he did well at his job, he was able to defend himself against
these feelings of worthlessness. But as soon as he didn't receive the
kind of recognition he needed to bolster his identity, his defences
collapsed and he was forced to face his underlying negative selfimage. His immediate response was to leave the company and find
another job through which he could prove himself. It didn't take
him long to realize that in doing so, he was only seeking another
way to compensate for the inner belief that he was a useless and
incapable person. Up to that point, his whole life was one attempt
after another to deny and prove wrong what he inwardly felt about
himself- that he was no good.
Instead of looking for a different job, Jim decided it would be more
beneficial to stay with his feelings, unpleasant as they were, and use
them as a pivot point from which he could explore his inner world.
Where had his personal myth of inadequacy come from? Why did he
feel that way? With the help of astrological counselling, he came to
understand how his eatly childhood environment had contributed
to his feelings of insecurity. His father was intelligent and hardworking, but didn't have the kind of personality or flair which
inspired confidence in others. He stayed in the same firm for his
whole working life, but never achieved much recognition and never
advanced within it. Jim's mother, who was born with Sun conjunct
Saturn in her tenth house, was disappointed by her husband's lack 290 Pluto Transits of success, and didn't hide the fact. Father is the first role-model for
maleness, and in Jim's case, the model he inherited was one of
failure and defeat. To combat these feelings, Jim was determined to
rise to the top. In effect, his basic motivation in life was to win his
mother's love. If he were successful, he would prove to his mother
that, unlike the father, he was worth loving.
Failing to achieve his promotion opened the way for Jim to discover
the deeper, hidden motives underlying his ambition and need to
succeed. Underneath he was convinced he (like his father) was no
good, and as a result, he was determined to prove his worth. But
how could he really succeed if deep inside he felt he was inept and
ineffective? How can we find love if underneath we believe we are
unlovable? Ultimately, life reflects back to us our deepest beliefs
about ourselves. In the end, despite all his efforts to achieve positive
recognition, Jim felt a failure. The only way he could free himself
from this vicious cycle was to become aware that ·he was in it.
Transiting Pluto conjunct his Saturn toppled the framework upon
which he was building his life, and created a situation which compelled him to look inside himself. Now that he had gained some
awareness of his early wounds and conditioning, he could begin the
process of healing them and finding his sense of worth from within
himself, rather than having his self-esteem remain dependent on
pleasing his mother. He could now begin to make more adult
decisions about what it was he really wanted in life.
Saturn is the planet associated with boundaries. When transiting
Pluto aspects Saturn, a force is set into operation which challenges
the boundaries, limitations, and inhibitions we have imposed on
ourselves. We might feel these destructuring urges so strongly that
we are compelled to break free of restricting self-definitions with
which we have circumscribed our lives. A married woman previously
committed to her husband and family could find herself no longer
· able to function happily solely within that structure: she may want
to break out, and experience other parts of herself and other aspects
of life. A man who always has been quiet, responsible and contained
may, under these transits, experience a powerful urge to free himself
of this persona. The boundaries between conscious and unconscious,
between what is allowed and what is not allowed, between what is To the Planets and Through the Houses 29I and what could be, are among the first restrictions that Pluto will
try to tear down and change when it transits Saturn. If Pluto succeeds in undermining any of these boundaries, much of what we
have suppressed or kept buried will erupt into consciousness, demanding its due. Obviously, such transits play havoc with our lives. And
yet they offer the possibility of growth and change in a way that few
other transits can. An astrological reading at this time won't stop
what is happening or remove the conflicts, but it enables us to
perceive more clearly what is going on and gives some indication of
the kinds of changes that need to be made and the areas of life most
affected. The chart can give us a perspective through which to view
what we are experiencing, and in this way make the whole process
more meaningful, smooth and effective.
However, in many instances when transiting Pluto aspects Saturn
(especially in the case of transiting Pluto opposition or square natal
Saturn), we don't feel as if something inside us wants to break down
boundaries and make changes; rather we feel as if something external
is forcing us to change, over which we have little control. Call it fate
or the deeper Self working through outside circumstances, but the
result is the same: we have to face some kind of change or crisis in
our life. How we have been deriving our sense of security or our
sense of who we are will be disrupted, and even though it doesn't
seem to be of our own conscious choice or making, it has none the
less found its way to our doorstep for us to deal with. At this point,
some of us may try to dig our heels in and resist change more
strongly than ever. We can rant, rave and moan about our fate- we
can blame it on others or on God - and yet, in the end, what we are
confronting is our problem and our challenge. If we can find meaning
or relevance in what we have to go through, we will be able to make
constructive use of this period.
Saturn is associated with anything that limits or defines us - and
the most obvious thing that does this is our physical body. Most of us
define where we end and another person begins by the boundary
line of our bodies. When transiting Pluto aspects Saturn, it may in
certain cases break down the body through illness. Sometimes physical illness is the last resort - the only way the psyche can speak to us
or get through to us that certain changes need to be made in our 292 Pluto Transits lives. Olivia's case history on page 360 is an example, among other
things, of a Pluto transit to Saturn working in this way.
Pluto transits to Saturn sometimes indicate a period in our lives
when we run into trouble with authority figures or with the law
itself. Again, in these situations, we can detect the attempts of Pluto
to tear down and de-structure anything that represents a boundary,
rule, or ring-pass-not (especially those that are unfair or stand in the
way of progress and needed change). None the less, issues with
authority figures can be quite a complex psychological matter usually relating to problems with parents during childhood and the
growing-up years. We may have a genuine grievance against our
boss, the law, the state or the Prime Minister; but if the way in
which we express our dissatisfaction is accompanied and mixed up
with unresolved anger or resentment towards mother or father, it
will manifest with an uncontrollable intensity al;ld produce extreme
behaviour that in the end will hinder our achieving the kinds of
changes we wish to implement. The task here is to disentangle our
infantile anger towards mother or father from the legitimate and
positive reforms we are promoting. No easy job, but a worthwhile
one, not only for the sake of promoting a cause, but also in the name
of gaining greater psychological self-knowledge and maturity.
Obviously, the effects of these transit (as with any transit) depend
to a large degree on our age. Children with transiting Pluto aspecting
Saturn are more likely to experience this as a time when their
security is threatened in some way, usually through disruptions
happening to the family that upset existing routines or structures in
their lives. Teenagers and young adults could experience the more
rebellious side of these transits, or go through a phase in which they
feel exceptionally vulnerable and tested by the kinds of difficulties
naturally associated with adolescence and the task of breaking away
from the womb of the family and establishing an independent existence. Adults generally relate to these transits in terms of changes in
self-definition and periods in which their defences break down and
they have to face their innermost fears or insecurities. For elderly
people, retirement issues and the loss of loved ones could arise under
Pluto-Saturn transits. Illness could occur under Pluto-Saturn transits
at any age. To the Planets and Through the Houses 293 No transit exists in isolation. Not only are there other transits and
possibly important progressions occurring, but a single transiting
planet will quite often aspect more than one planet. For instance, if
there is a natal Venus-Saturn square, then transiting Pluto aspecting
Saturn also will make a transiting aspect to Venus around the same
time. This means that transiting Pluto will rout out and stir deeply
ingrained issues not only to do with natal Saturn but with the natal
Venus-Saturn square as well- such as problems with one's sense of
self-worth and esteem, long-standing difficulties in relating to others,
or conflicts and blocks within the sphere of creativity. And when
transiting Pluto aspects Saturn, it will also be influencing the house
or houses in the chart that Saturn rules, i.e. the houses with
Capricorn and Aquarius on the cusp or contained within them.
Pluto-Uranus Both Pluto and Uranus symbolize forces that tear down what is
existing in order to make room for the new. When they are brought
together by transit, their combined effects can be both explosive and
revitalizing.
Uranus spends seven years in one sign, and people born within
that period will share its sign placement. Therefore, when transiting
Pluto aspects Uranus, many individuals will be experiencing the
same transit. These periods often mark times when new ideas,
movements, fashion or trends sweep through the collective and
captivate the interest and attention of large groups of people around
the world. We might observe that a number of our friends or
associates seem to be experiencing changes in their lives and in their
way of thinking similar to those we are going through. Such changes
usually reflect evolving social trends and ideas that are circulating
collectively, and how these shifts in collective consciousness affect us
personally will be shown by the house placements involved (the
house placement of natal Uranus, transiting Pluto, and the house
with Aquarius on the cusp or contained within it).
Basically, a transit of Pluto to Uranus intensifies Uranus's natural
predilection for change, expansion and growth. Even though we are
probably being influenced by larger social trends, most of us will 294 Pluto Transits experience these Uranian urges as stemming from inside ourselves especially in the case of transiting Pluto conjunct, sextile, square or
trine natal Uranus. Transiting Pluto opposing Uranus, however,
could carry with it a greater sense of external factors forcing disruption or upheaval onto us. With the opposition, we are also more
likely to find that our vision of how things should be is in conflict
with society or with others around us. In general, transiting Pluto
sextile or trine Uranus indicates a fairly smooth and gradual transition into a new phase of life, while the harder transits such as the
conjunction, square or opposition may be accompanied by more
obvious turmoil, drama and strain.
Mythologically, Ouranus was essentially a sky-god who viewed
life from on high. In astrology, this planet is associated with abstract
systems of thought and with the search for visions and ideals which
help order and give meaning to existence. It is also linked with the
revolutionary and the inventor, both of whom are concerned with
finding new and better ways to do things. When transiting Pluto
aspects Uranus, a part of us is activated that wants to break free of
habitual patterns of behaviour that are no longer serving our growth.
The psyche does a flip: if we have crystallized into rigid and predictable routines and set beliefs, these transits disturb the status quo. We
might find ourselves excited by some new ideas or visions, which
come to us through something we read or hear. Our political or
social awareness could also blossom and draw us into causes or
groups with which we become intensely involved. In her book The
Aquarian Conspiracy, Marilyn Ferguson discusses what she calls 'the
entry-point' experience - inner or outer events that disturb our old
way of viewing the world, alter our priorities, and open us to the
possibility of a brighter, more expansive and meaningful dimension
of life. 8 Pluto-Uranus transits often coincide with such entry-points:
they mark times when we are so stimulated and aroused, we can no
longer stay the same as we have been.
Extremism can be a problem with Pluto-Uranus transits, especially
with the transiting conjunction or square. We could easily be carried
away by a need to completely change our lives, and in one fell swoop
throw away everything we have worked hard to establish or anything which represents the past. Or we could be taken over by a To the Planets and Through the Houses 295 compulsion to change the world; fanatically advocating any means
to achieve our ends. Or we think we have found the one answer to
everything for everyone, and feel it is our mission to convert others
to this truth. In the case of transiting Pluto conjunct Uranus, the
house in which this is taking place will indicate an area of life we
actively want to revolutionize and transform, or in which change
and disruption is somehow forced on us. One way or another, we
won't be able to carry on with the affairs of that house in our usual
fashion. Both the conjunction and the square evoke stubborn behaviour, and a tendency to stick adamantly to our views. With Pluto
transiting Uranus, whatever we feel we feel strongly: we are absolutely sure we are right, and are not likely to listen to anyone who
tries to tell us differently.
We have been discussing Pluto-Uranus transits in terms of throwing off the shackles of tradition and conservatism. However, if we
have always opted for independence and freedom and never settled
down or adhered to conventionality, it is possible that a PlutoUranus transit could turn us round the other way. Seemingly overnight our motivation shifts and all we want is to put down roots,
and find security. In some cases (especially with the opposition),
these kinds of change may appear to be forced on us by circumstances
in which we find ourselves caught. And yet, some part of our psyche
has probably unconsciously created the situation, because, whether
we like it or not, the time has come to move in other directions from
those we have already travelled.
Most positively, Pluto-Uranus transits give us the opportunity to
contact and make better use of our latent talents and abilities. We
discover new things about ourselves and about the world we live in.
Previously we may have felt limited by certain blocks or apprehensions, but now barriers break down, and our creative expression, our unique attributes, are able to flow more freely. We are
especially capable of inventive and original achievements at this
time. These transits also can indicate a period when we become so
enthused or excited about a new field of interest that we are motivated to study and learn as much about it as possible - computer
technology, astrology, metaphysics and other 'new-age' philosophies
are commonly associated with Uranus, and an interest in these 296 Pluto Transits could be stimulated now. However, there is an erratic or haphazard
component to the hard Pluto-Uranus transits: we venture off enthusiastically in one direction only to decide later it doesn't suit us, and
then run off excitedly towards something else.
In general this is a time to be flexible, to experiment with new
ways of being, and look to the future ratht:r than the past. The
danger is in going overboard and too far, too fast. If we can channel
the intensity associated with Pluto-Uranus transits into constructive
changes and outlets, we may find ourselves looking back on these
periods as some of the most eventful and exciting times in our lives.
And even if we do fly too high and crash down to earth with a thud,
we have probably learned valuable lessons in the process.
Pluto-Neptune Pluto can stimulate and arouse whatever planet it touches by transit,
but it can also break down and transform that planetary principle as
well. Neptune is associated with dreams, fantasies, ideals, illusions,
transcendence and creative inspiration. When transiting Pluto contacts Neptune, facets of our desire-nature are powerfully awakenedwe might become obsessed or 'taken over' by strong yearnings or
ideals. However, these transits also could denote a period when
dearly held dreams and ideals are shattered or destroyed. Because of
the slow movement of both these planets, people alive today will
only experience the conjunction, sextile, or square of transiting
Pluto to Neptune. In general, transiting Pluto conjunct or square
natal Neptune is more potent than the transiting sextile and more
difficult to handle.
When transiting Pluto aspects Neptune (especially in the case of
the conjunction and square), significant inner changes take place.
Pluto wakes up and activates the Neptunian principle in us, that part
of us that seeks to dissolve our rigid ego-boundaries and merge with
something greater than ourselves. For some people, this entails the
awakening of spiritual yearnings - the desire to transcend the
confines of material existence or go beyond the usual 'me-in-here
versus you-out-there' way of seeing life and others. We might be
drawn to religion, mysticism, depth psychology, meditation groups, To the Planets and Through the Houses 297 or any cult which promises access to the divine and numinous.
Often this is a positive experience, an opening to another dimension
of life which can give greater meaning and fulfilment. However,
whenever Neptune is activated some degree of discrimination is
needed. Otherwise, we could lose ourselves and be swept away into
cults or groups which later on we realize are misguided or extreme.
Pluto-Neptune transits don't only arouse spiritual aspirations.
Humanitarian, social or political visions of a better and more ideal
world also are stimulated under these transits. Conversely, PlutoNeptune transits sometimes shatter our dreams and challenge the
beliefs or goals upon which we have based our lives. For instance,
many of the people born with Neptune in Virgo who believed
material wealth and success were the most important things in life
experienced a change in their dreams and ideals when transiting
Pluto passed through Virgo in the rg6os. In certain cases, they gave
up secure jobs in the 'rat race' in order to participate in the pursuit
of the spiritual aims and objectives embodied by the hippie movement, humanistic psychology, and the influx of ideas into the West
from Eastern religion. Similarly, the generation with Neptune in
Libra who held a vision of love and peace for the planet found their
ideals slipping away and transforming as Pluto moved through Libra
in the seventies. Discovering that what we have believed in is not
the answer to everythiqg can be very disorientating, as if the ground
has been taken away from beneath our feet. Yet we will not be going
through these changes alone. Neptune spends approximately 14
years in a sign, so whole groups of people will experience a Pluto
transit to Neptune around the same time. Again, as in the case of
any outer planet contact to another outer planet, many of our
contemporaries will be facing crises or changes similar to those we
are experiencing.
The kinds of longing stimulated by Pluto-Neptune transits also
vary according to the house position of Neptune in the birthchart (as
well as the house with Pisces on the cusp or contained within it). For
instance, if Neptune is in the eighth and Pluto comes along to
conjunct or square it, sexual compulsions could be activated. People
with this placement may find themselves driven or taken over by
intense sexual urges and fantasies, perhaps in the form of an obses- 298 Pluto Transits sion about a particular person who may or may not be attainable.
The effect of transiting Pluto aspecting a third-house Neptune might
be a thirst for knowledge and learning. If transiting Pluto makes a
contact to natal Neptune in the tenth house, the urges and longings
of Neptune are likely to manifest in the sphere of work and career
ambitions. But we must remember that Neptune is also the planet
associated with making sacrifices and giving up attachments. Therefore, a transit of Pluto to Neptune in a particular house could also
ask that we sacrifice or let go of some of our dreams and longings in
that area. Transiting Pluto aspecting Neptune in the eighth might
not only arouse our sexual fantasies, but it can also mean that these
may have to be given up, transcended or redirected in some way.
Even if we successfully reallze our fantasies in this domain, we may
discover that they haven't fulfilled us in the way we hoped they
would. Similarly, transiting Pluto aspecting Neptune in the third can
entail having to make sacrifices in relation to a third-house concern
-one young woman with this transit left school in order to look after
her mother who fell ill during this period. Transiting Pluto aspecting a
tenth-house Neptune could mean that certain of our career goals will
have to be abandoned- perhaps we realize that our existing goals are
unattainable and need to be relinquished or levelled down in scale.
In general, Pluto transits to Neptune (especially the conjunction
and the square) will activate the unconsciOI}S mind and the feeling
side of life. Creative inspiration can be aroused, along with greater
empathy, compassion and openness to others. Intuitive and psychic
faculties come to the fore, and we may experience an increased
capacity to love ar;td to perceive beauty around us. However, for
some people Pluto-Neptune transits are not so easy, especially if
natal Neptune is in difficult angle to the personal planets. In these
cases, the transit of Pluto to Neptune will bring out the troublesome
natal aspect, intensifying the difficulties. For example, a man came
for a reading who had the Moon in Júpiter degrees of Leo squared to
Neptune in 3 degrees of Scorpio. When transiting Pluto came over
his Neptune, it squared the Moon in Leo as well, triggering the natal
Moon-Pluto square. He fell madly in love with a woman whom he
believed was the true love of his life, only to be painfully disillusioned
within six months. This same man had lost his mother when he was To the Planets and Through the Houses 299 very young, and the transit reactivated all the feelings connected to
that early loss. A Pluto transit to Neptune which activates difficult
natal aspects to Neptune can be very hard going- we are prone to
deception and disillusionment or we may find ourselves at the mercy
of unconscious compulsions or complexes. However, we must remember that such times, although painful, can be productive: they
highlight psychological patterns existing in us which are in need of
attention.
Pluto transits to Neptune can also affect and alter creative expression. A number of artists with these transits have experienced a
period when their creativity temporarily was blocked, although in
most cases they eventually came out of this phase with renewed
inspiration and energy. Some turn to a new medium through which
to express themselves. Actors take up directing, painters change to
sculpting, or vice versa, or perhaps change their focus: for example,
a professional photographer who had mainly worked within the
fashion industry became disillusioned with that sphere and turned
instead to photographing nature and wildlife.
We often meet trouble through whatever planet Pluto is transiting,
and in the case of Neptune this could involve the misuse of drugs
and alcohol. The desire to escape or transcend the confines and
difficulties of everyday life may in part contribute to substance abuse
at this time. Both Pluto and Neptune are planets associated with
underworld deities, and when their influences are combined, they
exhibit a pull which can drag people down to the depths. Even
though we may be unconscious of such urges, self-destructive forces
could be operating during this time. The urge to fall apart and put
ourselves back together again in a new way is not necessarily
negative, since it is only when the old collapses that new beginnings
occur. However, some people under these transits do become dependent on drugs and alcohol and then have to face the difficult task of
freeing themselves from these addictions.
Sometimes, with transiting Pluto conjunct or square to Neptune, we
may feel as if we are losing control of our lives. Things we have taken for
granted or always thought we could count on let us down, leaving us
unsettled and adrift. Whenever Neptune is activated, it is a time of
letting go, and this is never easy, especially if we have grown attached 300 Pluto Transits to or reliant on certain structures in our lives. Yet there may be very
little we can do to stop changes from happening during these
transits, and we may have no choice but to flow with the tide and
trust that new things will come along to replace what is being taken
away. We only make it harder on ourselves if we resist too long.
Pluto-Pluto Pluto stirs and activates whatever planet it is aspecting by transit.
When it transits in aspect to itself, it signifies a time when forces
inside us push for a major change and renewal of the personality.
Whether we like it or not, under these transits we will attract
circumstances into our lives that compel us to come to terms with
elements of our nature that are not easy to face. Because Pluto has a
248-year cycle, the Pluto return or transiting conjunction does not
occur, except in some cases within the first six months or so after
birth. Transiting Pluto conjuncting its own place at this time (either
by moving retrograde or direct over it) might indicate an early
traumatic experience that leaves a deep psychological impression,
the ramifications of which could be explored through analytical
psychology, hypnotherapy or some form of regression therapy. Transiting Pluto will not oppose its natal place in the span of a normal
lifetime. However, most people will experience the sextile and square
of transiting Pluto to its own place, and many of us will also have
transiting Pluto trine to natal Pluto at some point in later life.
Transiting Pluto sextile and trine natal Pluto are less difficult to
handle than Pluto square Pluto. With the sextile and trine, we are
often in accord with the changes that need to be made - they 'feel'
right and necessary. During these transits, parts of us which are
touchy and sensitive can be brought out, and yet we are usually
willing to co-operate and learn from life at these times. In other
words, the trine and sextile indicate periods when we are more
able to flow with the kind of radical psychological growth and
development required of us. Provided that we don't doggedly dig
our heels in and' resist moving on to new phases of life, these
transits, even when there are difficult lessons to be learned or
challenges to be met, can be handled with relative dignity an~ To the Planets and Through the Houses 301 grace. In fact, they could indicate a fairly exciting phase of life.
However, transiting Pluto squaring its own place - from my
o~servation of this transit in the charts of clients -is among one of the
most testing transits we will experience in the span of our lives. This is
especially true if natal Pluto is difficultly aspected in the birthchart,
because the square of Pluto to its own place will activate these natal
configurations as well. For instance, if you were born with Pluto
conjunct Saturn, then transiting Pluto will also be squaring natal
Saturn at the same time. If you were born with the Sun opposing Pluto,
then transiting Pluto squaring natal Pluto also will square the Sun
around the same period. If you were born with Venus square Pluto,
then transiting Pluto will either be conjuncting the Venus or opposing
it at the time it squares its own place.
Transiting Pluto aspecting natal Pluto brings out what is grumbling in us, revealing where we are frustrated, discontented and
unhappy with the status quo. On the whole, this is a good thing,
because it is only when we acknowledge what is bothering us that
we can begin to do something about it. When transiting Pluto
squares natal Pluto, we can no longer get away with burying our
heads in the sand, and it's a most opportune time to look at and do
what we can to change what is not right in our lives. As stated
earlier, transiting Pluto trine or sextile Pluto are easier to handlewe are more willing and able to make adjustments and accept what
has to be changed. Transiting Pluto square Pluto however, is more
likely to activate what is most raw, intractable, reprehensible and
vulnerable in us -to force us to confront parts of our nature that are
particularly difficult to face. The kinds of personality changes
required with the transiting square are so threatening to our existing
sense of self that we offer more resistance to them.
How old we are when transiting Pluto squares its own place
depends on our year of birth. People born between I goo and the late
1920s will experience this transit when they are in their fifties and
sixties. People born from 1930 to the late 1980s will have Pluto
squaring Pluto slightly younger, in their late thirties and in their
forties. People born in the 1990s will have this transit in their forties
and fifties. Obviously, its exact effects will depend to some degree on
age, but certain general remarks still apply. 302 Pluto Transits Clients with this transit who come for astrological counselling
often bring concerns about sexual issues. Many of them complain of
sexual frustration. They may have been married for some time, but
they admit that the sexual side of the relationship is unfulfilling.
They have put up with this situation for many years, but now, with
transiting Pluto square Pluto, they can no longer ignore it. These
sexual problems are often symptomatic of a deeper issue - the
relationship they are in has no 'life' left in it. Communication
between partners is virtually non-existent or other problems that
have been there for a long time are no longer bearable. When Pluto
squares Pluto, we need something to be passionate about, something
that grips and engages us. If that is not being satisfied through a
marriage or ongoing relationship, we become restless and irritable.
A number of people with this transit have turned to extra-marital
affairs through which they rediscover passion and sexuality. In
some cases, an inner battle ensues between the desire to preserve the
marriage or relationship they are in, and the urge to destroy it, and
the indecision can be crippling. In general, with Pluto square Pluto,
we feel there are important decisions or changes to be made in our
lives, but for one reason or another these are frightening or extremely
difficult to carry through.
Conversely, some people with these transits report that they are
'going off' sex, or find themselves in situations that require them to
change their sexual habits and patterns. When Pluto squares Pluto,
we have to alter those areas of our life associated with Pluto - and
sex, regardless of what houses in the chart are involved, is one of
Pluto's main concerns. Pluto is also associated with feelings and
emotions which are buried deep in us - primal wounds from early
life which have left us with anger, rage, jealousy, envy and pain.
When Pluto squares Pluto, these 'darker' emotions have a way of
surfacing through present circumstances related to the house position of natal and transiting Pluto and the house with Scorpio on the
cusp or contained within it. At this time, we may be quite shocked Qr
overwhelmed by the nature and intensity of what we are feeling. We
might have believed we were a kind, sweet person, only to discover
that underneath there is a rage and vindictiveness which knows no
bounds. Or, through the areas of life associated with the houses To the Planets and Through the Houses 303 involved, we meet circumstances that hurt or threaten us deeply situations that trigger our worst fears and force us to confront our
deepest anxieties, insecurities and complexes. We may have suet ceeded fairly well in protecting ourselves from our deepest neuroses
and problems, but transiting Pluto square Pluto clearly reveals
where we are most damaged and wounded. We can rigidly try to
defend ourselves and do what we can to prevent difficult situations
from arising, but we will most likely be thwarted in these attempts.
Even if we manage to protect and defend ourselves against what is
painful, by doing so we are cheating ourselves of growth, change
and transformation.
An example will help make the workings of this transit clearer.
John and his wife Louise were both actors, but of the two he was by
far the better known. When transiting Pluto in the tenth came to
square his seventh-house Pluto, the situation reversed. Louise landed
the leading role in a television series, which brought her a great deal
of public attention. Meanwhile, his career seemed to have stopped
dead. For the first time, he was forced to acknowledge his feelings of
competition, jealousy and envy - emotions he had always managed
to keep under control, mainly through ensuring that the people with
whom he associated closely were less successful than himself. At first
he expressed his bitterness and resentment in devious and indirect
ways. He went out and had an affair, and found any excuse to
criticize and hurt his wife. Eventually, she confronted him, and he
admitted to his jealousy of her success. He sought the help of a
therapist in order to explore his feelings more deeply. At first, he
found this jealous side of his nature difficult to accept- he had never
thought of himself as petty or envious. In the course of therapy, he
realized that these emotions had always been there. When he was a
child, his mother continually compared his development and achievements with those of his twin sister. Although he and his sister were
friendly and close, John came to see that there was a great deal of
unacknowledged rivalry and resentment between them. As children,
our security depends on the love of our caretaker, usually our
mother; if we feel special in her eyes, we are reassured she will
protect and look after us. However, if someone else is more special to
her, we worry about being rejected or left to die. In John's uncon- 304 Pluto Transits scions mind, his survival depended on outshining his sister. As a result,
he worked very hard to surpass her achievements and later to outdo
his peers. These same feelings were transferred on to Louise. Everything was all right as long as he was on top and doing better than
she was. But when she became more successful. the little boy in him
feared losing the kind of love he needed in order to survive. Transiting
Pluto square Pluto brought this complex to the surface. It was a very
trying time for John, and yet through it he was able to recognize and
work on aspects of his nature he had never seen or admitted to
before.
The square of transiting Pluto to natal Pluto frequently coincides
with important transitions life requires us to make. For instance, I
have seen this transit in the charts of women who have dedicated
themselves to raising a family. Now, with their children grown, they
have to find other ways in which they can define themselves and be
useful. For men, these transits often mark critical points in their
careers. Some men have to face the fact that they have not succeeded
as they hoped they would. Others are trying to decide whether to
stay where they are or branch out in other ways, perhaps establishing their own business rather than continuing to work under others.
If this transit occurs in our late thirties or forties, we may find
ourselves taking on work that stretches us to our fullest capacity.
But if transiting square Pluto (or transiting trine Pluto) takes place
in our fifties or sixties, it could manifest in retirement issues and the
major changes ill lifestyle that this entails.
When Pluto makes a transit to its own place, we may have to
confront death in some form. On a symbolic level, this could mean
the passing of old or outworn phases of life. However, the transit of
Pluto square or trine natal Pluto is likely to occur at a time when
death could evince itself more literally - the loss of a parenl. or the
death of friends and colleagues. Such losses prompt us to examine
our own lives more closely. We realize, more clearly than ever, that
we are getting older and are not going to be around indefinitely.
What have we done with our lives so far? What more can we do?
What isn't right that could be changed? What have we missed out
on? These Pluto-Pluto transits challenge us to make changes in our
lives in order to make better use of the time we have left. To. the Planets and Through the Houses 305 Transits of Pluto to Pluto (particularly the square, but in some
cases the sextile and trine as well) also may mark periods of illness.
Pluto brings what is buried in us to the surface, and this includes
hidden impurities and debilities which may have been lingering in
the body for years. Hopefully it is not too late to change or alter the
negative habits that have contributed to any illness appearing under
these transits. While attending to the purely physiological aspects of
the malady, it also is useful to examine the possibility that our
physical symptoms are symbolic of deeper psychological issues. For
instance, skin problems which appear under Pluto-Pluto transits
could indicate long-term irritations and resentments now manifesting physically. Stomach complaints often are emotional in origin what is it that we can't stomach, or which is hard to take in and
digest? When any Pluto transit expresses itself in illness, there is
likely to be a psychological factor involved.
It is helpful to give some kind of creative expression to what we
are experiencing when transiting Pluto aspects natal Pluto- through
writing down, drawing, dancing or painting our feelings. The problems and tests we meet under these transits are deep and poignant
ones, and if we avoid looking at them, we deprive ourselves of the
kind of wisdom and maturity that facing them has to offer. PlutoPluto transits may wake up our 'demons', but they can also activate
a desire in us to explore more deeply into philosophical, psychological, or metaphysical concerns. Our ability to fathom the kinds of
laws or truths governing existence is increased, and any Pluto-Pluto
transit is an excellent time to study not only the workings of one's
own psyche but the cosmos as well. Transiting Pluto Through the Houses
First House
When transiting Pluto passes over the ascendant and moves through
the first house, our whole way of looking at life alters, and our sense
of self is radically transformed. This transit sometimes correlates 306 Pluto Transits with striking changes in physicai appearance, such as a new style of
dressing, wearing the hair or presenting ourselves to the world.
Overweight people slim down; previously thin or scrawny people put
on weight. These external physical transformations are the outward
expression of an internal shift in awareness and consciousness.
Obviously, the exact way any outer planet transit affects us depends on our age and other factors occurring in the chart at the
time. None the less, some general conclusions can still be drawn.
With Pluto crossing the ascendant and moving through the first
house (the most easterly point in the chart and the house of the self),
the core Self is asking that we explore new ways of expressing
ourselves and experiencing life. If we are not in touch with our need
to change, the environment will force us into it. For instance,
children with Pluto transiting the first may face disruption because
of difficulties their parents are going through. Adults under this
transit who are unaware of, or unwilling to acknowledge, the inner
need to alter their lives during this period could unconsciously
coerce another person to force change upon them - they could
provoke a partner to leave or an employer to fire them. In other
words, disruptive outer circumstances occurring when Pluto is
moving through the first reflect the core Self s desire that we change
at this time.
This transit can reverse our life direction in ways we didn't think
possible: people who thought they would never get married change
their minds; people who thought they would always stay married
get divorced; conservatives turn liberal; and liberals turn conservative. What we thought we were is no longer what we are.
During this transit, our personal style and way of approaching life is
meant to reflect and embody any of the principles which Pluto
symbolizes. Some people will 'live out' Pluto at this time by acting as
agents of disruption for others or for society in general, and the
changes we make in our lives will force those around us to change.
Or we can employ Pluto's regenerative energy by aligning ourselves
with causes or groups which promote social transformation or by
confronting the darker undercurrents buried within both the individual and group psyche. Hidden facets of our personality come to
light under this transit, and we have to face aspects of our nature we To the Planets and Through the Houses 307 have not fully acknowledged before. Unconscious contents break
through into conscious awareness: previously unrecognized anger,
sexuality or power drives erupt and challenge our existing self-image.
We might never have thought of ourselves as someone who was
manipulative and controlling, but now we see that side of our
nature. We might have been unaware of our capacity for anger,
jealousy, envy and destructive behaviour, but now there they are,
unleashed and out of control. Like a harrow dragged across ploughed
land to leyel or break up the soil, Pluto transiting the ascendant and
first house brings to light our hidden depths, what has been 'underground' in us, and breaks up previous complexes or rigid patterns
of behavioUr. This is a time of discovery, cleansing and renewal, a
fertile period for any form of self-exploration or self-development.
The unconscious is not only a storehouse for repressed infantile
complexes. When Pluto dredges subterranean contents of the psyche
up into consciousness, we also have the opportunity to discover and
reclaim latent or untapped strengths, aptitudes and talents previously not at our disposal but now ready to be developed. If we have
predominantly identified ourselves as weak and inept, this transit
could unearth hidden strength and hitherto denied wellsprings of
power, and reward us with a whole new sense of what we are
capable of achieving. Many people under this transit discover, sometimes for the first time, an ability to take charge of their lives, a
feeling that they are a creative force able to shape their destiny.
Pluto transiting the ascendant and first house thus signifies a time
of rebirth, but because there is no birth without pain, this transit of
Pluto is not without difficulties. The ascendant and first house are
areas of the chart directly related to the physical body, and Pluto
transits here can correspond with illnesses that profoundly affect our
lives. The gifted astrological thinker John Addey - founder of the
Astrological Association of Great Britain and the Urania Trust - is a
case in point. In 1942, when Pluto was transiting over his Leo
ascendant, he was struck down by an acute form of rheumatism
that left him crippled. However, John himself was later to remark
that had he not been 'forced to stay still for a moment and reflect on
life ... he would have probably been all too happy to spend his days
between golf and the horsesl' Mercúrio John's illness was a crucial factor in 308 Pluto Transits turning his attention to astrology and philosophy- two subjects that
had always fascinated him, but which he hadn't up to that point
fully pursued. Dramatically changing the direction and focus of his
life, the transit of Pluto over his ascendant heralded the death of one
phase of his existence and his rebirth into a whole new way of being.
Second House
As Pluto transits the second house, we experience changes in the
area of life associated with money, material possessions and values.
On the most obvious level, this can mean a radical change in
income. Pluto moving through this house could coincide with the
loss of a job, and we may have to face the stark terror of worrying
about whether there will be enough food to eat or enough money to
pay the bills. This situation will bring childhood fears to the surface
- in particular, those times we were terrified that mother couldn't
provide us with what we needed to survive. Although harrowing to
live through, losing the identity we derive from our work forces us to
redefine ourselves: we have an opportunity to find an internal sense
of worth not dependent upon how much we are accomplishing in
the world, how much power we wield, or how much money we
bring home each week. People who find this internal sense of worth
gain an inner strength and equanimity not contingent upon the
external world, but based upon a better estimation of who they
really are and what they really need. In some cases when Pluto
transits the second, the loss of one job paves the way for the
discovery of another and of work which may be more in line with
what we really want to be doing. However, a drop in income is not
the only way Pluto operates in the second: in some cases I have
seen, people have increased their income and wealth under this
transit and as a result their sense of identity, potency and self-worth
is enhanced.
On a deeper level, the second house is concerned with our sense of
values. As Pluto transits the second, our values may change. If
money and security have always been important to us above all
things, we might discover values of a different nature at this time. In To the Planets and Through the Houses 309 some cases, people with Pluto transiting this house have chosen to
switch to an occupation which pays less, but offers greater satisfac. tion and fulfilment in other ways. The reverse, however, also is true:
individuals who have never valued money or security could find
themselves obsessively concerned about these things for the first
time in their lives. And I have seen instances in which people with
this transit take a business that is not worth much and transform it
into something of great value.
Pluto makes us look more deeply into any house it is transiting, ·
and in the second it asks us to examine what money and possessions
really mean to us. If we passionately seek money, then why? Is
money seen as a way of controlling others? Is it tied up with our
sense of sexual attractiveness? Are we accruing money and possessions to compensate for a lack of love or security in childhood and to
prove our worth to the world? If we continually fail at attempts to
make money and find security in life, we need to explore why this is.
Is there a part of us which doesn't feel we are worthy or good
enough to achieve what we want? If so, we need to explore how we
came to form such a low self-opinion. Or are we afraid of invoking
anger and envy from others if we become successful? Asking these
kinds of question with Pluto transiting the second will help us gain a
deeper understanding of the issues we have around money.
When Pluto transits this house, a desire for wealth could bring
out 'the beast' in us. We might go to any lengths to obtain money,
resorting to ruthless and underhanded behaviour if necessary. We
could find ourselves intensely jealous and envious towards those
who have more than us. Pluto also stirs fears in whatever house it is
transiting, and as it moves through the second, we may become
obsessed by a fear that something will come along and take away
our job, money or possessions. In certain cases people do lose everything under this transit, and it may be that Pluto is asking them to
discover a new sense of self or the true ground of their being which
is not reliant on their material status. In fact, under this transit we
might unconsciously provoke or attract such a catastrophe so that
an inner and more permanent sense of worth and security can be
found. 3I o Pluto Transits Third House
Transiting Pluto in the third house can deepen our mind and this is
a good time to take up a demanding study. In fact, we may be
gripped by an urge to go beyond our superficial understanding and
to probe more deeply the essence of a subject. Pluto transiting the
third believes that knowledge is power: knowing how something
works gives us greater mastery and influence over it. Moreover,
what we learn under this transit we will probably never forget.
Because the third house also describes our relationship with the
lmrnediate environment, Pluto here often activates a desire to understand more deeply what is going on around us. Like a detective,
Pluto seeks to fathom the hidden motives behind the actions and
behaviour of people we come in contact with in daily life. Pluto
could also make us more suspicious than usual of other people.
What do they really want from us? What do they actually mean
when they say or do something?
In extreme cases, Pluto transiting the third correlates to a literal
l;lreakdown of the mind, or a long period of mental stress, paranoia
or depression. Pluto takes us into the underworld via whatever house
it transits, and previously hidden or repressed thoughts and feelings
erupt to the surface under this transit. The mind, overwhelmed by
deep primal emotions and fears, will not be able to function as
normal. We might project dark images from early childhood- 'the
suffocating mother', 'the punishing father' etc. - on to everyone in
the immediate environment. The world around us becomes a living
nightmare, peopled by the unconscious phantasies of the frightened
inner child of our past. Prescribed drugs may be necessary to keep
the mind under control, but this form of treatment will be most
useful if given in conjunction with some form of psychological
counselling or therapy. Understood most positively, the eruption of
unconscious complexes into conscious awareness is an opportunity
to begin to work constructively with hidden thoughts and feelings
which up to now have been denied or kept at bay. We may not be
able to cleanse ourselves totally of these psychic 'demons', but by
fully acknowledging their presence and source, we have taken the
first step towards facing and coming to terms with them. To the Planets and Through the Houses 3I I The third house is also associated with siblings, relatives and
neighbours, and Pluto transiting here can stir difficulties in this
sphere. A conflict with a brother, sister, cousin, uncle or aunt, or a
disagreement with a neighbour could awaken 'the beast' in us at
this time. Again, through such conflict buried feelings from the past
are brought to the surface. We hope that through becoming aware
of these deep and unresolved tensions, we can begin to work with
them more positively.*
Transiting Pluto through the third affects communication, writing,
teaching, lecturing and the media, so that developing any latent
writing ability or finding ways to improve our capacity to communicate and relate to others around us is a good use of this transit. We
may be more impatient than usual with 'small talk', and will urgently
want to get to the heart of a matter and talk deeply with others
about what really concerns us. Under this transit, we can achieve a
greater degree of honesty with people in our immediate environment.
Conversely, some of us may experience this transit as temporarily
inhibiting or interfering with our ability to communicate easily and
openly with others. There are various reasons for this: what we are
thinking or feeling may be so subtle or intimate that it is hard to put
into words, or it may be that we are afraid to reveal our innermost
thoughts - we are embarrassed by their intensity or frightened what
other people would do if they really knew what we were thinking.
We may fear that exposing too much of ourselves will give other
people power over us, and therefore we carefully guard our thoughts.
If this is the case, it is still useful under this transit to keep a diary or
journal which allows us to express in a safe way what we are
feeling. Or we can find a counsellor or psychotherapist with whom
we are able to express ourselves freely. Without such outlets at this
time, thoughts and feelings will fester, and the psychic pressure
become so intolerable that our minds could break down under the
strain.
The third house is also linked with early education. Younger
people with this transit could encounter problems at school - difficulties with learning or trouble relating to their peers. Children
*For a discussion on dealing with deep-seated complexes, see ch. 8, pp. 226-45. 3I 2 Pluto Transits sent to boarding school during this period sometimes interpret being
sent away as a punishment for something they have done wrong,
since, in a child's mind, the thought of an action easily can be
confused with the deed. A young boy, for instance, in a fit of anger
might wish his little sister dead, and if she hurts herself or falls ill the
next day, he will believe that his thought caused the mishap and feel
shamefully guilty and responsible as a result. If children or adolescents have Pluto transiting the third when a sibling or relative
dies or goes through a difficult phase, they may also feel somehow
responsible fot the event. In such cases, they will need help from an
understanding parent, adult or trained counsellor to work through
these feelings. If this is not available and their guilt remains unresolved, these children could be left deeply scarred by the experience.
Fourth House The I C and the fourth house mark the very bottom of the chart: when
Pluto transits here, it is a time to look into the depths of the self. At any
point during this transit (but especially when it first crosses the I C and
enters this house) we may feel more strongly introverted than usual.
There is nothing wrong or pathological about this -being alone with
ourselves at this time may be necessary in order to facilitate the kind
of psychological metamorphosis this transit heralds. Pluto crossing
the I C is an opportunity to make a new start, a new beginning in life,
and even if we are not conscious of an inner need to change and
progress, events will conspire in ways which make us do so.
The fourth is traditionally labelled the house of 'the home, the
soul and the roots of the being': It depicts the home and what kinds
of activities go on there, and, on a deeper level, it also describes
much about our childhood conditioning, the effects of the parental
home on us, and how we might have been influenced by our ·
ancestors. The fourth house also signifies father or mother, depending on which parent the astrologer feels fits most accurately with
this house.* The influence of transiting Pluto through the fourth can
be felt in any of these spheres.
What happens early in life forms a deep impression on us: we may To the Planets and Through the Houses 313 not be consciously aware of it, but we carry these impressions from
childhood around with us and they continue to influence how we
perceive and experience life far into adulthood. In other words, how
we see and evaluate the present is very much conditioned by our
conscious or unconscious recollection of what has happened to us in
the past. When Pluto transits the I C and fourth house, the effects of
early conditioning are brought out into the open. Childhood issues
are relived, either through the present relationship with our parents
or through interaction with those we have close contact with during
this period. Deeply ingrained beliefs and statements we hold about
life and ourselves come to the fore, revealing what is operating in the
inner recesses of our being. If we remember that the situations we
attract into our lives now are replays of earlier traumas and difficulties, we not only learn more about what is buried in us, but we
also gain added perspective and insight into our immediate concerns.
The case of a 2 s-year-old woman who came for a reading when
transiting Pluto was conjuncting her fourth-house Libran Sun illustrates this point. Her father, who had hoped she would be a boy, had
been exceptionally critical of her. Nothing she did was right, and she
grew up feeling inadequate and worthless. Under this Pluto transit
she became involved with a man who occasionally teased and made
fun of her. Other people might have laughed this off, but his teasing
stirred the early shame and hurt she had experienced with her
critical father. The chart reading helped her to see the connection
between her reactions to her boyfriend's behaviour and her feelings
as a child. She joined a women's group in which she explored the
early relationship with her father, and, in doing so, gradually freed
herself from the negative conditioning stemming from his attitude
towards her. Subsequently she found she was more relaxed with her
boyfriend - she could see his jesting for what it was, and it no longer
triggered her earlier wounds in the way it had previously done.
Getting to the bottom of long-standing problems and issues from
childhood makes it possible to break out of old patterns and implement
some profound and fundamental changes in our lives. Some of us may
*See ch. 5· note 5· 314 Pluto Transits even confront our parents directly at some point during this transit.
Transiting Pluto in the fourth could indicate the need to stand up to
them, to say 'This is who I am, and if you don't like it, that is too bad.'
In other words, this is a time when we can separate more completely
from our parents - to define who we are as people in our own right,
rather than continuing to be what they expect or want us to be.
However, the converse situation can occur as well. If we have
continuously rejected anything to do with our family and rebelled
against them in extreme ways, this transit could indicate a change in
that pattern - we may realize that some of their values or beliefs
actually do fit with who we are. In general, Pluto in the fourth is a
period when we are called upon to distinguish between those family
traits that accurately describe us, and those that have been imposed
on us and need to be rejected in the name of individuation. If the fourth
house is associated with the father, this transit may focus specifically
on issues to do with him. We might have to confront the father by
standing up to and separating from him; or conversely, we come to
realize just how much of our father's nature we have inherited.
Transiting Pluto here heralds breakthroughs which enable us to
relate more deeply or honestly with him than previously possible.
Passages he is going through in his life at this time (a psychological
crisis, an illness, retirement, etc.) will profoundly affect us as well.*
The fourth house describes the ancestral inheritance - our genetic
and psychological link to the antecedents in the family line. Unresolved issues and conflicts in the ancestral line are passed down to
us: we not only inherit our progenitors' physical traits, but we also
inherit their psychological complexes or unfinished emotional problems. Transiting Pluto in the fourth could stir conflicts and crises in
our own lives that in some way are related to unresolved issues in
the family heritage. Being aware of this possibility and exploring as
best we can our psychological family tree will help us better understand the kinds of concerns we are confronting during this transit.
In addition to childhood and ancestral patterns which are exposed
through present crises at this time, transiting Pluto in the fourth *Seep. 261 for a discussion of the issues raised by the death of a parent. To the Planets and Through the Houses 3I 5 coincides with changes and upheavals on the home front. If we
move house when Pluto is passing through this sphere of the chart,
it is likely that the move will significantly affect the whole of our
lives. Under this transit we might purchase a home of our own for
the first time, or embark on extensive repairs and redecoration in the
place where we live. These external alterations reflect inner changes
of a psychological nature. Transiting Pluto through the fourth can
also indicate important changes in the lives of those with whom we
live. Exactly how this manifests depends on the natal placements in
the fourth, the rest of the chart, and the other transits and progressions occurring at this time. In some cases transiting Pluto
through the fourth coincides with separations and divorces. In other
instances, this transit indicates new arrivals to the home - the birth
of a child, or a family member returning after a long absence (fathers
coming home from war, etc.), or someone new entering the household. Transiting Pluto in the fourth could also signify departures
from the home - a child who grows old enough to leave the nest,
any family member leaving, or even the death of a household
member. 'The beast' in us is awakened in whatever house Pluto is
transiting, so driring this time the home sphere will be the main
arena where vicious quarrels, intrigues and power-struggles might
take place. Traditionally the fourth house is associated with our
country of origin. When Pluto is moving through this house, some
of us might uproot and change countries, or return to our homeland
if we have been away from it for any significant length of time.
Fifth House
The fifth house is broadly associated with self-expression, creativity,
hobbies and recreational pursuits, children and romance. Transiting
Pluto through the fifth will affect any of these areas. That part of us
that yearns to give concrete external expression to our individual
thoughts, feelings and imagination gains impetus at this time. We
might discover a new interest, hobby or recreational activity in
which we become intensely involved, sometimes to the point of
obsession. If we are already engaged in a creative outlet, we may
change from one medium to another; on the other hand, if up to 3I 6 Pluto Transits now creativity has not interested us, it could turn into a major
concern. Under this transit, however, any form of creative undertaking is not likely to be achieved without a great deal of effort, and
we will have to confront psychological blocks and complexes that
stand in the way of our freely expressing ourselves. Such creative
blocks and difficulties can often be tracked back to the kinds of
messages we received about the worth and value of what we created
or gave expression to as children. The psychologist Erik Erikson
pointed out that the crucial developmental issue between the ages of
two and four was 'Autonomy versus Shame and Doubt'. 10 During
this phase oflife (what the Freudians refer to as 'the anal phase'), we
develop either a positive sense of our own power, autonomy and
effectiveness, or we come to believe we are shameful, bad and dirty the feeling that what we have to offer the world is inadequate or
unacceptable. Toilet-training occurs at this time and is directly
related to later issues around creativity. As children, we don't inherently feel that our faeces is shameful or dirty; on the contrary, we
take pride in what our bodies are creating. Eventually we are
conditioned into believing there is something dirty or wrong about
faeces - our first creations - and this can establish a pattern of
feeling inadequate or shameful about anything we attempt to create
later in life. When Pluto transits the fifth, early traumas and unresolved issues from this stage of development resurface in the
process of self-expression. Whether we consciously realize it or not,
we feel as if the dark face of the mother (or controlling parent) is
watching over what we are trying to accomplish during this period.
In order to free our creativity, we have to do battle with that figure.
Even if we have managed to pass through the anal stage and
toilet-training without too much damage to our self-worth and selfesteem, transiting Pluto in the fifth can still activate psychological
difficulties when we are trying to express our individuality and
creativity. We could be so worried about how our creations will be
received by others that our free flow of expression is inhibited. When
Pluto is transiting the fifth, power issues also complicate creative
endeavours, especially if we are engaged in projects that involve
other people. If our sense of worth and identity is closely linked with
what we are working on, we will insist that it is done our way, and To the Planets and Through the Houses 3r 7 we won't find it easy to make adjustments to how other people feel
things ought to take shape. This was the case of a film director who
came for a chart reading when transiting Pluto wasconjuncting his
fifth-house Mars.,He so adamantly clung to his particular understanding of the film he was directing that he became embroiled in fierce
arguments with the producer, who did not agree with his interpretation. Unwilling to relent or alter his view; he eventually broke his
contract rather than compromise his opinions. Later, he came to
understand that the intensity of his convictions stemmed from 'the
little boy in him' who was still contesting the authority to which his
overbearing father. had subjected him as a child. Problems with
creative self-expression that occur when Pluto transits the fifth serve
to expose unconscious patterns and unfinished issues from early life,
and offer us the opportunity to resolve them.
Children - creative extensions of the self - also come under the
heading of the fifth house, and transiting Pluto through the fifth can
affect this sphere in many different ways. The birth of a child during
this transit will take on special significance, indicating the death of
one phase of our lives and the beginning of a new one. It may be the
first child, ushering us into the world of parenthood. A child born
when Pluto is transiting our fifth will often show Pluto, Scorpio or the
eighth house strong in his or her chart; or the synastry between our
chart and the child's will highlight these areas. So~ehow, the child
will exert a Plutonic influence on us, forcing major readjustments in
our lives. A woman carrying a child when Pluto is transiting the fifth
may need to take extra caution during the pregnancy. In some cases,
Pluto moving through this house indicates abortions, miscarriages,
or stillbirths, events which require a period of mourning similar to
any death or loss. In a few instances I have come across, the transit of
this planet through the fifth coincided with the death of an offspring.
One woman with transiting Pluto conjuncting her fifth-house Sun
lost her eight-month-old baby son from a cot death, and her subsequent anguish and guilt led her to seek counselling and provided
the entry point into a very intense and thorough psychological reevaluation of herself, her marriage and her life as a whole.*
*See Suggested Reading (p. 386) for a list of books on death and the grieving process. 3I 8 Pluto Transits When Pluto transits the fifth, our children could be troubled or in
crisis, and their experiences may present us with major challenges
and lessons. The type of problems they are facing depend to a large
degree on their age during the period we have this transit. In a
number of cases, transiting Pluto in the fifth of the parent's chart
has occurred when a child was going through puberty and the
awakening of sexuality, but I have also seen this transit synchronize
with an offspring getting married or divorced or experiencing other
kinds of life-changing passages. Children may be exceptionally
difficult to handle during this period, and yet Pluto here suggests
that we have something to learn from what they are undergoing.
Intense power-struggles between parent and child are a common
manifestation of this transit. Some children may need to break
radically with a parent at this time in order to establish more
clearly their own separate identity. If we try to over-control children at this point, problems could escalate. Usually we do this
because we are frightened that, if left to their own devices, they
will harm themselves or act in a way that threatens our own
sense of what is safe, right or appropriate. However, we need to
accept that, in the name of growth and development, they may
have to go through certain experiences from which we cannot or
should not shield thf:lm. Also, under this transit unresolved issues
with our parents can resurface through problems we encounter
with our children. For instance, if we battled with parents for
greater freedom and autonomy, we may find our children battling
with us over the same issue. Or if we didn't feel loved by one of
our parents, we may find ourselves fearing that one of our children
doesn't love us, or we might be concerned that we don't love that
child enough. In whatever house Pluto is transiting, patterns and
problems from earlier in our lives reappear in a thinly disguised
form. It is as if Pluto is saying 'you didn't resolve this issue before;
here it is again for you to work on.'
The fifth house also relates to sex and romance, and Pluto transiting here will colour this sphere of life. A person we become
involved with may have Pluto, Scorpio, or the eighth house strong
in his or her chart, or the inter-aspects between charts accentuate To the Planets and Through the Houses 319 these placements. A relationship during this period will change us in
important ways. Involvements are likely to be intense, passionate
and complex - they may be kept secret or riddled with powerstruggles, intrigue, betrayal and jealousy. Liaisons formed now often
reactivate the hurt and angi: Netuno child of our past who is still trying to
get mother or father to love us in the way we needed then. We
discover 'the raging infant' or 'the beast' in us, and in this way are
presented with an opportunity to explore and work through unresolved infantile complexes.* Pluto transiting the fifth can also
coincide with the first awakening of our sexual passion, or this
transit might rearouse our sexual energy after a long period of
quiescence. However, while Pluto here often awakens sexuality, it
can also manifest in temporary sexual blocks or a change in the
nature of our sexual expression. Some people chose to transmute
their libidinal desires into creative outlets or physical activities such
as sports at this time. t Sixth House
Work, health, and the running of everyday life are the main concerns
of the sixth house. This area of the chart not only describes how we
relate to our own bodies, but also how we get along with co-workers
and those people we are serving or who serve us. As transiting Pluto
moves through the sixth, we are challenged and transformed
through the different kinds of problems and experiences we attract
in any of these spheres.
Transiting Pluto in the sixth can manifest itself as health trouble.
Pluto, the god of the underworld, brings what is buried in us out into
the open: chronic but not terribly significant symptoms may erupt to •see ch. 8. pp. 226-33.
tFor a more complete discussion of the effects of transiting Pluto on sexuality, see the
sections on transiting Pluto aspecting Mars, and transiting Pluto through the eighth
house. 320 Pluto Transits the surface in the form of illness and disease, the result of a longstanding imbalance. But even if we suffer ill health during this
transit, it is not fair to view Pluto's effect on our bodies as totally
malevolent; one of Pluto's main tasks as it moves through the sixth
is to expose accumulated toxins and poisons in order to help cleanse
the body and facilitate the healing process. Pluto here also wants to
remind us of the intimate relationship and undeniable reciprocity
between the body and the mind. Body and mind form an integrated
system: our mental and emotional states have a direct bearing on
our health, just as our physical condition affects the way we think
and feel. The sixth house, more than any other area of the chart, is
concerned with this body-mind connection, with the close relationship between pysche and soma, and it is well known that psychological issues play a pari in aggravating a disease. Noxious agents
are always present in the body, but whether we develop an illness or
not depends upon our ability to resist them. Psychological stress,
and negative thoughts and feelings (conscious or unconscious)
impair our immune system and weaken the body's natural defences,
making us more susceptible to what we previously were able to
ward off. If we fall ill with Pluto moving through the house, we
should not take the illness at face value. Poor health at this time is
Pluto's way of informing us that our lives are critically unbalanced.
The root causes of health problems, not just outward symptoms,
need to be treated when Pluto transits the sixth. By examining our
whole life, we move in the direction of better health. Linda is a case
in point: she came for counselling when transiting Pluto in Libra
was moving through her sixth house coming up to square her Sun
in Capricorn in the ninth. A lump on her neck had been diagnosed
as malignant, and she was desperate to know what the chart might
reveal about the illness and her future. Transiting Jupiter was making
some good contacts to her charr at the time, and I encouraged her to
fight the disease in any way she could. She sought the help of an
alternative therapy centre specializing in cancer, and through the
counselling and treatment the centre offered, she explored the factors
in her past and present life that were contributing to her illness. A
number of years before the onset of the cancer, she had given up a
promising career in the arts to attend fuR-time to the needs of her To the Planets and Through the Houses 321 husband and family. She hadn't realized how much bitterness and
resentment she felt about this. With the diagnosis of a life-threatening
illness, however, she gained a new perspective on her life. The old
rules she lived by needed to be questioned, and the illness gave her
permission to act in ways she hadn't allowed herself before. She
openly expressed the anger she felt at giving up her career, and
arranged for some part-time help to take over some of the responsibilities running the home so she could begin to work again.
She became aware that she had the power to change her life, and
with that realization, she felt increasingly positive and optimistic
about the possibility of getting well again. She pursued various
alternative therapies and followed a special diet recommended to her
by the cancer centre. Within two years, the tumour disappeared and
she was declared fully recovered. Transiting Pluto in the sixth,
expressing itself through the medium of her body, had alerted her to
what was wrong in her life and the kinds of change needed to steer
her on the right path again. Linda summed up the effects of the
illness in these words:
Through my efforts and attitude, I was able to influence the
course of my disease, and this showed me just what I was capable
of. The illness made me realize how passively I had been meeting
life. I never believed I had the power to make things the way I
wanted them. Now that I've been through this, I have a much
more positive sense of self, and feel that I have more control over
my life. I'm not such a victim anymore.
Not everyone with Pluto transiting the sixth house will fall ill. But
it is a time to listen to the body and respect its needs and limits and
to examine any areas in our life that need adjustment or attention.
Pluto tears down in order to rebuild and can exert a very positive
regenerative influence in whatever house it is transiting. During the
years this transit is in effect, we have the chance to remake ourselves
physically. People who are not happy with their weight or shape
often find the will-power and stamina at some point in this transit to
undertake and stick to a diet or exercise regime.
Work is another sphere transformed by Pluto moving through the
sixth. Wherever it is transiting, Pluto brings out what is grumbling 322 Pluto Transits in us. If we are not happy with the type of work we are doing, this
transit provides the impetus to seek something different, either within
the general area we have been working in or in an entirely new
field. Pluto marks a time when the old has to go so that new things
can happen. Very often, it will be our choice to leave or change
employment; we feel we have grown or progressed as far as we can
in our present job, and it's time for something new or different.
However, in some cases under this transit, fate will have its hand in
pushing us in new directions. We might be fired from the work we
are doing, or be made redundant. If this should happen while Pluto
is moving through the sixth, I would still read it as an indication
that the time is ripe for fresh growth in new areas. We may not be
fully conscious of that part of us which wants change, and yet if
disruption or humiliation comes under this transit, it is likely that
the core Self or deeper levels of the psyche are calling for it -perhaps
we have become too staid, complacent or stagnant in our present
employment. Doing what we can to co-operate with that part of us
which needs to branch out or expand into something new is a good
use of this transit. And even though the loss of employment could
have a serious effect on our psychological or physical well-being,
examining the emotions and feelings which are brought to the
surface by such contingencies will lead to greater self-knowledge
and further personal growth.
Everything in the world has both an inside and an outside. The
urge behind the sixth house is to make the outer forms of our life our body, our work, how we dress or keep our home - a truer
reflection of what we are inside. The sixth house asks that we
continually make adjustments and refinements in our lives in order
to be more true to the self that we really are. This urge to be true to
the self provides another motivation for changing work when Pluto
is transiting here. We keep searching until we find the employment
which best suits and reflects who we are. If under this transit we find
a task which really grips us, we will execute it with an intensity and
dedication that borders on the obsessive. Some of us may do the best
work of our lives when Pluto is moving through this area of the
chart. It is also possible that at some point during this transit, we
will be attracted to a line of employment that is Plutonic in nature - To the Planets and Through the Houses 323 undercover or detective work, secret projects, mining, psychology,
medicine or anything that involves tearing something down in order
to rebuild it.
Under this transit, Pluto could be reflected in working conditionswe may be working long hours or against great odds. Or Pluto may
reveal itself through problems with co-workers: 'the beast' in us or
in others could be loose in our office, factory or consulting room. We
may be jealous of a colleague's success, or sexually obsessed with a
workmate or client. We may feel that co-workers don't like us or
that they are plotting something behind our back. Power-struggles
could flare up between ourselves and those we work with or under.
During this transit, our own deep psychological complexes, insecurities and fears will surface in the workplace, or a co-worker or
client may be going through an exceptionally traumatic time which
affects us. On the other hand, we could also experience trouble and,
pain in connection with people we hire or use to serve us in some
capacity. For instance, a woman with this transit found out that her
husband was having an affair with the au pair, who had just become
pregnant with his child, while another woman discovered that her
home help was stealing from her. A trusted butler or domestic
servant could die or go through a difficult time. Or we might find
ourselves entangled in a long and fierce legal battle with the garage
mechanic, after our car is returned to us in a worse state than when
we took it in. Pluto will use the affairs of whatever house it is
transiting to bring powerful and complex emotions to the surface.
The sixth house is associated with those routines and rituals of an
everyday nature which we have to perform in the course of mundane
existence. At some point during Pluto's transit of this house, even
the most simple daily tasks could take on great importance. Just
deciding what clothes to put on in the morning, or just keeping the
house clean and the bills paid can become fraught with great
anxiG.ty. If this is the case, we are probably displacing deeper psychological concerns and complexes on to these ordinary tasks, and
the root source of our tension needs to be fathomed out and explored.
Finally, Pluto transiting this sphere of the chart sometimes indicates transformative experiences or problems that arise out of our 324 Pluto Transits relationships to domestic animals and pets, another sixth-house concern. For some people, the death or disappearance of a beloved pet is
as painful as any kind of loss that can be encountered in life, and the
ensuing grief could activate a host of psychological concerns that
need to be examined and worked through - such as unfinished
mourning for others we have lost who were once close to us, or fears
about our inadequacy as a carer, or the feeling that whomever or
whatever we love in life we somehow destroy. On the other hand,
the transit of Pluto through the sixth can indicate positive experiences with pets. One elderly woman who had constantly complained
of loneliness and physical debility inherited two small cats from a
relative just as Pluto was moving into her sixth house. Caring for
these animals and the kind of attachment they formed with her gave
new meaning and happiness to her lonely life. Another woman
overcame a lifetime of feeling she had nothing to give to people and
discovered a new sense of her value and worth when she took in a
stray dog who found its way to her back garden when Pluto was
transiting her sixth house.
Seventh House
When Pluto transits the seventh, close relationships become the
catalysts or agents for personal transformation, growth and change.
If we are already involved with someone, transiting Pluto entering
the seventh or making important aspects by transit from this house
will test the truth or depth of that relationship. Pluto in the seventh
will bring out where we feel dissatisfied, incomplete or unfulfilled in
the area of partnership. If the difficulties that arise now can be met
and resolved, the relationship will become stronger and more solid
as a result. It doesn't help to run away from problems inthis area
when Pluto is transiting this house. The frustrations we are feeling .
will continue to simmer and seethe under a wilfully calm surface
and eventually find some way to undermine the partnership. Besides,
if we try to deny that anything is wrong in order to avoid a crisis or
confrontation, we are cheating ourselves of the kind of growth and
transformation that comes through honestly facing the reality of the
situation. To the Planets and Through the Houses 325 Pluto stirs deep feelings in any house it is transiting, and in the
seventh, our entry into the underworld will come through other
people. At this time, relationships will activate deep-seated emotional
complexes lurking in the recesses of the psyche. Through issues that
arise in the course of relating, facets of our nature that have been
repressed or kept under lock and key will erupt with full force into
everyday life. We might be overtaken by feelings of jealousy, envy,
- rage or uncontrollable sexual passion. Even though these emotions
are felt and directed towards a current partner, they stem from
childhood, when we experienced similar feelings about mother,
father or others in the early environment. Transiting Pluto in the
seventh, through the context of a present close relationship, offers us
the opportunity to discover and resolve such long-standing emotional patterns.*
Alternatively, in some cases with Pluto transiting the seventh, it
may be our partner who unleashes his or her jealousy, envy or fury
on to us. In other words. we don't directly experience these emotions
ourselves, but they come at us through the agency of another
person. Should this happen, we need to look into what we might
have done to help create this situation. It is a psychological precept
that what we disavow in ourselves, we attract in others. The nature
of life is wholeness; we draw to us those parts of ourselves we have
denied or suppressed. For example, if we deny our own capacity to
be jealous, we are more likely (unconsciously) to keep choosing
partners who openly display this part of their nature; even if our
partners aren't usually inclined to jealousy, we will somehow act in
a way that provokes these feelings in them. The same dynamic
applies to anger. We may successfully curtail or circumvent the
owning or expression of our fury and rage, and yet uncannily
choose partners prone to such outbursts, or subtly coerce them into
responding in that manner. As Pluto moves through the seventh,
partners or people we become involved with will mirror our shadow
or unconscious back to us. This is hard to accept and admit to - we *For a more detailed discussion on dealing with emotional complexes, see chapter 8,
pp. 226-45· 326 Pluto Transits would much prefer to blame them and the way they are for the
unpleasant course of events. It feels better to have the burden taken
off our backs, and yet in the end, accusing the other person of being
the source of all the trouble does nothing to further our own
psychological maturity or growth.
Treachery, ruthlessness and betrayal are other hallmarks of transiting Pluto in the seventh. We might be obsessed by a fear that a
partner will leave us, or that he or she is secretly involved in an
affair with someone else. Again, we need to look at this in terms of
projection. Are we restless or dissatisfied with the relationship and
projecting these feelings on to the partner by imagining the other
person living out what we are holding back in ourselves? If we
discover such feelings in ourselves, we don't necessarily need to act
on them by running off and having an affair,. but we should be
psychologically honest enough to explore that part of us that entertains fantasies or desires of this nature. Instead of labelling our
partner the culprit, the responsibility is now on us to analyse why
we are unhappy, bored or discontented with the relationship.
Of course, it is possible with Pluto transiting the seventh to
discover that a partner is actually conducting an affair. Should this
be the case. Pluto is working to expose issues within the relationship
that need to be confronted and discussed. This situation also is likely
to stir such powerful emotions in us that we may be shocked by our
own reactions - we always thought we were so reasonable and in
control, not the kind of person who could ever display feelings of
such violence or intensity. Pluto is making us face parts of ourselves
we would rather not know about. After some psychological selfinvestigation, we may come to realize that these overpowering
emotional reactions can be traced back to feelings we had in early
life, when our survival depended on mother and we were terrified
we would die if she abandoned us. Our partner's infidelity reactivates
these old fears, and gives us the chance to learn more about the
kinds of complexes lurking in the depths of our being.
Then again, we might be the one to fall in love with someone else
when Pluto is transiting our seventh. Pluto complicates the issues of
any house it is moving through, and in the seventh its target is our
relationships. If, under this transit, we find ourselves strongly attrac- To the Planets and Through the Houses 327 ted to another person outside our main relationship, we will be
forced to re-examine and re-evaluate our existing partnership as
well as our whole attitude towards relationships. What is the new
relationship giving us which our present one isn't? Has our existing
relationship run its course and is something new now right for us? Is
there a part of us which is afraid of commitment and therefore
looking for a way out of the existing partnership? Grappling with
these kinds of questions leads to a deeper understanding of ourselves
and the nature of relationships in general. This is precisely what
Pluto wants to make happen when it transits the seventh.
Transiting Pluto moving through the seventh sometimes indicates
that our partners themselves are experiencing a Plutonic phase.
Their natal Pluto may be activated by an important transit or
progression, or transiting Pluto may be hitting key points in their
chart. They may be having various kinds of emotional difficulties, a
hard time at work, or health troubles. However this manifests, the
kinds of problems they are facing will directly affect us. and our
relationship to them. We will be changed by what they are going
through. In some cases, transiting Pluto through the seventh could
coincide with the death of a partner. All that we have discussed
earlier about the necessary process of mourning obviously applies
here.*
Pluto transiting the seventh reveals deep-seated tensions and
problems in our close partnerships, some of which we may not be able
to overcome or resolve. For this reason, this transit could mark the end
of a relationship. When anything we have been attached to or
identified with dies, it must be properly mourned. Otherwise our ability
to form new, meaningful relationships will be severely impaired. While
in some cases Pluto may require the complete breakdown and
elimination of an existing union, it is not an absolute law that a
relationship must end when Pluto is moving through the seventh. This
transit could also indicate that the relationship will go through a series
of mini-deaths and rebirths, and in the end be stronger as a result. *See Suggested Reading (p. 386) for a list of books dealing with death and the
grieving process. 328 Pluto Transits If we are not involved in a close personal relationship, Pluto
moving into or through the seventh often brings one to us. During
this period, we might become involved with others who have Pluto
strong in the natal chart, or who are going through a major Pluto
transit at the time of our meeting. In other words, their nature is
probably complex and intense, or they are in the middle of a major
life-crisis when we meet them. Relationships that take place at this
time may also involve intrigue or require some degree of secrecy.
People have been known to fall in love with a boss's wife or a best
friend's husband under this kind of transit. Whatever the case, we
can be sure of one thing about relationships which begin or form
when Pluto is moving through our seventh -they are meant to have
a powerful and transformative effect on us. However long they last,
we won't be the same person afterwards.
Power-struggles are another feature of a Pluto transit through the
seventh. We might try to control or dominate partners, usually in
order to prevent them from acting in ways that threaten or wound
us. Or we could become involved with a person who wants to
control us in this manner. When Pluto moves through this house,
the issue of who has the power in the relationship comes to the fore,
and we may realize that we don't feel safe unless we are the ones in
charge. Conversely, we may be looking for someone to give our
power to - someone who will swallow us up, make decisions for us,
and tell us who to be or what to do. In either case, the balance of
power is not being shared evenly, and lessons of true mutuality and
co-operation still need to be learned. Sooner or later, transiting Pluto
in the seventh will ask this of us, and it will work in two ways:
people will act as agents of change and transformation for us, but we
too will find ourselves in a position to help others through times of
crisis and transition. The seventh house also describes our relationship to society in general. When Pluto passes through this sphere of
the chart, we may be drawn into groups or activities concerned with
changing or reforming aspects of society. This could be quite a
productive use of this transit, provided we don't succumb to destructive extremes in our attempts to tear down old structures
to make way for the new.
The seventh house isn't just about marriage and close partner- To the.Planets and Through the Houses 329 ships, or our relationship to society at large; it also rules open
enemies and the lower law courts. In Planets in Transit, Robert Hand
gives the reader some good advice: he warns us to be cautious about
power-struggles with enemies at this time. 11 If we engage in battles
when Pluto is going through the seventh -legal ones or otherwise they are likely to be long and drawn out, and could turn quite nasty.
When Pluto is in our seventh, 'the beast' or 'raging infant' in us is
on a collision course with the 'the beast' and 'raging infant' in other
people. Others may not be willing to look at the deeper psychological
implications of why they are feeling hostile towards us at this time,
but that doesn't mean we shouldn't examine where our angry
feelings are really coming from.
Eighth House
The eighth house, carrying on with the seventh-house theme of
close relationships and marriage, probes deeply into what could be
called 'the nitty-gritty of relationship': the kinds of issues that arise
when two people (each with his or her own temperament, valuesystem, resources, needs and inner biological clock) come together
to share with each other and merge as one, to die as an 'I' to be
reborn as 'We'. Put very simply, the eighth is an indication of 'that
which is shared' between people - in particular the kinds of exchange that take place on a monetary, emotional, physical or
psychic level. When Pluto transits the eighth, it is through this
sphere of life that we are,broken down, changed and transformed.
Let's examine this in more detail.
The eighth is often labelled the house of 'other people's values'
and describes how we fare with money and resources that are
shared in marriage, close relationships or business ventures. On the
most concrete level, transiting Pluto in the eighth could indicate
that we will be profoundly changed or affected as a result of someone
else's money or material resources. For instance, a number of my
clients have either married or become closely involved at the time of
this transit with a wealthy partner, and in this way their material
status altered significantly. This transit could mark a time when our
partners experience a major swing (up or down) in their financial 330 Pluto Transits affairs. They might come into millions or go bust, but in either case
this transit means that our lives will be profoundly affected by their
changes of fortune. This transit might also bring conflicts and
power-struggles with a partner revolving around issues to do with
money or joint resources. Sometimes Pluto moving through the
eighth coincides with divorce, and represents a complex or intense
battle over who gets what. Or it could describe problems with a
business associate - some kind of financial treachery, intrigue or
deception taking place. As Pluto transits the eighth, we may end one
business partnership in order to begin another.
The eighth is also concerned with issues ·of taxes and inheritance.
If we have been wildly cheating on taxes, when Pluto comes to
transit the eighth we could find ourselves in trouble with the government. Or we might be on the receiving end of an inheritance that
considerably alters or improves our material security. However,
should transiting Pluto through the eighth make difficult aspects to
other planets in the chart, there could be some complications in
matters of legacy, or conflicts with other people over the execution of
a will or bequest. The eighth also indicates money we receive on
loan, or through government grants or other forms of assistance.
Again, if transiting Pluto in the eighth is making hard aspects to
other planets in the chart, going too far into debt could lead us into
deep water or give rise to much psychological discomfort. And yet,
sorting through the emotional issues that such money problems
bring up at this time could ultimately help us come to a deeper
psychological understanding of ourselves. For example, if we go into
debt we may need to learn to defer 'instant gratification' and to
tolerate frustration of our needs and wants; beyond this, however,
we may need to look at why we think we need specific material
things. The problems concerning money, attachment and responsibility are all intimately connected.
Money isn't the only thing shared between people. The eighth
house also denotes the emotional undercurrents that pass between
two people involved in any kind of joint venture, and the feelings
that are stirred when we relate closely with another person. Pluto,
Mars and Scorpio are the natural rulers of the eighth reflecting the
well-known fact that relationships arouse very powerful emotions in To the Planets and Through the Houses 331 us, which we either express with ease, indulge or defend ourselves
against. When transiting Pluto moves through its natural house, we
can expect a fair amount of crisis and upheaval in our close contacts.
This transit has the effect of drawing to the surface unresolved issues
from previous relationships, especially early bonding problems with
our mother. The fear, for instance, that our partner doesn't love us
any more will reawaken primal emotions in us. Just the thought of
being abandoned by a current partner can arouse a high degree of
anxiety and outrage - the same kinds of feelings we experienced
when we equated the loss of mother's love with abandonment and
death. Much of the anger and destructive rage we sometimes feel or
unleash on partners can also be traced back to infancy. Because of
our extreme helplessness as children, we experience tremendous
frustration when our needs are not being met; later in life, :when a
partner thwarts us in some way, the 'raging infant' in us could be
awakened once again. Transiting Pluto through the eighth exposes
the early fears and complexes lurking in the deeper recesses of the
psyche. This may not be pleasant, but it is only through facing what
is there that we can begin to come to terms with our early pains and
wounds.*
If during this transit we find ourselves repeatedly on the receiving
end of a partner's destructive rage or negative outbursts, we had
better explore why we are attracting such hostile reactions at this
time. Are we somehow projecting our own unexpressed feelings on
to other people, and getting them to live these out for us? Or is it time
we learned to stand up to others, and not allow ourselves to be
the dumping ground f~r their unresolved infantile complexes?
The eighth house- the house of intimacy- also reveals something
about the nature of our sexual expression. In sex, we expose and
share intimate parts of ourselves which we normally keep hidden.
And it is through sex that we might attain, even for a brief moment.
a more complete physical, emotional and spiritual union with another. When Pluto transits the eighth, we can expect changes in the *For a more detailed discussion on working with emotional complexes, see chapter 8,
p. 226-45· 332 Pluto Transits expression of our sexuality, or experiences in this sphere of life that
have a profound or devastating effect on us. Pluto intensifies whatever part of the chart it transits. In some cases, this transit could
mark the awakening of our sexuality in a way it has never been
aroused before. Transiting Pluto in the eighth may help us to break
through certain defences which have held us back from fully relaxing
and letting ourselves go sexually. However, the reverse situation can
also occur, at least temporarily. One of my clients, a man aged so,
who had always enjoyed an active sex life, began to have sexual
difficulties when Pluto entered his eighth house. At first he thought
the problem would just go away. It didn't, and eventually his
impotency caused him such distress he sought the help of a psychotherapist. In the course of therapy, he explored his deeper attitudes
towards women and sex, and discovered a misogynistic side he
had never acknowledged was there. The therapy also gave him a
chance to discuss other emotional and psychological problems he
was going through at the time - primarily the feeling that he had
failed to achieve in life what he had hoped he would. Through
various sex therapy techniques, he overcame his impotency. Moreover, the psychological work he had done on himself helped him to
feel more open, trusting and less critical of his partner; and as a
result, he found it easier to express feelings of tenderness during sex.
All this was the work of transiting Pluto through the eighth.
The eighth-house label of 'other people's values' can extend
beyond monetary resources to include their sense of values in general
-what others believe in, hold dear or find important in life. As Pluto
transits our eighth, we could be dramatically transformed or changed
through a close encounter with another person's beliefs and values
By expanding or altering our understanding of life to embrace a
philosophy and perspective on the world other than our own, we
symbolically die as we have been and are born again. However, a
transit of Pluto through the eighth could indicate battles and powerstruggles with other people, in which we pit our sense of values and
view of the world against theirs. This is more likely to occur if
transiting Pluto in the eighth opposes natal planets in our second
house (the house of 'my values'), or squares placements in our
eleventh (the house of 'friends, hopes, wishes, goals and objectives'). To the Planets and Through the Houses 333 The eighth also denotes our relationship to what esoteric philosophers call 'the astral plane', a level of existence where apparently
intangible, but none the less powerful, emotions and feelings collect
and circulate. As Pluto transits this house, we become more sensitive
to undercurrents in the atmosphere and open to the hidden or
unexpressed feelings of those around us. We may find it difficult at
this time to take life or other people at face value; instead, we feel the
need to probe beneath the surface or superficial level of our
relationships and interactions with others in order to ascertain what
is really happening on a deeper or more subtle level. Along similar
lines, this transit could activate an interest in occult or psychic
phenomena, metaphysics or any branch of psychology that explores
the hidden or unchartered dimensions of life. However, if transiting
Pluto is making hard aspects to other planets in the chart or triggering troublesome natal placements in the eighth, some caution is
advised when exploring anything to do with the psychic or occult:
we could tap forces or powers that are difficult to handle wisely.
Should we venture into this realm when Pluto is transiting our
eighth, it is wise to do so only under the guidance of someone we
·
trust and who is experienced in such matters.
Pluto was the god of the dead, and the eighth house is one of the
areas of the chart associated with death. Accordingly, transiting
Pluto in the eighth could mean that we will have to grapple with
death itself. Freud theorized that we all harbour a death-wish, a
desire to return to a tension-free state we experienced some time
before birth. Transiting Pluto through this house might activate a
death-wish of this sort, and we may be tempted to flirt with death by
putting ourselves in very risky or obviously dangerous situations, or
by unconsciously playing out self-destructive urges at this time;
these are best dealt with by bringing them into conscious awareness
and examining their true source. I have encountered a number of
.people who have had close brushes with death while under this
transit. As a result of their near-death experience, they have reassessed their priorities and made major changes in their lives. 12 During
this transit, it's also possible that some of us may experience the
death of someone close to us. One way or another, we may be asked
to look death squarely in the face. Death is an inextricable part of life 334 Pluto Transits -to deny it is to deny life. Confronting it, however, can plunge us into
living more authentically and enhance our ability to appreciate life.
The transit of Pluto through its natural domain may not be an
easy time, and at some point we may feel deeply depressed or find
ourselves trapped in our own personal hell - an underworld of
intensely disturbing emotions and feelings. But we shouldn't forget
that Pluto has the power not only to destroy life, but to create it as
well. Like Inanna, who is condemned to death in Ereshkigal's realm,
this transit also carries with it the possibility that we may rise again,
reborn and transformed.* Ninth House
During the years that Pluto transits this house, our whole world
view - ·how we perceive life and the cosmos in general - will
undergo major adjustments. Up to the time of this transit, we may
have held a belief system or religion that worked reasonably well,
providing a framework through which to view and interpret life.
However, as Pluto enters and moves through the ninth, our existing
belief-systems and religious allegiances will be challenged in some
way. What previously provided us with a sense of meaning or
purpose may no longer seem suitable or appropriate. What we once
worshipped and respected as the truth is called into question and
may no longer appear to us as absolute. In short, transiting Pluto in
the ninth often means the death of our existing philosophical valuesystem. The loss of a philosophy or religion can be a shattering
experience. Belief-systems and religious precepts help guide us
through life, enabling us to make choices about the most appropriate
way to act or behave in different situations. When our existing
philosophy is no longer seen as valid or, for whatever reason, doesn't
work for us any longer, it feels as if the ground has been taken away
from beneath our feet. We no longer have concrete guidelines or
rules by which we can judge or determine the 'right' way to be.
In my years as a professional astrological consultant, I have
*See 'The Dark Goddess', chapter 8, pp. 237-41. To the Planets and Through the Houses 335 observed this effect of transiting Pluto through the ninth on many
occasions. John is a good example. Up to the time that Pluto entered
his ninth by transit, he avidly followed the teachings of an Indian
guru. He regularly practised his meditation techniques, participated
in courses and retreats, and tried to live according to the laws and
truths which his guru taught. John was happy with this way .of
looking at life, and he derived much security and comfort through
having definite beliefs to guide and give structure to his daily existence. When transiting Pluto crossed his ninth-house cusp, however,
all this changed. He began to encounter new ideas which forced him
to question his existing beliefs and much of his guru's philosophy
and outlook. John had always believed implicitly in his guru's teachings, but now he was seriously re-evaluating its validity for him. For
a number of years after Pluto entered his ninth, he was still confused
about what to believe in and vacillated between his old beliefs and
the newer ones that were gradually replacing them. Letting go of his
connection to his guru was a frightening prospect: he had gained
security from belonging to his particular meditation group, and
without that identification he felt adrift in the world. He feared some
kind of calamity or disaster would befall him because he was no
longer meditating regularly or adhering so strictly to the guidelines
that had previously dominated the way he had conducted his life. He
felt as if he were betraying both his guru and the meditation society
and he expected to be punished for straying from the path he had
followed for so long.
John's sense of identity had been very much linked to his belief
system. When that changed, he went through a desperate period
when he didn't know who he was. People who change religions or
turn their back on the church when Pluto transits the ninth may go
through a crisis similar to the kind John endured. John still maintained a respect for his guru and the meditation practice he had
done, and yet he knew that at this particular stage in his life
something new was needed. However, in other cases I have seen of
Pluto transiting the ninth, people have rejected or discarded their old
philosophy or religion with much more resentment and bitterness
than John felt.
Transiting Pluto in the ninth fuels the urge to explore deeply the 336 Pluto Transits meaning of life. If we have never felt this 'calling' before, if we have
been content with received wisdom and an undemanding life, this
transit will activate 'the seeker' in us. As Pluto moves through the
ninth, we will keep searching for the philosophy or belief-system
that will help us make sense of existence and give purpose to our
lives; and we will keep rejecting different philosophies in the name of
finding the one which works best, in the Plutonic mode of 'tearing
them apart' to find the essence or hidden meaning. Any philosophy
or belief-system we sincerely embrace during this transit will have a
deeply transforming effect on us. But Pluto transiting the ninth can
also mean that we become obsessed with our new religion or creedbe it born-again Christianity, est, or Jungian psychology. And we
may fall into the trap of believing that what we have found is the
answer to everything, and everyone should be converted to it. Pluto
stirs intrigues, obsessive allegiances and strong feelings in whatever
house it transits. Those of us with Pluto transiting the ninth could
also find ourselves caught in the middle of fierce 'in-fighting' within
the sect or group to which we belong. And, in some cases, people
under this transit become involved with a cult or movement which
is the target of persecution or prejudice -either from other groups or
from mainstream society itself.
Pluto is the god of death and rebirth, and when it moves through
the ninth, travel (another concern of this house) may be the catalyst
for major changes in our lives. Under this transit, we meet Pluto
when we are travelling. Usually, this doesn't mean our literal death,
but travel could provoke psychological deaths and rebirths during
this period. We will attract experiences while travelling which have
a life-changing effect on us, or meet people who profoundly influence
our lives. In many cases I have seen, people take up residence
abroad during this transit and are dramatically transformed through
immersion in a foreign culture. Because transiting Pluto arouses
deep or buried emotions, we may find ourselves battling with inner
'demons' and complexes while travelling; or we may discover that
what we thought was a universal moral concept is actually a
'cultural construct', something valid for our own world but not the
world. Joseph Conrad's book Heart of Darkness is a profound exploration of this dilemma. To the Planets and Through the Houses 337 Higher education is another ninth-house issue, and transiting
Pluto through this house could affect this area of life as well. If we
are at college or university during the time of this transit, we will be
significantly changed as a result of experiences we encounter there.
With Pluto transiting the ninth, conflicts and passions are likely to
be aroused in the pursuit of higher education: this could be anything
from falling madly in love with a professor to becoming involved in
political or ideological battles with the academic establishment. At
some point during this transit, we may choose to make a dramatic
shift in our major focus of study - a change from arts to science, or
vice versa. Embarking on an in-depth course of study in a topic that
engages us is a good way to use this transit at any age.
The ninth house also covers writing and publishing. If we write
during this period, we will meet Pluto in some form. The writing
itself may be experienced as a challenge or struggle, or what we
write could have a profound effect on the field or discipline with
which we are involved. Problems and entanglements with publishers
is another possibility if transiting Pluto makes difficult aspects to the
natal chart from this house.
Finally, the ninth house is traditionally associated with 'the higher
courts', and during Pluto's transit through this domain, legal battles
could be complex and drawn out. The ninth is also the house ruling
our relationship with in-laws (it is the third house from the seventh,
therefore connected with our partner's relatives). In a number of
cases I have seen, transiting Pluto through the ninth brought conflicts and battles with in-laws: a mother-in-law at odds with a
daughter-in-law; sisters-in-law or brothers-in-law at each other's
throats, etc. Under Pluto's influence, an in-law may be the agent
through which our simmering resentment and dilemmas about
power in relationships are brought to the surface - we hope, to be
integrated or transformed.
Tenth House
The transit of Pluto through the tenth is very powerful, not only
affecting our career goals, but helping us arrive at a deeper understanding of who we are and why we are here. This can happen in a 338 Pluto Transits number of different ways. As Pluto approaches the tenth-house
cusp, we may find ourselves feeling increasingly dissatisfied with the
work we are doing. The nature of the career itself may be called into
question. Is it the right one for us? Does it engage us enough?
Wherever Pluto transits we tear down, alter or destroy existing
circumstances in order to create new ones. Often we want to clear
the decks ruthlessly and completely remove what is already there in
order to build anew. Not all of us will have the experience of Pluto
transiting the tenth house, but if we do, it often indicates we are
more ready than ever to pursue the kind of career we feel is most
true or right for us. Some people feel a 'calling', choosing a true
vocation during this transit. Or they discover their ambition for the
first time in their lives.
In some cases under this transit, changes in career may be forced
on to us through involuntary redundancy or other such circumstances. If some part of us desperately wants or needs change and
we are not acknowledging this, we could unconsciously provoke an
employer to fire us or our business to collapse in order to be free to
pursue new lines of work. In a number of charts I have seen, people
with this transit leave a job on a matter of principle - they reach a
point where they no longer can tolerate how things are being run.
No matter how it happens, Pluto will find some way to effect change
in this area of life. Rather than changing occupations altogether, we
might stay within the same field, but become involved in an angle or
aspect of it that we have never tried before.
Pluto often stirs issues around power, and its transit of the tenth
house can manifest in various ways. I have seen people promoted to
positions of greater power within their work sphere, where transiting
Pluto brought increased authority over others, as if they were being
given a chance to explore more fully how to handle power wisely.
This was the case with Tony, promoted to a higher position when
Pluto crossed his tenth-house cusp only to discover that wielding
power intelligently wasn't an easy task. Shortly after taking up his
new post, he implemented changes in work schedules that antagonized many of the people under him. Determined not to be
overruled, he dug his heels in and maintained a hard line. It wasn't
long before protests were organized, and Tony found himself with a To the Planets and Through the Houses 339 major mess on his hands. Eventl1ally the heads of the organization
had to be called in to sort out the difficulties. They made it clear to
Tony that unless he learned how to dispense his authority with a
better understanding of the people who worked under him, he
wouldn't be in his new position much longer. By being given more
authority, and by his early mistakes, Tony learned the uses and
abuses of power from this transit.
Pluto creates intrigues and power-struggles in whatever house it
is transiting, and as it moves through the tenth we might find
ourselves engaged in more battles than usual with colleagues, bosses
or employees. These conflicts can awaken early infantile complexes
-in other words, unresolved power issues between ourselves and our
parents reappear in the guise of struggles with authority figures or
co-worker!\, and we need to assess and re-evaluate any hidden,
underlying motives that fuel our ambition and need for power or
worldly success. Are we trying to succeed in order to please a
parent? Are we seeking recognition to prove to people that we are
worthy and lovable person? Did we suffer so badly at the hands of
others when we were young that we desperately need power now in
order to feel secure?
One way or another under this transit, Pluto will find its way into
the work situation. An employer might die, leave or be replaced by
someone else. Secret talks and negotiations could be going on at the
executive level that will have a profound effect on the way things are
run. We may wake up one day to discover that the company we
work for has been taken over by another organization that plans to
make important changes in work procedures. A career we pursue at
this time may be of a Plutonic nature: medicine, psychology, investigative science or journalism, politics, mining, or even atomic
research. We might be working on something which has to be kept
secret, or promoting a cause to reform outworn or out-dated societal
institutions. This transit of Pluto can also mean that we become
intensely involved or obsessed with a work we are engaged in during
this period. In Planets in Transit, Robert Hand emphasizes that transiting Pluto in the tenth often stimulates a desire to take control and
dominate situations or other people. He warns that if we act ruthlessly in the pursuit of our goals at this time, we are likely to suffer as a 340 Pluto Transits a result. 13 With transiting Pluto in the tenth, should we behave in
ways that are untoward or illegal, there is a good chance we will be
caught out. If discrimination is not exercised, some people with this
transit could invite public scandal and humiliation or a professional
downfall. In Transits: The Time of Your Life, Betty Lundsted echoes
Hand's warning when she advises people with transiting Pluto in
the tenth not to engage in 'short cuts, graft or underhanded
dealings'. 14 I would agree with both these authors: it may be appropriate to pursue goals avidly while under this transit, but it is ·
safer to play fairly and by the rules.
The tenth house is also associated with mother or father,
depending on which parent the astrologer feels 'fits' best with this
house.* If we take the tenth to signify the mother, Pluto's transit here
could indicate a period when she is going through transformative
experiences in her life. These may be positive, but in some cases
she might fall ill or face difficult emotional problems. In certain
instances, this transit coincides with the death of a parent especially at the time Pluto crosses the tenth-house cusp. When I see
transiting Pluto approaching the tenth house of a client's chart
and discover that the mother is elderly or ailing, I will advise the
person to do whatever he or she can to resolve .unfinished emotional issues with her, since she may die under this transit. The
loss of a parent at any time in our lives will stir deep emotional
pain and confusion that needs to be faced and gone through, but
these reactions will be felt even more strongly with transiting Pluto
in the tenth -especially if we have not prepared ourselves. t
Under this transit it is also possible that a parent's death will free
us from long-standing restrictions and insecurities we have experienced in connection with that parent, and we may then feel reborn
as a result. Even if a parent's death isn't apparent or imminent,
Pluto entering and moving through the tenth is a time to take stock *See chapters. notes.
tSee p. 261 for a discussion of issues raised by a parent's death. See also Suggested
Reading (p. 386 for a list of books on death and the grieving process. To the Planets and Through the Houses 341 of where we stand in relation to one or both of our parents. The
transforming influence of Pluto could help us clear difficult issues
and blocks between the parent in question and ourselves. We may
be unable to confront a parent face-to-face with what we are feeling
or what we would like to say, but we still can work through
unresolved issues with our 'inner' parent by seeking the help of a
therapist or counsellor or finding some way to do this on our own.
In some cases I have come across, this transit occurred many years
after the death of a parent, and yet it stirred unresolved feelings
about that parent. Even if mother or father is already dead, transiting
Pluto in the tenth may ask that we work on finally transforming our
relationship with that parent, extricating ourselves from guilt, anger
and resentment in order to live our own lives more fully.
Eleventh House
The eleventh house is associated with friends, groups, and long-term
goals and objectives. When transiting Pluto moves through the
eleventh, we_ will experience challenges, disruption and change in
these spheres of life.
Transiting Pluto iri the eleventh often reveals itself through issues
around friendship. On a positive note, this transit could indicate
important and profound liaisons which endure over many years,
even through periods of separation and change. However, Pluto
moving through the eleventh also suggests complications in this
area. While we could come to value friendship very deeply during
this time, we are likely to encounter difficulties and dramas as well.
Psychological complexes and problems we have been carrying
around inside us from childhood and the past could be projected and
re-experienced through circumstances involving friends. We might
find ourselves very angry, hurt, resentful, jealous or competitive
with close associates, or sexual undercurrents or rivalry could complicate a friendship.* At some point during this transit, we may feel let
*See chapter 8, pp. 226-45, for a discussion of infantile complexes and how to work
with them. 342 Pluto Transits down or betrayed by a friend or group of friends whom we trusted,
or we may be the one to turn our back on old friends and desert
them for new allegiances. Power-struggles between friends is another
possibility with Pluto transiting here. We may want to control and
dominate friends, fearing that unless we are in charge they may act
in ways that harm or hurt us. Or we may feel that a friend is trying
to suffocate, over-control or dominate us, and as a result we want to
break free of the relationship.
With Pluto in this house, some of our friendships may have to
end: they are outworn or negative, or the other person 'is no longer
on the same wave-length as we are. A close friend may move away
or die, stirring grief, anger, guilt and a host of other psychological
issues that we need to confront. Conversely, this transit also signifies
the fomiation of new friendships that can have a profound and
transformative effect on our lives. Friends can be the catalysts who
bring change to us: an old or new friend could introduce us to new
ideas, new fashions or new groups that alter our whole outlpok and
approach to life. Pluto deepens whatever area it transits: in the
eleventh, it asks that we examine more closely our reasons for
forming friendships - are there secret or ulterior motives for wanting
to be a particular person's friend? More positively, transiting Pluto in
the eleventh can help enrich our appreciation of the value, meaning
and importance of friendship. However, this is usually achieved only
after the relationship has been tested or tried in some way.
Besides circles of friends, the eleventh house is also associated
with groups or our experience in groups, and transiting Pluto can
bring expansive and positive experiences in this sphere: we may join
a social group that broadens our contacts with other people, or we
might align ourselves with groups of a political or humanitarian
nature, and find new meaning in life through contributing to causes
and immersing ourselves in activities that help other people. We
could be drawn to groups interested in the radical reform of society's
existing structures and institutions, but should we act too ruthlessly
or treacherously to achieve the group's aims under this transit, we
are likely to come into direct conflict with the law; our cause may be
just and we may feel extreme tactics are necessary, and yet it is still
wise to look inside ourselves to understand better why our reactions To the Planets and Through the Houses 343 are so violent or emotional. The fervour we feel for a cause could be
entangled with unresolved infantile rage towards parents or authority figures, but by analysing the original source of our anger, we
can view the immediate situation with more objectivity; this will
help us to choose more clearly the most effective ways to realize our
goals.
During this period, a group may serve to break down our existing
ego-boundaries and open us in ways we haven't experienced before.Some people under this transit jump right in at the deep end and join
therapy groups expressly for the purpose of psychological growth
and exploration. However, the group experience can also be frightening or difficult for us when Pluto is moving through this house. Deep
emotional complexes and unresolved issues from early childhood (or
past lives) may be revealed in group situations. We may find ourselves exceptionally uneasy or disturbed within a group context, or we
may fear that the group won't accept us. With Pluto moving through
the eleventh, we could project the destructive force of Pluto on to a
group- if so, we will feel as if one of its members or the group itself is
trying to destroy us. Some of us with Pluto transiting here could end up
playing the scapegoat for a group, or find ourselves in the role of' group
shadow', attracting hostility for expressing what other members are
afraid to admit to in themselves. While such experiences are not
pleasant, exploring why we attract these kinds of projections can help
us come to a deeper psychological understanding of ourselves.
The transit of Pluto through the eleventh could make us confused
about where we fit into society or the collective of which we are a
part. We may go through a period offeeling isolated and lonely until
we can arrive at a deeper understanding of our relationship to
humanity and other people in general. Conversely, for some of us
this transit may coincide with a breakthrough - what Marilyn
Ferguson calls 'an entry point experience'- in which we realize our
interconnectedness or unity with the rest of creation. 15 This could
prompt us to join groups that serve the evolution of society and the
planet in general, or promote the well-being of those whom we feel
are being unfairly treated.
The eleventh house also describes our goals and objectives in life,
and the ideals we wish to realize in the future. By the end of Pluto's 344 Pluto Transits transit of the eleventh, we will have siggificantly altered our sense of
direction and purpose in life. Goals we once thought important or
desirable may not seem so central to us any more. As our objectives
and ideals change, so too will our choice of friends and groups.
During a Pluto transit, the manner in which we set about realizing
our desired aims also needs to be examined: if we are continually
vague about our goals or sluggish in pursuing them, we need to
fathom the reasons for this, and to transform such a pattern. However, as discussed earlier, when Pluto is affecting this house we
should be careful about employing extreme measures, for if we fail to
modify an overbearing or over-aggressive way of pursuing our aims,
transiting Pluto in the eleventh may make life very difficult for us
until we are willing to change.
Twelfth House
We tend to identify with and live out certain parts of our chart,
while other facets of the birth map are relegated to the unconscious.
The ego - or sense of 'I' - builds walls to keep out what threatens it.
We are capable of denying or suppressing any factor in the chart: we
might be out of touch with Mars, or we might suppress the Moon or
our Neptunian side. Although we may be unconscious of any chart
placement, the twelfth house is one of the clearest indications of
those drives, motivations and elements in our nature that are likely
to be operating below the surface level of awareness. The task of
Pluto transiting the twelfth is to bring into consciousness those parts
of ourselves which are hidden, weak or undeveloped, so that they
can be faced and integrated into the ego-identity. In other words,
when Pluto transits the twelfth, we have an opportunity to discover
and form a relationship with those aspects of our being that we have
hitherto denied or repressed.
Freud first perceived the unconscious as a repository of what is
primitive, evil or anti-social in us. However, the unconscious is not
just the storehouse of negative drives - it also contains positive
potentialities that have yet to be recognized fully. As children, our
survival depends on winning the love of a caretaker. Certain drivesour aggressive and sexual impulses in particular - are usually not To the Planets and Through the Houses 345 acceptable to the environment and therefore we deny or repress
them for the sake of winning love and securing our survival. But it is
also possible that our caretakers may not wholly approve of other,
more positive traits we might exhibit - our innate spontaneity,
curiosity or creativity, for example. Should we as children sense that
the environment does not validate such qualities in us, these too will
be banished to the unconscious. Positive drives as well as so-called
negative ones can be denied or repressed.
As it transits the twelfth, Pluto will conspire in any way it can to
bring us face to face with those parts of ourselves from which we
have run away. During this transit, we will attract circumstances
and events that force us to look inside and discover more of what we
are. Reclaiming missing parts is not always a comfortable task.
Something in us still believes that acknowledging our hostile or
sexual feelings entails losing the love of others and therefore endangering our survival. Accepting untapped positive potential is just
as frightening. If we fully own our latent talents, resources and
skills, we will have to shoulder the responsibility of doing something
to develop these potentials. Refusing to know is a way of not having
to take responsibility for what is there. And yet doing so means we
remain half a person, incomplete and unfulfilled. Whether we like it
or not, the aim of Pluto transiting the twelfth is to help us rediscover
those parts of ourselves we have denied, so that when Pluto reaches
the ascendant we can emerge reborn - more completely in touch
with who we are than ever before, and ready to express more openly
our newly discovered self.
Pluto moving through the twelfth not only stirs and awakens
whatever planet it aspects by transit, but it also gives us the opportunity to transform or regenerate the way we have been expressing or using that planet. This was the case with Jean, a woman who
came for a reading when transiting Pluto was conjuncting her
twelfth-house Mars. She had always considered herself extremely
withdrawn and shy. But under this transit, she was promoted in her
work to a position of greater power and authority over others, and
as a result she had to explore and utilize more of her Mars energy.
Similarly, a man had transiting Pluto in the twelfth conjunct his
natal Moon. During this period, he discovered and more fully ex- 346 Pluto Transits pressed feelings he normally kept hidden - he found himself in
situations that forced him to reveal his emotional needs and frustrations in ways he had never dared previously. The same dynamic
applies to transiting Pluto in this house aspecting other planets in
the chart, even if these are not natally in the twelfth. So if transiting
Pluto through the twelfth squares natal Mars in the third or ninth,
for instance, qualities of Mars will be brought into the open and
·made available for transformation
Pluto transiting the twelfth has an uncanny ability to reactivate
issues from earlier in our lives that we have not yet fully resolved.
This can happen quite concretely in the form of people from the past
turning up with whom we have some sort of unfinished business.
For example, when transiting Pluto in the twelfth aspected one
woman's natal Venus, she ran into her first serious boyfriend (whom
she hadn't seen in 20 years) at a party, and the meeting rekindled
an old passion between them. However, it's not only people who
come out of the woodwork - any kind of unresolved situation from
the past can reappear in a slightly altered but thinly disguised form.
For instance, a man who had experienced fierce power-struggles
with his father met the same situation with an employer when
transiting Pluto in the twelfth opposed his natal sixth-house Sun; in
other words, his father complex resurfaced through problems with
his boss at this time. Transiting Pluto through the twelfth acts like a
clearing house - it forces us to face issues we might have run away
from or left dangling in the past. We can also find ourselves intensely
reliving old encounters or experiences through powerful dreams we
have at this time, as if the dreams are serving to bring to our
awareness problems we still need to come to terms with.
Fears, complexes and insecurities from early life come clearly into
focus during this transit. Based on our childhood experience and
perception of mother and the early environment, we form opinions
about what kind of person we are and what life 'out there' is going
to be like for us. We carry these early impressions and assumptions
around inside us, and for the rest of our lives they continue to
influence our self-image and what we expect from the world. They
become part of our personal mythology - the framework and beliefsystems we have about ourselves and life in general. As transiting To the Planets and Through the Houses 34 7 Pluto moves through the twelfth and makes aspects to other planets
in the chart, our early life-statements and beliefs come to the surface
through current situations we are encountering in our lives, or
possibly through dreams which evoke our most deep-seated fears
and complexes. For instance, if transiting Pluto in the twelfth makes
an aspect to our natal Moon, the kinds of opinions and images we
formed around mother and the kinds of expectations we have about
getting our emotional needs met will be brought to the fore; or if
transiting Pluto in the twelfth aspects the natal Sun, our unresolved
issues with father and our feelings about our own power and worth
will resurface. As mentioned earlier, transiting Pluto through the
twelfth manages to arrange our meeting 'ghosts' from the past
through the agency of current events. This transit creates the ideal
breeding ground for what is known in analytical psychology as
repetition compulsion: the tendency to keep re-creP.ting early-life traumas and difficulties, perhaps in order to resolve and work through
them as best we can. By facing and dealing with our deeply ingrained
complexes, we will feel less fated to repeat these patterns over and
over again in life. Transiting Pluto in the twelfth helps to cleanse
and free the psyche from the unconscious repetition of the past.
When Pluto finally reaches the ascendant, we can look at life from a
whole new perspective.
If we consider the ascendant to relate to birth, then the twelfth
house, which precedes the first, can be understood as what is in the
back of the mind before birth. The developing embryo is receptive
not just to physical substances that the mother ingests, but is also
affected by her overall psychological state during the gestation
period, and her attitudes and experiences are transmitted through
the umbilical connection to the foetus in the womb. The nature of
what is passed on to the child in this way is shown by the twelfth
house (i.e. planets and signs there, as well as the placement by
sign, house and aspect of the planet ruling the sign on the cusp of
the twelfth). Therefore, as Pluto transits the twelfth, this area of life
is reactivated and experiences we had in the womb will resurface in
some way through present life circumstances. I did the chart for a
woman with Saturn ruling the cusp of the twelfth. After her mother's
death, she found a diary in which her mother had written that she 348 Pluto Transits had not wanted to have a child; throughout the pregnancy, the
mother had wished she wasn't pregnant, because it conflicted with
her work as an artist. I believe that these were the kinds of messages
transmitted via the umbilical effect to my client, while she was still
in the womb, for she grew into a woman who unconsciously harboured a deep belief that nobody really loved or wanted her. When
transiting Pluto went through the twelfth house and squared her
natal Saturn which ruled the twelfth, all these negative expectations
came to the surface in a relationship she was having at the time. The
relationship brought into the open fears and self-doubts which had
formed during her gestation. With the help of the chart reading and
subsequent psychotherapy, she was able to make a connection
between her strong current feelings of rejection and what she had
felt in the womb in relation to the mother. In the therapy, she was
able to express the anger she felt towards her mother, and she came
to see how she kept repeating her early hurt through falling in love
,with men who had difficulty loving her back. By becoming more
aware of the complex and its origins, she began the process of
freeing herself from blindly repeating its pattern. Transiting Pluto
through the twelfth had exposed the deep early feelings and gave her
the opportunity to come to terms with them.
The twelfth house shows influences from the past that are affecting
us now, but these could stem from even farther back than the
womb. Many astrologers refer to the twelfth house as the 'house of
karma', the area of the chart which most directly shows the debits ,
we are carrying over from previous incarnations. Understood in this
way, transiting Pluto through the twelfth could reactivate problems
or difficulties that have their origins in unresolved past-life issues.
But we should also remember the continuity principle of karma, the
concept that positive traits and potentials developed in one life will
be carried over into the next. Therefore, the twelfth will show our
ingrained assets - acquired abilities and qualities that may be latent
in us until transiting Pluto through the twelfth brings them out into
the open again.
The twelfth house is an indication of what is stored in the unconscious from early childhood, the womb, or from our past lives, but
there is another branch of memory - what is called our 'ancestral To the Planets and Through the Houses 349 inheritance'. Just as biophysical traits are carried in the genes, we
inherit a mental and emotional legacy as well. Our psyche teems not
only with our personal experience, but also with the parental,
ancestral and racial memories that are handed down from one
generation to the next. We are the beneficiaries of our ancestors'
unresolved psychological difficulties, and also the recipients of their
positive traits and drives. The natal placements involving the twelfth
house describe the nature of our ancestral inheritance, and transiting
Pluto through the twelfth brings this more fully into the open. As
Pluto transits the twelfth, we can find ourselves unwittingly living
out and trying to resolve the kinds of psychological dilemmas with
which our ancestors also contended. Or the transit of Pluto here
could activate latent abilities and potentials which we have inherited
through the family line.
The twelfth can be associated with an even larger pool of memory
than just the ancestral inheritance, the pool Jung referred to as the
collective unconscious: the entire memory bank, not only of the
individual, the family or the tribe, but of the whole human race. The
collective unconscious represents the sum total of all the thought
substance of humanity. Every cell in our body has coded within it
everything that has ever happened before us. In some way, as
shown by our twelfth house, we are linked to the past and to all of
creation, carrying records of experience far beyond what we have
personally known. People with a strong twelfth-house emphasis
have a natural access to this collective memory bank. Therefore,
transiting Pluto moving through the twelfth can enliven the ability
to tap into this realm. What we write, say, create, do, dream or
experience during this transit could in some way be an expression of
our attunement to images and thoughts circulating on the level of
the collective unconscious.
The twelfth house represents the greater whole of which we are a
part. One way or another, transiting Pluto in the twelfth will make
us more aware of our essential interconnectedness with the rest of
creation. When Pluto transits here, we may have to contend with
the less pleasant aspects of the collective shadow, experiencing a
period during which we are more susceptible to dark or destructive
undercurrents in the atmosphere around us. We could be excep- 350 Pluto Transits tionally sensitive to anger or hostility in the air, and even 'taken
over' by such feelings. In other words, some of the feelings we are
having at this time may not be entirely our own - but those of
people around us which we have absorbed as if we were a psychic
sponge or vacuum cleaner. With Pluto transiting the twelfth it is
also possible to be 'used' as an agent of change or transformation for
society by embracing some cause or reform, thereby acting out
Pluto's predilection to tear down what is outworn and to rebuild
new, more authentic structures. As we become more aware of our
unity with the rest of life, our motivation to serve and help others
also increases.
The twelfth house is associated with institutions - hospitals, prisons, schools, libraries, museums, etc. When Pluto transits this house,
we will meet Pluto through this area of life as well. Some of us with
Pluto transiting the twelfth may work to transform outmoded institutions, removing the old or moribund to make room for something
new or innovative. Or we could be transformed ourselves through
significant encounters with institutions - a period in prison, confinement in hospital, or through work we are doing for a charity,
library, museum or other such place. Unpleasant experiences within
an institution of any sort could awaken 'the beast' in us, activating
our early infantile rage, fears and complexes. One thing is certain: if
we have close associations with any of society's institutions when
Pluto is transiting the twelfth, we will emerge from these cruCial,
perhaps painful, encounters with a deepened sense of ourselves,
with a renewed sense of what we may offer the collective, and with
an increased possibility to contribute to its - as well as our own transformation. PART FIVE The Light at the End of the Tunnel IO Three Case Histories A transit to any placement in the.birthchart can be fully understood
only in light of the whole chart. A transiting planet aspecting natal
Mars, for instance, will not only affect Mars, but it also will activate
any natal planet in aspect to Mars. Furthermore, during any crucial
period of a person's life, there will usually be more than one important transit influencing the natal chart; for example, transiting
Uranus might be conjuncting Mars and opposing Saturn at the same
time that transiting Neptune is squaring the Sun and trilling the
Moon, while transiting Pluto is passing over the midheaven and
conjuncting the Venus/Uranus midpoint. In assessing the effect of
any transit, many astrologers will also examine the simultaneous
secondary progressions, taking into account the transits to these
progressions as well. A person's age, background, temperament,
level of self-awareness and self-understanding all have a direct influence on how a transit or progression is experienced, so these too
must be taken into consideration. Someone with a fiery chart and
prominent natal Uranus, for example, is likely to have an easier time
adjusting to Uranus transits than a person with six planets in earth,
while a person with a stellium in Pisces and a strongly placed natal
Neptune would probably cope better with a Neptune transit than
someone with a preponderance of air in the chart. With so many
factors to consider and to synthesize, interpreting outer planet transits is a complex task that challenges the skill of even the most
experienced astrologer. The following case histories are included as a
teaching aid to illustrate the workings of transiting Uranus, Neptune
and Pluto within the framework of the whole chart, and to examine 353 354 The Light at the End of the Tunnel in greater detail how periods of pain and crisis can offer opportunities
for profound psychological growth.
Betty Betty met her future husband in I97I, and they lived together for
four years before getting married in I Mercúrio 7 5. In I Mercúrio 7 7, two years after
the marrriage, Betty left her job in public relations to pursue a lifelong ambition to become an actress. Focusing primarily on establishing herself in her new profession, she was prepared to delay having
children for a number of years, although her husband was more
keen to start a family right away. From I977 to I979 she toured the
world with various theatre companies, receiving praise and recognition for her work. However, in November I979 her husband, who
had begun an affair during one of the periods she was away,
announced that he was leaving Betty for this other woman. He
refused to investigate why the marriage had broken down or to
consider any ways in which the difficulties could be resolved. On
reflection, Betty feels she underestimated how much her huband
wanted to have children and the degree to which he resented her
not playing the role of a traditional 'mothering' type of wife. He
finally left to live with his girlfriend in January I980. Betty was
devasted, literally beating the walls and screaming in Unbearable
pain and agony. And yet by March I980 she could look back on the
experience and begin to see value in it: 'It was extremely creative for
me and something I'm glad I went through. I was very upset at the
time and wanted Stan back, but eventually I realized it had to be.
The break-up of my marriage marked a clear dividing line in my life,
a person_al B CI AD.'
The transits and progressions occurring during this period (see fig.
I) describe not only the outer events but also Betty's inner experience
-what the dissolution of the marriage meant for her. Her natal Sun
in Pisces had progressed to 2 3 degrees of Aries moving through the
eleventh house. The movement of the progressed Sun is an augury
of a shift in self-definition, and as it aspects natal planets, we are
presented with new opportunities for change and growth. Betty's
unfoldment at this time was symbolized by the progressed Sun in Three Case Histories 3 55 Aries in the eleventh house- the fervent pursuit (Aries) of the goal
(eleventh house) to establish herself as an actress. (In I Mercúrio 7 7, the year
she changed professions to go into acting, the progressed Sun exactly
sextiled natal Mars in 2 I Gemini in the twelfth, activating her desire
to fulfil a hidden ambition. And in February I Mercúrio 79 career issues were
further emphasized by a solar eclipse in 7 degrees of Pisces, which
conjuncted her midheaven, squared natal Uranus and inconjuncted 356 The Light at the End of the Tunnel natal Pluto). Considering the importance of this time in her life, I
had expected to find the progressed Sun making a major aspect to
her natal chart, but this was not so. However, the progressed Sun
was widely opposing transiting Pluto in Betty's fifth house. Her
desire to realize her goals during this period (progressed Sun in the
eleventh) was opposed by, or at odds \\ith, transiting Pluto in Libra
in the fifth, accurately reflecting her dilemma about having children
and the conflict caused within her marriage by the decision to
embark on a career that would leave less time for her private life.
Her husband (born with the Moon in Gemini trine Jupiter) partially
supported her acting ambitions, but he also resented her not being
at home to look after him (besides trining Jupiter, his Moon squares
Venus and Saturn in Virgo, giving a more conventional image of the
feminine). Betty's case history is a reminder of the importance of
transits to progressions when assessing any situation or event.
Throughout 1979, transiting Pluto was inconjuncting Betty's
tenth-house Pisces Sun - another indication that her acting career
(Sun in tenth in the creative sign of Pisces) conflicted with the
domain of children (transiting Pluto in the fifth). But I was surprised
to find transiting Pluto trining her Venus at the time her marriage
broke up. Previously I would have associated a relationship crisis
with transiting Pluto in hard angle to natal Venus, but in this case
there was a trine. Again, Betty's story had something to teach even transiting Pluto trines or sextiles can correlate with painful
endings and new beginnings. Betty was enjoying success abroad
acting in repertory theatre, and this was partly reflected by transiting
Pluto in the fifth (the house of creativity) trine Venus in the ninth
(the planet of creativity in the house of travel). But the Pluto-Venus
trine, helped by the fact that transiting Pluto was forming a grand
trine with her natal Venus trine to Mars and Saturn, also symbolized
the way she reconciled herself fairly quickly to the end of the
marriage. She felt a great deal of pain, but within a few months after
the event she was able to find meaning and relevance in what she
was going through. Had Pluto been making a conjunction, square
or opposition to natal Venus, Betty might have fought much harder
and longer against this crisis; instead, she came to terms with the
inevitability of her marriage breaking ·down and could accept the Three Case Histories 357 painful loss which none the less resolved her dilemma and further
contributed to her creative growth.
When she was younger, Betty's family were happy for her to
explore her creative talents as a hobby, but they discouraged her
from taking up acting as a profession and she was persuaded to
develop secretarial skills instead. However, between 1977 and 1979,
when transiting Pluto in Libra came to trine her natal Saturn and
Mars in the twelfth, Betty found the courage, determination and
strength (Mars and Saturn) to be true to herself and follow her
deepest inclinations. Progressed Mars moving out of the twelfth and
over her ascendant likewise described the ability to express more
openly her personal will and desires at this time. The transit of Pluto
sextile to Jupiter in Leo in the third correlated with her success
abroad and the sense of pride and self-worth this gave her. However,
the progression of the ascendant over her natal north node conjunct
Pluto in Leo in the second was also highly significant in this respect.
The north node is a point of growth and evolution inthe horoscope,
and it is conjunct Pluto in Betty's chart - in other words, crisis
(Pluto) is intimately connected with growth (north node). The progressed ascendant reaching this point in her birth map signalled that
Betty's next step in development demanded she stand up for herself
and follow her personal desires and value-system (Leo second house)·
even if it meant conflict and crisis; it was a time when she had to find
her identity, power, value and self-worth from inside herself (north
node in Leo in the second) rather than through a partnership or by
adjusting to her husband's preferences (south node in the eighth).
The progressed ascendant hitting Pluto in the second carried another
meaning. Betty had been deriving a sense of security and safety (the
second house) from her marriage, but when it collapsed she found
she was capable of surviving even after what she thought she
needed for survival was taken away. In other words, through the
progressed ascendant activating Pluto, Betty discovered her own indestructability.
.
Neptune, by transit mid progression, also played an important
role in the changes Betty was experiencing during this period. In late
1979 and early 1980 Neptune was between I8 and 21 degrees of
Sagittarius moving through her sixth house and filling the empty leg 3 58 The Light at the End of the Tunnel of her T-square (Sun-Mercury in Pisces opposing Moon in Virgo
squared by Saturn-Mars in Gemini). Neptune in the sixth house (the
house of work) indicated both the choice of a creative field of work
and also the fact that sacrifices had to be made in relation to that
sphere of life - a theme reiterated by transiting Neptune squaring
her Sun in the tenth (the house of career). One way or another, a
Neptunian sacrifice was called for. If she chose to have children,
then her acting work would have been sacrificed. If she chose to
pursue her career, she would have to give up the idea of mothering
at this time. Transiting Neptune in the sixth opposed natal Saturn,
the ruler of her seventh house, and through this we can see that the
relationship was in danger of dissolving because of issues around
work (the sixth). In addition to these Neptune transits, transiting
Neptune was also sextiling her natal Venus as well. As in the case of
transiting Pluto trine Venus, we once again find a soft aspect - a
transiting sextile to Venus- coinciding with a crisis and the breakup of a marriage. Normally we might associate a transiting Neptune
square or opposition to Venus with the letting go of a relationship,
but in this case the aspect was a sextile. Her husband's clandestine
affair is shown by transiting Neptune (deception) square the Sun
(the male principle), and by her progressed Venus opposing natal
Neptune during this period: any fantasies or ideals .(Neptune) she
might have had about her 'perfect' husband (Sun) or relationship
(Venus) were undermined by his infidelity. The progression of Venus
in Aries in the tenth opposing Neptune in Libra in the fourth also
correlated to the domestic sacrifices (Neptune in the fourth) required
of Betty for the sake of developing a creative career (progressed
Venus in Aries in the tenth).
During this period transiting Uranus trined her Sun and squared
her natal Venus-Jupiter opposition. The Uranus-Sun trine supports
the idea that Betty was freeing and expanding her self-expression,
personal will and spirit at this time by pursuing her career goals in
spite of what others felt. The fact that her marriage was disrupted by
her choice to delay having children and to focus instead on developing her creative talents was shown by transiting Uranus in the fifth
(the house of children and creativity) square to Venus in the ninth
(ruling Libra in the fifth) and Jupiter in Leo in the third ruling Three Case Histories 359 Sagittarius in the sixth house (touring with repertory companies
took her away from the relationship). In 1979. Uranus, Neptune
and Pluto in the heaven were lined up in adjacent signs: Pluto
moved back and forth between 16 and 21 degrees of Libra; Uranus
moved between 19 and 23 degrees of Scorpio; and Neptune stayed
within 18 to 20 degrees of Sagittarius. For this reason the natal
planets between these degrees in Betty's chart (Sun, Venus, Jupiter,
Saturn and Mars) were affected simultaneously by each of the
transiting outer planets. In particular, transiting Pluto trined her
Venus in Aquarius, transiting Neptune sextiled the Venus, and
transiting Uranus squared it. With all three of the outer planets
stimulating her Venus in Aquarius, Betty discovered that the kind of
relationship she really wanted was one based on values of an
Aquarian nature:
The pain I went through was for the best. I realized that· I had
been playing the wife - playing out certain roles - and not really
being myself. My relationship with Stan was immature ... it was
too symbiotic - we were too enmeshed and dependent on one
another. One of the first books I read after we broke up was Erich
Fromm's The Art of Loving, and I started to assess what love really
means. Love has to do with freedom rather than hemming in.
Her progressed Venus in Aries was coming to sextile natal Uranus in
the twelfth- again we can see the linking of Venus with Aquarian
values, and an unconscious need for change, freedom and spape
(twelfth-house Uranus). Progressed Venus also was about to trine her
north node and Pluto, suggesting that the disruption was painful
and traumatic, but none the less dictated by a need to evolve.
In 1979, Saturn was moving through her fourth house, where it
passed over the Moon-Chiron conjunction, opposed her tenth-house
Mercury and Sun in Pisces, inconjuncted Venus and squared the
Saturn-Mars conjunction in Gemini in the twelfth. The fourth and
tenth are both parental houses and the twelfth is related to the
unconscious and the past. Transiting Saturn's influence on these
houses meant that at this time Betty was confronting issues from
childhood inherited via the family. Betty had been brought up in an
environment where communication was a problem- nobody in her 360 The Light at the End of the Tunnel family had found it easy to express themselves or come out and say
what they really wanted (Mars conjunct Saturn in Gemini in the
twelfth square Sun-Mercury in Pisces in the tenth and the Moon in
Virgo in the fourth). With Saturn affecting the fourth, tenth and
twelfth, and with all three outer planet transits hitting Venus (ruling
Libra on her fifth-house cusp and Taurus on the cusp of the twelfth),
Betty had the opportunity to confront and break through parental
patterns and childhood conditioning by asserting an inner need to
delay mothering so that her creative and professional ambitions
could be fulfilled. However, the dissolution of the marriage was the
price she had to pay for her honesty: her husband left her in January ·
1980, but by March, when transiting Jupiter conjuncted her IC,
she was already aware of a new sense of self emerging from within:
As soon as I got through the initial crisis and March came, I saw the garden starting to grow again- and I started to feel that I was
growing again. When I began to put the pieces of my life back
together, I put them back in a slightly different way and realized
the importance of what had happened in terms of my own
development. After years of being what other people wanted me
to be, I felt like I was finally becoming my own person. Olivia In late 1979 Olivia, aged 55, discovered she had cancer. She agreed
to immediate surgery, assured that the removal of the tumour would
stop the disease from spreading. A year later, however, ill December
1980, secondary cancer was diagnosed. OliVia was told that unless
she consented to another operation, she had only between six weeks
and six months to live. She refused to be operated on again, but now
-over seven years later- she is more alive than ever, not just healthy
but enjoying great well-being and energy. She faced despair, disease
and death, and emerged from the experience transformed.
If we include Chiron - the image of the wounded healer - in her
chart (see fig. 2), Olivia has three T-squares. One T-square is in
cardinal signs (Saturn in Libra opposing Chiron in Aries, squared by
Venus in Cancer); another T-square is mutable ijupiter in Sagittarius Three Case Histories 36.l OLivia. fig.2
opposing the Sun in Gemini, squared by Uranus in Pisces), while the
third is fixed {the Moon conjunct Nepture in Leo opposing Mars in
Aquarius, squared by Mercury in Taurus). The chart also shows two
grand trines - one involving Sun, Saturn and Mars in air signs and
the other in fire involving Moon-Neptune, Jupiter and Chiron. From
the time of the diagnosis of her illness through to her recovery in
1982, transiting Uranus, Neptune and Pluto were triggering each of 362 The Light at the End of the Tunnel her T-squares and the grand trines as well. Transiting Uranus in
Scorpio touched off the fixed T-square; transiting Neptune in Sagittarius affected the mutable T-square and the fire grand trine; and
transiting Pluto was conjuncting Saturn, activating the cardinal Tsquare and the air grand trine. Almost every planet in her chart was
involved in these outer planet transits, and Olivia's life was never to
be the same.
Inner planet transits can trigger the effects of slower-moving
transits. Transiting Mercury in Scorpio was conjuncting transiting
Uranus in Olivia's first house and opposing her natal Mercury on 7
December I979. the day her doctor rang with news that would
profoundly alter the course of her life - a biopsy had confirmed her
condition as cancerous. And yet on that same day the transiting Sun
in Sagittarius was exactly conjunct her natal Jupiter, the planet of
hope and expansion, and the transiting Mercury-Uranus conjunction in the heaven was trining her natal Uranus - early hints that
the crisis, terrible as it may have seemed at the time, heralded a
period of growth and broadened awareness. Understandably, Olivia's
first reaction was shock: her existing sense of identity was shattered
and undermined (transiting Uranus in the first, and transiting Neptune conjunct her progressed ascendant). She was familiar with
American and British research into the cancer-prone personality
which concluded that people who were emotionally repressed and
unable to express anger or love spontaneously were more likely to
suffer from the disease. Olivia couldn't believe she fitted that description: her life was going well and she had done a fair amount of
psychological self-exploration. But if the research findings were true,
it meant that she was still not entirely open or receptive to the full
range of her emotions. Transiting Uranus in the strongly emotional
sign of Scorpio squared to her Moon-Mars opposition and trine to
natal Uranus initiated a period in Olivia's life which would awaken
feelings more powerful and deep than she had ever before experienced.
Although an operation in December I979 had supposedly cured
her of the cancer, she felt depressed and uneasy for some months
after. As a result she sought the help of a psychotherapist in spring
I980, and through the work they did together, she discovered a Three Case Histories 363 host of denied emotions inside her. During this period, transiting
Pluto was moving through the twelfth, arousing unconscious responses, and the Moon - the planet associated with feelings - was
squared by transiting Uranus, trined by transiting Neptune and
sextiled by transiting Pluto. In other words, the Moon was under the
scrutiny of all three outer planets. These transits- exposed losses,
disappointments and broken dreams from earlier times in her life. ·
However, Olivia was frightened by the depth of depair she had
discovered in herself - part of her wanted to continue delving into
her psyche, but another part was afraid she couldn't cope with the
drastic changes and upheaval this might bring. Thinking that she
.needed time to assimilate what the therapy had brought to the
surface so far, she chose not to continue with the sessions. By
terminating counselling, she was trying to avoid the difficult emotional journey into the darkest regions of her psyche that her eighth
house Sun, Scorpio ascendant, and twelfth house transiting Pluto
were asking her to make. But it wouldn't be long before renewed
attempts to heal her physical body would force her to follow that
Scorpionic route.
In December 1980, a secondary cancer was diagnosed. The consultant who had performed the surgery the year before encouraged
her to undergo a second operation. Olivia described this time as the
bleakest period in the whole saga, 'like thinking you are in your own
home and shelter, and then all of a sudden, the shelter moves away
and you are left in the middle of an Arctic night in December'. Let
down by the medical 'expert' who had led her to believe her first
operation was all that would be needed, she had never felt so
betrayed and so alone. Transiting Pluto was nearly stationary in the
heaven at that time, stuck in 24 degrees of Libra in her twelfth
house, I degree away from her Saturn. All her unconscious defences
(Saturn) were under siege by Pluto, and she had to confront head-on
life's most basic existential concerns. Not only was she confronting
death (transiting Neptune and Pluto were both inconjuncting Mercury ruling the eighth house), but she also had to face the anxiety of
being totally responsible for her life - no one could decide the next
move for her. She could agree to another operation, but the thought
of further surgical mutilation was abhorrent, and apparently it had 364 The Light at the End of the Tunnel a less than 60 per cent chance of curing the cancer. She could try an
alternative therapy she had read about - a strict and demanding
regime involving a major change in diet and lifestyle which, if
unsuccessful, would amount to nothing but a very unpleasant and
dull way of spending the last months of her life. Or she could forget
about any kind of treatment and live out her remaining time engaged
in activities she would enjoy - for instance, making a pilgrimage to
various places in the world she longed to visit. The third option, that
of forgoing any form of treatment and making the most of her last
months as best she could, was very tempting. But in the end she
chose to fight the cancer. This decision was reflected by transiting
Pluto trining her fourth-house Mars and sextiling her Moon, and
transiting Neptune sextiling the Mars and trining the Moon and
Chiron. Somewhere from deep inside herself, she found the will
(Mars) and inspiration (Moon) to battle for life.
Intuition guided her to undertake the alternative cancer therapy,
which involved a strict vegan diet, vast amounts of freshly made raw
fruit and vegetable juice, and a drastic programme of detoxification.
Its premise was simple: if the body - damaged by environmental
pollution and debilitated by over-processed foods - could be restored
to a normal healthy functioning, it would destroy and eliminate the
disease as a matter of course. Success in this therapy depended on
strict adherence to its rules. Transiting Pluto in the twelfth was
conjuncting Saturn and forcing Olivia to find from within herself a
greater degree of discipline, commitment and consistency than she
had ever before exercised. She wanted to learn the diet and routine
properly, and decided to spend time at a clinic abroad specializing in
the technique (the Moon, ruler of her ninth house of long journeys
was sextiled by transiting Pluto and trined by transiting Neptune).
The night she made up her mind to attend the clinic, she had a vivid
dream. In it, the zodiacal symbol of Scorpio and the symbol of
Cancer were stalking and circling each other on a deserted, rocky
shore. They watched each other's every movement, poised to fight a
duel to the death. She couldn't remember how the dream ended, but
she had a sense of what it was trying to tell her. Over the last few
years, she had neglected the Scorpionic side of her nature - qualities
of endurance, tenacity and fierce determination had been absent Three Case Histories 36 5 from her life. From the dream she knew the time had come to
reclaim these characteristics in herself. The cost of the clinic and the
journey there would drain her savings (transiting Neptune in Sagittarius in the second inconjuncting natal Mercury, ruling her eighth
house Gemini Sun), but that represented only a fraction of the price
she would have to pay and the sacrifices she would have to make in
the process of being healed and reborn.
Olivia stayed at the clinic from late January to April rg8r. Transiting Pluto and Neptune- the two most potent gods of change- were
aspecting her natal Moon, Mercury, Mars, Saturn, Chiron and
Uranus during that period. The most important secondary progressions were the progressed Sun semi-sextile to natal Pluto, the
progressed ascendant trine to natal Neptune and squared natal
Uranus, and the progressed midheaven sextile to Neptune. Although
many of these transits and progressions were trines and sextiles and
therefore promised the hope of renewal, the fact that they also
involved Pluto and Neptune meant that Olivia still felt stripped of her
old persona. The cancer therapy forbade the use of anything artificial
such as make-up or hair-colouring, and Olivia had to relinquish
feminine vanities to which she had previously been attached (transiting Pluto and Neptune hitting the Moon). She was robbed of her
professional identity, forced by her illness and the therapy to abandon
her career (transiting Pluto conjunct Saturn and opposing Chiron in
the sixth, transiting Pluto sextile to the Moon in the tenth, and
transiting Neptune trining the Moon and Chiron). The stay at the
clinic also meant she was separated from her close friends and loved
ones (transiting Neptune and Pluto both inconjuncting her seventhhouse Mercury which rules the eleventh, and transiting Saturn in
the eleventh). The living accommodation at the clinic offered no real
privacy, and although she made some new friends there (transiting
Jupiter in the eleventh), much of the time she felt terribly alone
among strangers (transiting Saturn in the eleventh). She also felt
stripped of her options - she had no guarantee of a future, no plans
or prospects she could make or rely on (transiting Pluto and Neptune
inconjuncting Mercury ruling the eleventh house of goals and objectives).
Transiting Pluto and Neptune were aspecting Mars which ruled 366 The Light at the End of the Tunnel Aries on the cusp of her sixth house of health, and the therapy
required Olivia to assume an active (Mars) part in her body's healing
process: every hour she had to drink a freshly made raw fruit or
vegetable juice, and she alone was responsible for taking in the right
order and at the right time each day the 30 tablets, capsules and
pills which had been prescribed to her as part of the treatment.
Because of the detoxifying nature of the diet, the body casts off
poisons and toxins in order to heal itself, resulting in what are
known as 'flare-ups'- periods of headaches, pain, sickness, irritability
or depression. This dramatic process of detoxification was closely
aligned with an inner process that released deep residues of poisonous
emotion and negative feelings which were polluting her psyche, and
Olivia experienced her most intense flare-ups in the form of anger: a
dark, murderous rage which overwhelmed her usual self-control
and destroyed her existing self-image: 'A lot of nastiness came out of
me - I was a really horrible woman . . . the meanness and the
pettiness which came up was astounding. But at least I did most of
my raging in private [natal Mars in the fourth], I'll say that for
myself. But I got so angry over the most stupid, childish things. Part
of me stood by and didn't believe what was going on.'
Olivia recalls a time in childhood when she saw her mother in a
terrible state of anger. Her mother looked so fierce and dangerous
that Olivia made a vow to herself - from that day on, she would
always keep her own temper in check. Her innate discomfort with
aggression is described by the natal T-square involving Mars: the
Moon opposing Mars square to Mercury suggests that she too has
something of her mother's angry nature. However, with natal Neptune conjuncting the Moon and opposing Mars, Olivia tried to
conceal and rise above anger for much of her life. Because Mars
rules Aries on the sixth-house cusp, there is a connection between
aggression, health and the body. In other words, long-festering and
unexpressed hostility was a contributing psychological factor to her
illness. The flare-ups were purifying (transiting Pluto and Neptune
in harmonious aspect to Mars): they brought her deeply guarded
rage to the surface where it could be released from her system.
Moreover, in denying anger, she had put the lid on a whole range of
other emotions as well. Lifting the ban on Mars would ultimately Three Case Histories 36 7 enrich and enliven her entire feeling nature (transiting Pluto and
Neptune had a cleansing effect not only on Mars but also on the Moon
during this period). And by reconnecting to Mars she would also, from
then on, gain a greater ability to direct and steer the course of her life.
In April I Mercúrio 8 I she left the clinic and returned to her home in
Scotland. For the next year, enormous amounts of will and discipline
were needed to follow thy health programme on her own. Throughout this period, Pluto was still conjuncting her twelth-house Saturn,
and transiting Saturn was approaching its second return - a
thoroughly twelfth-house experience which Olivia compared to a
lonely desert crossing, a slow trek through a wilderness, a monotonous and isolated in.carceration. Olivia recalls one day during this
period when she was strongly tempted to abandon the restrictions of
the diet and indulge in a rich and sumptuous Indian meal. But that
night she had a dream-of a scorpion clinging to a rock in the midst of
a violent tempest, and this image of indestructibility gave her the
inspiration to carry on. Her dedication was not in vain and Saturn
rewarded her justly: by the summer of I982 she was not only rid of
the cancer, but also declared cured of diabetes and incipient osteoarthritis, two other illnesses that had been diagnosed the previous
year. Her physical recovery was only a part of the reward - as a
result of the whole experience, Olivia underwent a major inner
transformation. She had freed herself from old fears (transiting Pluto
in the twelfth) and outworn values (transiting Neptune in the second)
and was left with a new sense of freedom and wholeness (transiting
Uranus in the first). Physically and psychologically healthier than
she had been at any other time in her life, she was able to come off
the strict diet and rigorous treatment just as Pluto completed its •
passage. over her Saturn, and transiting Jupiter in Scorpio jubilantly
appeared over her ascendant. She had travelled to the edge of death
and returned to life again - a life more precious and abundant than
she had ever known. And like many people who have made that
journey, Olivia currently spends much of her time .as a counsellor
and therapist specializing in the care and support of cancer patients,
where she has the opportunity to help others through the kinds of
difficulties and crises she herself has known. In a recent conversation
I had with Olivia, she reflected on what she had been through: 368 The Light at the End of the Tunnel My illness made such a difference in my life. Now I can speak to
people who are very ill, and I can talk to them about death
without any hesitation or euphemisms. I also can talk about the
alternatives to death. I don't push alternatives at them, but more
often than not people can accept what I have to say. For many
years I've been attached to a short poem, the gist of which, in free
translation, goes:
He who wants to learn to play the bagpipes
has to go to the bottom of hell,
and that is how he learns to play the bagpipes.
I guess I had to do that with my 8th house Sun. Craig
Just to look at Craig, most people find it hard to believe he is ill.
Attractive, in~elligent and articulate, he exudes the natural 'fire',
spirit and warmth you would expect from .a Sagittarius with the
Moon in Aries. He doesn't look like a sick person. But Craig, like
hundreds of thousands of other people throughout the world, lives
with a time-bomb ticking away inside him. He lives with AIDS.
In January rg8s, Craig noticed a purple spot on his arm, and a
biopsy in late February confirmed it was Kaposi's sarcoma, one of
the opportunistic diseases associated with Acquired Immune Deficiency Syndrome. Even before the diagnosis, Craig was already
beginning to question and re-evaluate his life. AIDS, however,
has dramatically fuelled and acceleratf?d this process. The transits
and progressions from 1985 to the present reveal the nature of
Craig's metamorphosis; but to appreciate more fully how confronting
a life-threatening illness has changed him, we need to look further
back into his personal history.
In the 1970s, Craig lived in Boston, where he earned a Bachelor's
degree in journalism and a Master's degree in counselling; later he
started a Ph.D. programme in psychology, but abandoned this in
1975. From then onward, he was caught up in what he now
describes as the 'mainstream gay hedonistic scene', a lifestyle involv- Three Case Histories 369 ing a fair amount of drinking, drug-taking, and many sexual encounters. Scraping together a living through various jobs caring for
disabled children, Craig admits that he was more interested in his
social and sexual life than in the serious pursuit of a career. He was
born with Neptune rising in Libra (see fig. 3), and in the late 1970s
transiting Pluto was conjuncting his natal Neptune at the same time
as transiting Neptune was passing over his Mercury-sun conjunc- 3 70 The Light at the End of the Tunnel tion in Sagittarius. In other words, during this phase of his life, Craig
was mainly expressing the 'Neptunian' side of his nature - working
with the disabled, but mostly drifting, 'boozing', experimenting with
drugs, and indulging in the kind of Dionysian abandonment associated with Neptune.
In 1980 he moved to Houston, where he lived for three years. At
first his life in Texas, as in Boston, revolved primarily around a social
whirlwind of bar- and bed-hopping. However, in 1981, transiting
Saturn came to his ascendant, conjuncted natal Neptune and moved
through his first house. Under these sobering Saturn influences,
Craig began to think more seriously about establishing himself in a
fulfilling career. He was drawn into journalism (Mercury, Sun and
Jupiter in the house of communications), and after a period working
for a gay newspaper he became the editor of a hospital journal (the
third-house Mercury-Sun conjunction sextiles angular Neptune
ruling the sixth house of health and work; Mercury in the third rules
Virgo on the cusp of the twelfth, the house of institutions).
In 1982, while working as a medical journalist, he was approached by a leading Texan doctor concerned about the increasing
number of gay patients turning up with strange illnesses and physical
complaints. Together with a team of medical professionals, Craig
was instrumental in inaugurating a screening project to take blood
samples from gay men, and he later helped to found the first AIDS
organization in Houston (transiting Pluto was trining his natal
Uranus and transiting Uranus was conjuncting his Chiron - two
astrological influences signifying an early involvement in what was
to become a major collective health crisis). Three years were to pass
before he himself would be diagnosed as having AIDS, but with
transiting Neptune opposing Craig's highly intuitive ninth-house
Uranus, he already had an unshakeable, disturbing feeling that this
mysterious illness would eventually strike him: 'When I first heard
about AIDS I remember feeling deep inside that this could happen
to me, and that it probably will ... I remember shivering in my core
-I knew I would get it. It didn't paralyze me, but it stayed in the back
ofmymind.'
In April I 98 3, with transiting Jupiter and Uranus moving together
through the third house (writing and short journeys), Craig left Three Case Histories 3 7I Houston for New York City, where he had a job working for the
cancer information service at the Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer
Center. Soon after, however, both these planets retrograded to square
his natal Saturn, and Craig felt restless and disappointed not only
with his new post, but also with life in New York- he had no close
friends or ties in the city and hated the neighbourhood where he
lived. To fill the emptiness he went to bars, drank and slept around,
but without the same fervour as he had back in Houston and
Boston. His old lifestyle and usual ploys to make himself feel better
were no longer working (transiting Uranus in square to natal Saturn
ruling the IC). With natal Uranus opposed by transiting Neptune
and trilled by transiting Pluto, and with transiting Saturn approaching his progressed ascendant in Scorpio, Craig was feeling the need
to make some fundamental changes in his life:
I was becoming conscious of how self-destructive I was. I always
had been aware of it, but not in a way that was strong enough to
make me want to change. I was still going to bars and drinking
too much, but not with the regularity that I had done in the past.
I had it in my mind that I wanted to get my career more together.
I was beginning to get offers to work as a correspondent for
different papers, especially for articles to do with AIDS and
other gay issues. Instead of working full-time for one hospital or
organization, I saw the possibility of establishing myself as a
freelance writer.
Transiting Jupiter conjuncted Craig's natal Jupiter and passed
over his IC and Mars, giving him the incentive in April I984 to
leave the job at Sloan-Kettering. Craig felt good about his decision to
pursue a freelance career in journalism, but his new-found enthusiasm was shortlived. In September, when transiting Saturn
passed over his Venus and triggered the natal square to Pluto, he
became involved in a complicated, draining relationship that
consumed much of his time and energy. The disappointing affair
ended badly in December (transiting Jupiter square natal Neptune in
Libra), and it was at this time that Craig began to feel very low, both
psychologically and physically. Depressed and suffering from insomnia, he went into what he described as a tailspin - 'sleepless, 372 The Light at the End of the Tunnel crazed and over-the-edge'. In January rg8s, in an effort to resto
balance to his life, he began psychotherapy. This was also the mon.u
when he noticed the foreboding purple spot on his arm. At first, he
chose to ignore it; but in late February a biopsy confirmed his worst
fears. He had been feeling empty and lost, and now AIDS had come
to fill that void.
During this period, transiting Pluto in Scorpio was passing over
his south node and approaching a conjunction with his progressed
ascendant. Pluto had brought the lurking illness out of hiding, and
with it came the need to deal not only with his initial reactions of
shock and depression, but also to explore and sort through deepseated emotions and ingrained patterns of behaviour (the south
node in Scorpio). Two years before, when transiting Saturn had
passed over his progressed ascendant, Craig had felt he wanted to
break free of self-destructive patterns and to build his life on a new
foundation, but, in spite of these urges, he hadn't made much
progress in this direction. Now with transiting Pluto reaching this
point, the need to change could no longer be avoided. By June of
1985, he found a new psychotherapist who was already working
with a number of AIDS patients. Faced with the possibility of
death, Craig chose to look more deeply into himself than ever before,
and attended therapy three times a week. As reflected by the transits
and progressions involving Pluto and Scorpio, Craig's inner explo~
rations brought him into contact with intense feelings of anger,
bitterness, grief and fear:
Through the therapy, I looked at my anger towards my parents,
and old feelings associated with the sudden death of my father
when I was two. I also had to face how incredibly irritated I was
with almost everyone around me. If I was at the grocery store and
someone was complaining about having to wait too long in the
check-out line, I wanted to slug that person in the face. What right
did others have to complain and moan? Their problems were
nothing compared to mine. I was going to die!
From the time of the diagnosis in early r Mercúrio 8 5 through to the end
of rg86, transiting Uranus was passing over Craig's natal MercurySun conjunction in Sagittarius and triggering the grand trine with Three Case Histories 3 73 the Moon in Aries and Pluto in Leo. I was surprised to find the onset
of full-blown AIDS coinciding with a major transit activating a
grand trine, which, traditionally, is meant to be a benefic aspect,
bringing blessings and good fortune into one's life. However, the fact
that Craig's natal grand trine involves Pluto suggests that a crisis,
breakdown, or major challenge may have been needed to help him
realize the promise of this configuration and the unfolding of his
life's quest or purpose. The fiery grand trine in air houses bestows
Craig with a natural warmth, charm, intelligence, extroversion and
adventurous spirit - qualities that had nearly always made it easy
for him to 'get by' in life. But during this period, with transiting
Uranus awakening the grand trine, he was presented with 'a crisis
that would challenge him to mobilize many more of his untapped
resources and strengths. The grand trine is also part of a Kite
Formation: a planetary pattern which _involves a fourth planet in
opposition to one of the corners of the trine and sextile to the other
ends. In his book The Horoscope, The Road and Its Travelers, Alan Oken
writes that the Kite is a 'more stable and powerful configuration
than the Grand Trine, as the opposition gives a definite focal point
for the direction of the abundant energy contained within this
planetary picture'. 1 In Craig's case, Neptune opposes his Moon, one
of the ends of the grand trine, and sextiles the other two ends (the
Sun and Mercury in Sagittarius and his Pluto in Leo). In other
words, his first-house Neptune forms the focal point of the Kite and
also rules his sixth-house of health. A 'Neptunian' illness could have
turned Craig into a helpless victim. Instead, with Uranus transiting
in aspect to all the planets involved in the Kite, AIDS activated
Craig's fiery grand trine in a way it had never been used before: he
discovered the initiator, the crusader and the fighter in himself.
Shortly after his diagnosis, Craig heard reports about ribaviron, a
drug that reputedly could inhibit the virus from replicating itself,
thereby holding the disease in check. Ribaviron, as yet untested by
the American Medical Association, wasn't legal in the States. None
the less, in September 1985 Craig arranged a trip to Mexico where it
could easily be obtained. He brought a large supply back to New
York, and began using it under the guidance of a consenting doctor.
At this time, transiting Uranus (the planet associated with rebellion 3 74 The Light at the End of the Tunnel and defiance) was moving direct after a station in close sextile to his
natal Neptune (the focal point of his Kite and the planet associated
with drugs). Defying the medical establishment's position and obtaining the ribaviron was a turning-point for Craig; from then on, he felt
more in control of his illness and his life: 'I had been in despair and
had felt hopeless. But now I was feeling more powerful, and more
determined to show the world I could tackle this disease. Getting
hold of the ribaviron was the first step.'
Craig's therapist wanted him to join a group for people with
AIDS. Craig, however, took this a step further. In January rg86
(with transiting Uranus conjuncting his Sun, ruling Leo on the cusp
of his eleventh house of groups), instead of joining somebody else's
group, he started his own. With so much diverse information coming
from so many sources about how to treat AIDS, Craig felt that he
and other people in the same situation as himself would benefit from
pooling their experiences. The group he formed eventually became
known as the 'Cure of the Week Club'; members met once a week for
a year to support each other and to exchange information about any
new treatments they had come across or tried. The group- his group
- provided Craig with a purpose, a structure into which to channel
effectively the rebellious energy activated by transiting Uranus. In
addition, during much of this period, transiting Jupiter - the planet of
hope and expansion - was moving through his sixth house of work
and health. The weekly meetings kept Craig abreast of the latest
information about AIDS, and in this way he became a personal
clearing house of medical knowledge of the illness. What he learned
then would later prove invaluable in furthering his writing career.
It was also through the group that Craig became friendly with a
man who owned a huge mansion on Long Island. Invited to use the
mansion as much as he pleased, Craig spent the summer of rg86
there, an idyllic location where he took advantage of an opportunity
to co-author a novel with a writer friend (transiting Uranus over his
third-house Sun ruling Leo on the cusp of the eleventh). The outside
help he received during this period deepened Craig's appreciation of
friendship and gave him a renewed sense of hope and well-being
(transiting Neptune trine and transiting Pluto sextile natal Saturn in
the eleventh which rules the fourth): Three Case Histories 3 75 I was getting nurturing, and it made me feel good to be out of the
dump I was living in - to be in a beautiful place in the country,
like a glorious situation in the middle of the Titanic sinking. I
started to feel alive again. My network of friends expanded and I
was meeting new kinds of people- all kinds ... gay, straight,
semi-celebrities. I realized then, more than ever, that I couldn't
deal with my crisis alone. I needed an elaborate support system. In I 986 and through much of I 98 7, transiting Pluto was sextiling
Craig's Jupiter at the same time as transiting Neptune was approaching a conjunction with natal Jupiter. Jupiter rules his Sun, and any
transit to it will have a powerful effect on his sense of identity. These
transits to Jupiter correlated with a change in the way he was
expressing the Sagittarian side of his nature. In his twenties and for
much of his thirties, Craig mostly lived out the wilder side of Sagittarius -the hedonistic party-goer, coasting through life, drinking,
playing, enjoying himself without too many strings attached. But
with transiting Uranus over his Sun, and transiting Neptune and
Pluto aspecting Jupiter (his Sun-ruler) in Capricorn, Craig shifted
into a deeper level of Sagittarius - that of the wise, philosophical
centaur:
Even when I was at my most hedonistic, I questioned why I was
acting like a lunatic. One half of me is a monk on a hill and the other
half of me is wild. I was always caught between these two parts- a
divided self. Before I got sick, the wild part of me won out. I acted it
out compulsively. AIDS was the vehicle to change that in me. I had
to cut out the paganism and partying, and invest more in analyzing
and understanding myself. AIDS pulled me out of the lunacy stuff
and plugged me into a more sane part of myself. In a way it helped
me to heal a split within myself. Before I was trapped by my wild side.
I had been filling up empty holes in my life with various anaesthetics
like alcohol and sex. When I stopped drinking and going to bars so
. much, I had to face the emptiness inside me. I spent more time alone
at home. That was hard- without my addictions, I was left with a
depression I had to face. And yet, having gone through that, I feel
better off. I still have moments of real agony, but on the whole I feel
more calm in myself, better balanced, and much more centred. 3 76 The Light at the End of the Tunnel In the summer of r987, Craig was asked to prepare a paper on his
experience with AIDS, to be published as part of an anthology for
a health conference in Boston (transiting Saturn passing over his
third-house Mercury-Sun conjunction and triggering his grand
trine/Kite at the same time as his progressed M C was conjuncting
natal Pluto in the eleventh). At first Craig was afraid that he wouldn't
be able to produce ·anything worthwhile. However, as transiting
Jupiter in Aries was sextiling his natal Uranus in the ninth, he was
invited on holiday to Italy. Typical of his Sagittarian nature, travelling gave him a needed distance and objectivity, and when he
returned to America he successfully completed the article. In doing
so, he realized he had much more to say than the length of the paper
allowed. It was then that he decided to write a book, a guide offering
to others the kinds of insights he had gained into living and coping
with AIDS. By May rg88, he had sec;ured a contract for his book;
with Saturn and Uranus moving through his third house and opposing natal Uranus ruling his fifth house of creativity, he confronts the
task of putting his vision into words:
Getting a book contract was amazing. Just a couple of years ago,
the idea of my writing a book about AIDS was so far-fetched,
and now it is a reality. This is one of the payoffs to having to go
through the nightmare I have been facing. My career is taking
shape, and I believe in myself as a writer. I used to throw myself
into self-defeating love affairs ... I used up most of my time that
way. Now I am freer to put my energy into other, more constructive things. Hopefully people can benefit from my perspective,
from what I have gone through. I feel I have something to say something to share with people who have AIDS, and something
to say to those who know people with AIDS.
Transiting Uranus opposing Uranus is traditionally associated with
the mid-life crisis, a period of self-examination and re-definition.
Under this transit, we become more aware of our mortality, and as a
result we may choose to make profound changes in how we conduct
our lives. Facing his illness and the loss, through AIDS, of many of
his close friends, Craig's recognition of his own mortality is far from
theoretical. A very real spectre of death hovers over him, compound- Three Case Histories 3 77 ing and intensifying his mid-life issues, impelling him to cast aside
superficial or destructive behaviour in favour of that which is positive
and life~supporting.
At the same time as transiting Uranus is opposing his Uranus,
transiting Neptune is now crossing Craig's IC and conjuncting his
Mars, bringing out his natal Mars-Neptune square. This transit
describes a time when Craig, a long-term AIDS survivor, has to
live with constant uncertainty, with the possibility that his weakened
immune system will no longer be able to ward off further infection
and death. A Neptune-Mars conjunction can rob us of physical
drive and energy, but it can also give rise to inspired action:, great
compassion and the desire to help other people. And now, more than
ever before in his life, Craig can use his wise third-house Sun and
Mercury in Sagittarius and his pragmatic Jupiter in Capricorn to
teach, guide and inspire others with what he has so far learned:
The explosive irony is that in the face of a nightmare that
breathes death, we must develop a philosophy of living - a
strategy - as our defense ... Of all the traumas and issues associated with AIDS, I try to separate them into two categories- those
that are in my control and those that are not. On a day-to-day
basis, I find that it helps to ignore the issues over which I
have no control and focus on those I can affect. The tendency to
lean toward hopefulness or hopelessness is largely dependent on
this. Choice is a large part of control and I choose hopefulness ...
By taking charge of things that are at least partially controllable,
a self-empowering energy emerges and coping becomes pro- gressively easier ... Compared to the alternative - passive de- pression
- is there really a choice? 2
Craig has Mars conjunct Jupiter at the very bottom of his chart.
Underneath it all, he is a fighter, determined to find meaning in
what he is going through and to hold on to whatever power he has
in his war against AIDS.
If I had the chance to start all over again from square one, I wouldn't choose to go through this. But why not get what we can
out of what is inescapable? I'm battle-scarred and battle-wounded, 3 78 The Light at the End of the Tunnel but I have found a new kind of inner strength. It's the curious
side of this business, that there is something to be found ... that
even with all the pain and misery, there is a light in the tunnel. Notes INTRODUCfiON
I
Assagioli cited in Piero Ferrucci, What We May Be (Wellingborough,
UK: Turnstone Press, I982), p. II3.
·
2 Dane Rudhyar, The Astrology of Self-Actualization and The New Morality
(Lakemont, Georgia: CSA Press, I970), p. 27.
3 Although Chiron often appears as a major astrological factor in times
of pain and crisis, I don't have enough experience of working with this
planet to write at length about it and therefore have not dealt with
transits to or from Chiron in this book (except briefly in the case
histories inch. IO). For an in-depth discussion ofthis planet, the reader
is referred to Melanie Reinhart's insightful book, Chiron and the Healing
Journey: An Astrological and Psychological Perspective (forthcoming, also
part of the Arkana Contemporary Astrology series). Júpiter When referring to clients, names have been changed to ensure confidentiality.
CHAPTER I: The Search for Meaning
I
Viktor Frankl, Man's Search for Meaning (New York: Washington Square
Press, I984).
2 Ibid., p. 95·
3 Ibid., p. 98. Júpiter Piero Ferrucci, What We May Be (Wellingborough, UK: Turnstone
Press, I982), p. I63.
5 Robert Hand, Planets in Transit (Gloucester, Mass.: Para Research Inc.,
I976), p. 5·
6 Liz Greene, The Astrology of Fate (London: George Allen and Unwin,
I984), p. 8.
7 Hand, Planets, p. s. 379 380 Notes 8 Ibid., p. 6. Mercúrio Greene, Astrology, p. 8.
IO Cited in Ferrucci, What We May Be, p. I63.
I I Frankl, Man's Search, p. 140.
I2 Beata Bishop, 'Mapping the Psyche: The Use of Astrology in Psychotherapy', lecture given to Astrological Association of Great Britain,
21 June I986.
CHAPTER 2: Breaking Down to Break Through
I
Ken Wilber, No Boundary (Boulder, Col., and London: New Science
Library, Shambhala, I98I), p. Júpiter ·
2 Ibid., pp. 5-14.
3 Marilyn Ferguson, The Aquarian Conspiracy (London: Granada, I98I),
pp. I76-83. Júpiter Sallie Nichols, Jung and the Tarot (York Beach, Maine: Samuel Weiser
Inc., I98o), p. 52.
5 Elisabeth Kiibler-Ross, On Death and Dying (New York: Macmillan, 1969 ).
6 James Hillman, 'Betrayal', Spring I965, Zurich and New York (Spring
Publications), pp. 57-76.
7 Ferguson, Aquarian Conspiracy, p. 8o.
CHAPTER 3: Interpreting Transits: Some Practical Guidelines
I
Betty Lundsted, Transits; The Time of Your Life (York Beach, Maine:
Samuel Weiser Inc., 1980), p. IO.
2 Tracy Marks, The Astrology of Self-Discovery (Reno, Nev.: CRCS
Publications, 1985), p. 124.
3 Robert Hand, Planets in Transit (Gloucester, Mass.: Para Research Inc.,
I976). Júpiter For more on midpoints the reader is referred to an excellent new book
by Mike Harding and Charles Harvey, Working with Astrology: A
psychological guide to midpoints, harmonics, and astra-cartography
{London: Arkana, forthcoming in January I 990 ).
CHAPTER Júpiter : Uranian Crises
I
Rudhyar, cited in Arroyo, Astrology, Karma, and Transformation (Reno,
Nev.: CRCS Publications, I978), p. 41.
2 FritjofCapra, The Turning Point (London: Fontana, 1982), p. 70.
3 Teilhard de Chardin, cited in Marilyn Ferguson, The Aquarian Conspiracy
(London: Granada, 198I), p. 52. Júpiter Rupert Sheldrake, A New Science of Life; The Hypothesis of Formative
Causation {London: Blond and Briggs, I98I). Notes 381 The Transits ofUranus to the Planets and Through the Houses
Gail Sheehy, Passages (New York: Bantam Books, I972).
Gail Sheehy, Pathfinders (New York: Bantam Books, I98I), p. 65.
Sheehy, Pathfinders, p. 37·
Ibid., p. 3I4.
Some astrologers attribute the fourth house to mother and the tenth
to father, while other astrologers attribute the fourth to father and
the tenth to mother. I believe that the 'shaping parent' -the one
with whom the child spends the most time and who usually has the
task of adapting the child to society - fits best with the tenth house;
and the 'hidden parent' - the one who is with the child less and
who may be more of a mystery or unknown quantity to the child should be connected to the fourth house. Generally, the mother is
the shaping parent, and for this reason, I assign her to the tenth
house; while the father is often the more hidden or less well-known
parent and therefore I associate him with the fourth. In actual practice, through talking with a client I can formulate which parent fits
better with which house. (For a further discussion on this topic, see
my book The Twelve Houses (Wellingborough, UK: Aquarian Press,
I98s). pp. s6-7.) CHAPTERs: I
2
3 Júpiter 5 Neptunian Crises
Alan Watts, The Book on the Taboo Against Knowing Who You Are
(Loudon: Abacus, I977).
2 Paraphrased in Peter Russell, The Awakening Earth (London: Routledge
and Kegan Paul, 1982), p. 127.
3· Ibid., p. 127. Júpiter _Ken Wilber, No Boundary (Boulder, Col., and London: New Science
Library, Shambhala, I98I), p. 37·
5 Robert Bly (ed.), The Kabir Book: Forty-Four of the Ecstatic Poems ofKabir
(Boston: The Seventies Press, I977), p. Mercúrio ·
6 Sallie Nichols, ]ung and the Tarot (York Beach, Maine: Samuel Weiser
Inc., I98o), p. 222.
7 T. S. Eliot, 'East Coker', in Four Quartets (London: Faber and Faber,
1959). p. 28. CHAPTER 6:
I CHAPTER 7: The Transits of Neptune to the Planets and Through the Houses
I
Robert Hand, Planets in Transit (Gloucester, Mass.: Para Research Inc.,
I976), p. 443·
2 Gail Sheehy, Pathfinders (New York: Bantam Books, 1981), p. 294· 382
3 Júpiter 5
6
7
8 Mercúrio IO Gêmeos Notes
Erik Erikson, Childhood and Society (London: Triad Palladin, I963),
p. 24I.
Ibid., p. 222.
Bernie Siegal, Love, Medicine and Miracles (New York: Harper and Row,
I986).
Hand, Planets in Transit, p. 430.
Elisabeth Kiibler-Ross, On Death and Dying (New York: Macmillan, I 969 ).
For a fuller discussion of these issues, the reader is referred to Adolf
Guggenbuhl-Craig, Power and the Helping Professions (Zurich: Spring
Publications, I978).
Einstein cited in Russell, The Awakening Earth (London: Routledge and
Kegan Paul, I982).
Will Durant, On the Meaning of Life (New York: Kay Long and Richard
Smith, I932), p. 128.
Judith Viorst, Necessary Losses (New York: Simon and Schuster, I986),
ch. 2. CHAPTER 8: Plutonian Crises
I
Melanie Klein, Love, Guilt and Reparation and Other Works 1921-1945
(London: Hogarth Press, I985).
2
Alice Bailey, The Labours of Hercules (London: Lucis Press, I977), p. 67.
3 Rainer Maria Rilke, Letters to a Young Poet, trans. M.D. Herter (New
York: W. & W. Norton, I934), p. 69. Júpiter Rilke (Letter 74, Briefe aus den Jahren 1907 bis 1914) cited in Rollo
May, Love and Will (London: Collins, I969), p. 122.
5 For further elaboration on this myth, the reader is referred to Diane
Wolkstein and Samuel Noah Kramer, Inanna, Queen of Heaven and Earth
(London: Rider, I 984); and Sylvia Brinton Perera, Descent to the Goddess
(Toronto: Inner CityBooks, I98I).
6 Irvin Yalom, Existential Psychotherapy (New York: Basic Books, 1980),
p. Mercúrio ·
7 Abraham Maslow, The Farther Reaches of Human Nature (New York:
Penguin Books, 1985), p. 34·
8 See note 6. Mercúrio Erich Fromm, Escape from Freedom (New York: Holt, Rinehart and
Winston, I94I).
IO Yalom, Existential Psychotherapy, p. 423.
CHAPTER Vênus : Transits of Pluto to the Planets and Through the Houses
I
Donna Cunningham, Healing Pluto Problems (York Beach, Maine:
Samuel Weiser Inc., I986), p. 148. · Notes 383 2 Irvin Yalom, Existential Psychotherapy (New York: Basic Books, I980),
p. 263.
3 See Cunningham, Healing Pluto Problems, section entitled 'Pluto and
the Pregnancy Trap', p. I68. Júpiter Schweitzer, cited in Piero Ferrucci, What We May Be (Wellingborough,
UK: Turnstone Press, I982), p. IOS.
5 Paraphrased in Peter Russell, The Awakening Earth (London: Routledge
and Kegan Paul, I982), p. 125.
6 Epictetus, cited in Ferrucci, What We May Be, p. IOS.
7 For further information and advice on this subject, see Cunningham,
Healing Pluto Problems, ch. 5·
8 Marilyn Ferguson, The Aquarian Conspiracy (London: Granada, I98I),
p. 93· Mercúrio Charles Harvey, 'John M. Addey', Astrological Journal, Astrological Association of Great Britain (Urania Trust Centre, 396 Caledonian Rd.,
London NI), Summer I982, p. I36.
IO Erik Erikson, Childhood and Society (London: Triad Palladin, I963),
p. 226.
I I Robert Hand, Planets in Transit (Gloucester, Mass.: Para Research Inc.,
I976), p. 482.
I2 For an interesting study of the near-death experience, the reader is
referred to Margot Grey, Returnfrom Death: An Exploration of the NearDeath Experience (London: Arkana, I985).
I3 Hand, Planets in Transit, p. 485.
I4 Betty Lundsted, Transits: The Time of Your Life (York Beach, Maine:
Samuel Weiser Inc., I980), p. IO.
IS Ferguson, The Aquarian Conspiracy, p. 93·
CHAPTER IO: Three Case Histories
I Alan Oken, The Horoscope, The· Road and Its Travelers (New York:
Bantam, I974), p. 274.
2 Craig Rowland, 'A View from the Moon', published July I988 in an
anthology released at a conference ,called 'The Second International
Lesbian and Gay Health Conference and AIDS Forum' in Boston,
Massachusetts. The conference was sponsored by the National Lesbian
and Gay Health Foundation. Suggested Reading Astrology
The following astrology books are recommended for their insights into the
outer planets, transits and the creative use of pain and crisis.
Arroyo, Stephen, Astrology, Karma, and Transformation (Reno, Nev.:
CRCS Publications, 1978).
Cunningham. Donna. Healing Pluto Problems (York~Beach, Maine: Samuel
Weiser Inc., 1986).
Freeman, Martin, Forecasting by Astrology (Wellingborough, UK:
Aquarian Press. 1982).
Green, Jeff, Pluto: The Evolutionary Journey of the Soul. Volume I (St Paul.
Min.: llewellyn Publications, 1986).
Green, Jeff. Uranus: Freedom from the Known (St Paul, Minn.: llewellyn
Publications, 1988).
Greene, Liz, Relating (Wellingborough. UK: Thorsons, 1978).
Greene, Liz, The Outer Planets and Their Cycles (Reno, Nev.: CRCS Publications. 1983).
Greene, Liz, The Astrology of Fate (London: George Allen and Unwin, 1;984).
Greene. Liz, Neptune: The Inmost Light (London: Penguin Arkana. forthcoming).
Greene, Liz, and Sasportas, Howard, The Development of the Personality (York
Beach, Maine: Samuel Weiser Inc.; London: Routledge and Kegan Paul,
1987).
Greene, Liz, and Sasportas, Howard, The Dynamics of the Unconscious (York
Beach, Maine: Samuel Weiser Inc., 1988).
Hand, Robert, Planets in Transit (Gloucester, l'lass .• Para Research Inc.,
1976).
Lundsted, Betty, Transits: The Time of Your Life (York Beach, Maine: Samuel
Weiser Inc., 1980). Suggested Reading 38 5 Lundsted, Betty, Planetary Cycles: Astrological Indicators of Crises and Change
(York Beach, Maine: Samuel Weiser Inc., 1984).
Marks, Tracy. The Astrology of Self-Discovery (Reno, Nev.: CRCS Publications, rg8s).
Morimando, Patricia, The Neptune Effect (York Beach, Maine: Samuel Weiser
Inc., 1979).
Reinhart, Melanie, Chiron and the Healing ]ourney:An Astrological and Psychological Perspective (London: Arkana, rg8g).
Ruperti, Alexander, Cycles of Becoming (Reno, Nev.: CRCS Publications,
1977).
Stone, Pauline, The Astrology of Karma (Wellingborough, UK: Aquarian
Press, rg88). Psychology
Frankl, Viktor, Man's Search for Meaning (New York: Washington Square
Press, 1984).
Friday, Nancy, Jealousy (London: Fontana/Collins, 1987). An exploration of
jealousy, envy, and related emotional complexes.
Missildine, Hugh, Your Inner Child of the Past (New York: Pocket Books,
1982). How our experiences as a child affect our adult life.
Peck, M. Scott, The Road Less Travelled: A New Psychology of Love, Traditional
Values and Spiritual Growth (London: Rider, rg8s). Written by a practising
book explores how facing pain and crisis can lead to a
psychiatrist,
higher level of self-understanding.
Rowe, Dorothy, Depression: The Way Out of Your Prison (London: Routledge
and Kegan Paul, 1983).
Scarf, Maggie, Unfinished Business: Pressure Points in the Lives of Women
(New York: Doubleday, rg8o). An investigation into the kinds of physical
and psychological issues that women confront in different phases. of their
lives.
Scarf, Maggie, Intimate Partners: Patterns in Love and Marriage (London:
Century, 1987). A fascinating study of problems in relationships and
marriage, and how unresolved dilemmas from early life and the past
affect later partnerships.
Sheehy, Gail, Passages: Predictable Crises of Adult Life (New York: Bantam,
1977). A road map of life exploring the kinds of changes we face in our
twenties, thirties, forties and fifties.
Sheehy, Gail, Pathfinders: Overcoming Crises of Adult Life and Finding your
Own Path to Well-Being (New York: Bantam, 1982). Sheehy explores such this 386 Suggested Reading issues as the mid-life crisis, retirement and old age, and why some people
overcome life's crises while others do not.
Viorst, Judith, Necessary Losses: The Loves, lllusions, Dependencies and Impossible Expectations that All of Us Have to Give Up in Order to Grow (New
York: Simon and Schuster, rg86). Highly recommended as a readable,
insightful study into the kinds of losses we experience in the process of
living, revealing the inextricable link between loss and growth. Death, Loss, and the Grieving Process
Kiibler-Ross, Elisabeth, On Death and Dying (New York: Macmillan, 1969).
Levine, Stephen, Who Dies? An Investigation of Conscious Living and Conscious
Dying (New York: Anchor Press, 1982).
Lewis, C. S., A Grief Observed (London and Boston, Mass.: Faber and Faber,
rg6r). One man's reflection on grief, written after death of his wife.
Pincus, Lily, Death and the Family: The Importance of Mourning (London and
Boston, Mass.: Faber and Faber, 1974).'
Stearns, Ann Kaiser, Living Through Personal Crisis (London: Sheldon Press,
!984).
Insights into lllness
McCormick, Elizabeth Wilde, Nervous Breakdown: A Positive Guide to Coping,
Healing and Rebuilding (London: Unwin Paperbacks, rg88).
Siegel, Bernie, Love, Medicine and Miracles: Lessons Learned about Self-Healing
from a Surgeon's Experience with Exceptional Patients (New York: Harper
and Row, rg86).
Simonton, Carl, Stephanie Simonton and James Creighton, Getting Well
Again (Toronto: Bantam Books, rg8r).