ASPECTS
I AND! PERSONALITY KAREN HAMAKER-ZONDAQ pects are one of the less-well-understood factors
in astrology, something often overlooked in the rush *
of books that attempt to describe the planets, signs
and houses. Yet aspects are the fundamental descriptors of relationships, both within the psyche and between the individual and the outside world. Hamaker-Zondag takes a perceptive look at aspects—
both major and minor—and at the continuing discussion in astrology about the aspects and harmonics, the relationships between question of orbs, sign relationships versus degree relationships, the relationships between qualities. the aspects and the elements and She also addresses less-well-discussed fac- tors: mclining and declining aspects, approaching and
departing aspects, the nature of unaspected planets,
and the ruling aspect.
Her general discussions of these matters are supplemented by extensive, in-depth delineations of the major aspects for each of the planets as well as the
Sun and Moon. These delineations include the aspects
each planet makes to the Ascendant and Midheaven.
Of special note is the inclusion in these delineations
of the inconjunct, or quincunx, an aspect that Netuno astrologers are beginning to agree has important influence in the chart. This is a clear and accessible approach that can be used by students at many levels. Contents Preface ix
Part One: About Aspects 1. Kinds of Aspect 3 2. Determining the Aspects 23 3. The Psychological Influence of Aspects 39 Júpiter . Approaching and Departing,
Inclining and Declining Aspects
5. Unaspected Planets 51
61 6. Aspect Configurations and the Ruling Aspect
7 . Judging the Composition of Aspects 91 Part Two: Aspect Interpretation
8. A Few Words on Interpretation 99 Mercúrio . Aspects of the Sun 103 viii! Contents
10. Aspects of the Moon 137 11. Aspects of Mercury 169 12. Aspects of Venus 195 13. Aspects of Mars 217 14. Aspects of Jupiter 237 15. Aspects of Saturn 255 16. Aspects of Uranus 273 17. Aspects of Neptune 283 18. Aspects of Pluto 291 Bibliography 301 About the Author 303 Preface This book has been written to help students understand the factors
that play a part in the interpretation of aspects as they relate to
personality. An unquestioning acceptance of ready-made interpretations—however helpful some of them may be—is never satisfactory in the long run. Therefore my intention is to teach students
how to work out the interpretations (see chapter 3) after we have
studied the essential nature of the aspects and how they are derived
from the circle.
At the very outset we encounter a number of problems such
as what orbs to use and what allowance, if any, should be made for
the influence of the signs. Since opinions on these points differ in
the astrological world, I have let myself be guided as far as possible
by my own practical experience because I have no wish to base this
book on theoretical arguments. Practical experience also comes to
the fore in the chapter on unaspected planets—the latter being a
feature that ought never to be ignored when aspects are being
judged. \ / Prt'tdCf Astrological Signs and Svmlrols
Day Ruler
Night Ruler Element Cross Aries Mars
Pluto Touro Fire Cardinal Taurus Venus Mercúrio Earth Fixed Mercury ^ Air Mutable Cancer Moon 5) Water Cardinal Leo Sun O Fire Fixed Mercury ^ Earth Mutable Libra \renus ^ Air Cardinal Scorpio Pluto
Mars ^
c? Water- Fixed Sign Gemini Virgo Symbol I[ TTP Sagittarius ^ Jupiter
Neptune ^ Fire Mutable Capricorn ^ Saturn
ITanus 'S
^ Earth Cardinal Aquarius — Uranus
Saturn 6r
^ Air Fixed Water Mutable Pisces Neptune £
Jupiter •The ic.nlcr should noic lli.il (hisauihoi usrs Kmopt-.m ^hphslor llu-pl.uu'ls. Puh. Preface / xi
I assume that the reader is already familiar with the meanings
of the planets, signs, houses and elements, and so I will try to avoid
ground covered in my earlier books.
The last chapter consists of basic interpretations of the major
aspects; the object being to give an opportunity for practice. Let
the reader turn to chapter 1 for the effect of a given aspect, and
then combine this with the meanings of the planets involved (as
explained in chapter 3) to arrive at an interpretation which can be
compared with that given in chapter 8. This chapter makes no claim
to completeness, but is intended solely as a guide to aspect interpretation; which is, of course, only one part of general chart analysis.
As always, my husband, Hans has mulled over the form and
content of thousands of words in order to make the manuscript as
readable as it now is; thank you Hans.
January, 1982
Karen Hamaker-Zondag Part 1 About
Aspects 1 Kinds
of
Aspect What Is An Aspect? As everyone knows, the Earth and the other planets orbit the Sun.
The astrologer, however, studies the universe as it affects people
on Earth and therefore treats the Sun and planets as if they were
going round the Earth. In other words, we retain for convenience
the old geocentric view. As seen from Earth, the Sun appears to
travel across the sky along a fixed path; a path that is also traversed
by the planets. The Sun, Moon and planets all seem to move in
more or less the same circle (or, more accurately, in the same narrow
track) around the Earth. This 360° circle is the zodiac. It is divided
into twelve 30° sectors—the signs of the zodiac. The Sun, Moon
and planets move in front of a backdrop of the signs. They can be
found anywhere in the zodiac, and can therefore be observed in
different directions. When two or three are in the same zodiacal
degree, we perceive them lying in the same direction.
Figure 1 on page Júpiter marks a few planets in the zodiac. If we
consider Mars as our reference point, the direction in which we
view Mars is at a right angle to the direction in which we view -t / A.tpiCI.) jr/J Pirsonuhty o
cf 3
26° 90 Plutão 120 £
150 V ■ Mercúrio Figure 1. The horoscope viewed from Earth (E) at the center. From this
point, the angles of the planets create aspects.
Venus. For us on Earth, they are 90° away from one another. But
the position of Mars in respect to Jupiter is quite different. Here
the distance between the two planets is such that the Mars-EarthJupiter angle is 120°.
Mars also stands at a specific distance from Saturn in the circle
of the heavens as seen from Earth, and the two planets form an
angle of 26°. Now this angle is not a recognized astrological aspect.
Not every angle between planets is called an aspect. The angles
known to tradition as aspects are listed in Table 1.
When two (or more) planets as seen from the Earth form one
of these special angles, this means they are linked astrologically.
The parts of the psyche symbolized by the said planets interact
directly. All according to the nature of the aspect, they assist and
stimulate or hinder and dampen one another. In psychological
terms, an aspect represents a process by which given psychic energies are linked in a way that gives each of them greater freedom Kinds of Aspect / 5
Table 1: Major and Minor Aspects.
Name Symbol Size in
Degrees Orb Major aspects
Conjunction 6 0
60 6-8 Júpiter -6 Quadratura 90
120 6-8 150
180 3
6-8 18 1-2 30 2 36 2 40 2 45 2
1 Sextile
Square
Trine
Inconjunct*
Opposition A
TV 6-8 Minor aspects
Vigintile
Semisextile Semisquare \L
J.
N
L. Septile s Quintile* Sol ¥. T Decile
Novile Tridecile
Sesquisquare
Biquintile* Sol 0 51 25'43"
72 2 108 2 135
144 2
2 There is no unanimity on whether these aspects are major or minor. Also considerable variety exists in the symbols assigned to the minor aspects. ot expression or, on the other hand, makes them spasmodic, inhibited, etc. However, the ease or difficulty of the aspect should
not be confused with the ease or difficulty of the development of
the psyche—the so-called "hard" aspects are not necessarily bad
for character development!
As you can see from Table 1, a further distinction is drawn
between angles when they qualify as aspects; they are called "major"
or "minor" aspects. The major aspects have the most obvious effects
and are found in all aspect books—with the exception of the inconjunct. The inconjunct has only recently been recognized as a
major aspect, but is attracting increasing attention. The minor as- 6 / .-l.i/JtV/.i anrf Personality
pects are much less valued, and many astrologers think very little
of them. This is because their action is not so easy to discern; also
because with several of these aspects it is (still) unclear how they
work, or, indeed, whether they work at all. For example, the
novile (40°) is a disputed aspect. Another is the semisextile (30°),
described by some as weakly harmonic, by others as weakly disharmonic. We shall be taking a closer look at this problem in the
next chapter.
When we first study aspects it looks as though they have been
chosen arbitrarily. Why, for instance, should an aspect of 72° be
operative whereas an angle of 81° (to take one at random) is not?
As it happens, the choice follows a regular system. Johannes Kepler,
the famous astronomer-astrologer, was the first to clarify it for us.
With the help of Pythagorean number theory, he carried out research into tonal relationships (harmony) in music, and took these
as the basis of his doctrine of aspects. He demonstrated that when
we divide the 360° circle by a whole number, we seem to get either
an aspect or the "fundamental factor" of an aspect. Table 2 illustrates the process.
Aspects are formed from angles produced when the 360° of
the circle are consecutively divided by whole numbers. By dividing
by 24, some astrologers (including Kepler) attach a meaning to the
angles 75°, 105°, and 165°. One astrologer I know uses the 15°
aspect in chart interpretation, although there is no name for it. The
names of the three other angles have been proposed by certain
astrologers but have not been universally accepted.
The next thing we need to examine is the distinction drawn
between the so-called major and minor aspects. In all probability,
experience was the guide here. Practice still teaches us that some
aspects make themselves felt clearly and unambiguously, while others appear to be much less obvious and identifiable in their effects.
Especially in earlier times, when psychology was embryonic and
life was more outgoing, the subtler aspects would readily escape
notice. Such was the state of affairs around 1600, when Kepler
introduced the minor aspects on theoretical grounds, although Morinus claims the honor of having already discovered two of them—
the semisextile (30°) and the inconjunct (150°).
The major aspects have always been used: the conjunction,
opposition, square, trine and sextile. Also, in this connection, it is Kinds of Aspect / 7
Table 2: The Division of the Circle.
360°
Divided by Equals the Aspect Aspect
Angle 1 conjunction 0° 2 opposition 3 Júpiter trine
square
quintile
2 x quintile = biquintile 180°
120° 5
6
7 sextile
septile 8 semisquare Mercúrio 10
11
12
15
20
24 3 x semisquare = sesquisquare
novile
decile
3 x decile = tridecile
semisextile
5 x semisextile = inconjunct
quindecile
vigintile
(unnamed) 90°
72°
144°
60°
5 1025'43"
45°
135°
40°
36°
108°
30°
150°
24°
18° 5x15 = bilien 15°
75° 7x15 = trilien
11x15 = tao 105°
165° rather intriguing that the psychologist M.-L. von Franz in her book
Number and Time] treats only the numbers 1,2,3 and Júpiter as basic;
the number 5 being seen not as an autonomous number, apart from
the rest, but as a number that sums up those that precede it. The
similarity of this concept to the Oriental doctrine of the four elements with a fifth element (ether) coordinating them in a mysterious
manner is faintly amusing.
All subsequent numbers are composed of the former numbers.
Now, if we take a look at the division of the circle, we notice that
'Marie-Louise Von Franz, translated by Andrea Dykes, Number and Time (Evanston,
IL: Northwestern University Press, 1974). N As pals ilNil Person jltl\ 7S Plutão 6 o jx. jj 180° ^
1Pi Touro Figure 2. The conjunction (A) and opposition (B). Kinds of Aspect! Mercúrio dividing by 1, 2, 3 and Júpiter unquestionably gives the major aspects.
The result of dividing by 6 (the sextile) was for centuries regarded
as major, but, in our time strange to say, there has been a tendency
to demote it. Thus the sextile seems to have lost some of its importance in the eyes of various modern astrologers; although by
no means the last word has been said on the subject. Now if the
moderns are right in their assessment, and if the inconjunct is
important, too, without being quite major, then we have a remarkable confirmation of the supremacy granted to the first four
numbers by numerology.
The numbers 1, 2, 3 and Júpiter yield, therefore, the basic divisions
of the circle and separate the strong, prominent major aspects from
the more quietly acting minor aspects. As it happens, these numbers
crop up elsewhere in astrology: in the one circle of the heavens (1
or unity), in the succession of negative and positive signs (2), in
the crosses (3), and in the elements ( Júpiter ). No other methods of sign
division are known, hence it is clear that there is something fundamental about the numbers 1 through Júpiter .
Let's look at the various aspects arising from the abovementioned division of the circle. The Conjunction: 0°
This is the first stage, in which the circle is not divided and the
angle subtended at the center is 0°. As seen from Earth, two or
more planets appear to be occupying the same degree of the zodiac.
Traditionally, the conjunction signifies united effort or a combination of forces, but how this works out depends on the nature of
the planets concerned. Conjunct planets invariably act together,
whether they harmonize with one another or not. All possible
modes of expression lie latent in a conjunction. This is a most
powerful aspect, especially when it is exact, for the action of the
planets concerned is intensified. Frequently one of the planets predominates, because it is stronger by sign than the other(s). The
stronger planet then decides the way in which the aspect will operate. See figure 2. 10 / Aspects and Personality ^"fnTTTTTTrrnrmn^ V
\Pv 90° Figure 3. The trine (A) and the square (B). Kinds of Aspect III
The Opposition: 180°
Here the circle is divided into two equal halves. (See figure 2.) The
angle formed is 180° and the planets concerned face one another
across the zodiac. The aspect signifies tension and doubt, vacillation
and uncertainty. There is an underlying sense of uneasiness. The
uncertainty generated by the opposition can lead to action but
usually only after some dithering. However, the planets do stand
in signs that have something in common, signs that lie in a single
axis. For example, Gemini/Sagittarius is the axis that has to do with
vision and information. The Gemini pole of the axis gathers and
arranges facts; the Sagittarius pole places them in perspective and
draws conclusions. Each of these signs has the same preoccupation
but approaches it from opposite directions. Hence planets in opposition can be used to supplement one another in a remarkable
way if the native learns to reconcile them.
People with many oppositions tend to be controversial by expressing opinions that almost beg for contradiction. At the same
time, they can look at a matter from every angle and give a balanced
judgment on it; in which case the two extremes of their aspects are
working in tandem. They invariably look at the reverse side of the
coin and this can give them a sense of proportion, but they are also
capable of using their two-sided view of things to demolish other
people's arguments. Therefore this is an aspect of conflict and gives
rise to many struggles and latent tensions; nevertheless the native
surveys so much ground that he or she overlooks less than this
rather refractory attitude might make us imagine. The Trine: 120°
When the circle is divided by three, the angle formed is 120°.
See figure 3 on page 10. Its traditional meaning is harmony. The
planets concerned work harmoniously together and support one
another. The trine is a gift on which we can fall back, a resting place. What is more, it holds considerable promise: there is
a great deal of creativity locked away in it. The trine has al- 12 I Aspects and Personality
ways been described as the easiest and most promising aspect. All
the same, the absence of tension leaves little incentive to action,
therefore this aspect is said to encourage laziness. Often there
is scant need for effort because things always come so easily.
With a number of trines in a chart, the native will be undeniably
lucky in many areas, but it is doubtful whether much of what is
promised will be fully realized. One or two harder aspects are
required for that. The trine represents rest, balance, relaxation,
and harmony. The Square: 90°
Here the circle is divided by four and the angle formed is 90°.
The planets are at right angles to one another (figure 3). The
square signifies tension and conflict. The planets concerned have a
very uneasy relationship; they work against and inhibit each other,
or else reinforce each other at the wrong moment (overcompensation!). In short, with the square, we have to pick ourselves up
again after many a fall before we learn to channel certain energies
properly.
The square is sharper than the equally tense opposition aspect.
Whereas the opposition implants uncertainly and underlying tension, the square produces open tension and divisiveness; so it
can be altogether more trenchant in its action. Also there is no
shared theme, such as we saw in the opposition. Nevertheless, a
square provides valuable energy, even though initially this is impulsive and uncoordinated. Squares are naturally destructive, but
their energy can be employed constructively, because they place
at our disposal the power and determination to clear away the
old in order to build the new. The restlessness inherent in the
square keeps us busy. It is a complete contrast to the trine in
this respect, and can supply the required impetus to develop the
trine's talents. The square confronts us with acute problems which
we have to solve, and keeps us occupied for a large part of our
lives; yet, in spite of its difficulties, it is not a bad aspect. Thanks
to its drive and inherent unrest, it puts us on the trail of many
possibilities. Kinds of Aspect / 13
The Quintile: 72°
When the circle is divided by five, the angle formed is 12°. Increasing attention is being paid nowadays both to the quintile and
to its double, the biquintile (2 x 12° = 144°). See figure Júpiter on page
14. The quintile bestows a naturally well-developed capacity which
is merely waiting to be brought to the surface. It is usually thought
of as an intellectual aspect, being described as mercurial in its action.
Like the biquintile, it is regarded as harmonious. The biquintile
has the same effect as the quintile while, at the same time, there
is something very creative about it and often something occult or
hidden. Admittedly, not all authors agree about the way it acts.
John Addey, for instance, gives it the meaning of purposefulness
and points out that we often find this aspect in people in positions
of power, and also in peopole who are striving for power. Both
aspects belong to the minor group and therefore are still not much
used. The Sextile: 60°
When the circle is divided by six, the angle formed is 60°. A sextile
functions as a weak trine and is therefore harmonious (see figure Júpiter on page 14). Like the trine, the sextile bestows talent, but the
native needs even greater application to exploit it. So the sextile
is something of a doubtful aspect because its promise is not too
easily realized. Hesitancy and talent requiring harmonious development are typical of the sextile, which is seen as the weakest of
the major aspects and by some astrologers (who, after all, may be
expected to find fault with traditional ideas) even as a minor aspect.
People with many sextiles in their charts often turn out to be
waverers who might do much but never make the most of themselves. The Septile: 51025'43"
Here the circle is divided by seven and the angle is 31025'43", an
angle that is rather troublesome to calculate. See figure 5 on page
16. The septile is generally said to have a harmonious if very I -l Ai/'nlt JHJ I'i rMirijhl\ X E> Sol * 144 V 72 Plutão Mercúrio ¥r Netuno Plutão 60 Figure Júpiter . The quint He and biquintile (A), and the sex! He <B). Kinds of Aspect / 7 5
weak action. Harmony and union are the key words of this very
little used minor aspect. Kepler, who introduced many minor aspects, rejected the septile because there is no rational construction
for the heptagon. Other astrologers do favor it, although they are
not yet in agreement about its use. The Semisquare: 45°
Here the circle is divided by eight and the angle formed is 45°, or
half a square (90°). See figure 5. The significance of this minor
aspect is much the same as that of the square, but weaker. Hence
its action is rather disharmonious and difficult, and gives rise to
tensions and irritation. It has proportionally less energy than the
square, although a certain amount of activity does emanate from
it. Three times the angle of the semisquare makes the sesquisquare
(also called the sesquiquadrate), or 3 X 45° = 135°, the effects of
which are approximately those of the semisquare. The Novile: 40°
Here the circle is divided by nine and the angle formed is 40°. The
nbvile is a bone of contention and Kepler himself treated it dismissively. Opinions are much divided over this minor aspect and
precious little can be found on it in the literature. See figure 6 on
page 18. The Decile: 36°
Here the circle is divided by ten and the angle formed is 36°. The
decile (figure 6) is a minor aspect to which mental ingenuity is
ascribed, as well as insight into the inner workings of nature and
her forces.
Three times the angle of the decile makes the tridecile (108°),
an aspect which is becoming increasingly important. It bestows
formidable talent, in spite of the fact that the joint action of the
planets concerned (unlike what we find in the trine for example) /(') Ai/Vi /i jnJ PirMDuhty Z) ^r \ Plutão s 51 25 43
^8
C9 z> CP
135 r* \ Plutão 45
L o Figure 5. The sept He (A), and the sesquisquare and semi square (Bl. Kinds of Aspect 117
is almost completely hidden. It promotes mental growth, spiritual
expansion and possibilities for improvement. The Semisextile: 30° When the circle is divided by twelve, the angle formed is 30°. See
figure 7 on page 19. A certain amount of doubt hangs over this
minor aspect: some authorities say it is weakly harmonious while
others calls it weakly disharmonious. Either way, the semisextile
causes little inconveniences which can be the harbingers of fresh
possibilities.
Five times the angle of the semisextile makes 150°, or the
inconjunct (also called the quincunx). There is a growing tendency
to class the inconjunct with the major aspects. A glance at recent
works on chart interpretation will confirm this. Its significance is
internal tension, the source and direction of which cannot be pinpointed by the conscious mind for a long time, although it causes
a gnawing sense of uneasiness. This tension of the inconjunct can
suddenly well up into consciousness and then discharge itself into
a situation that makes you feel that you are standing with your back
against the wall. It can also create problems through unconscious
negligence. In short, it is a rather awkward, troublesome and stressful aspect with which it is not easy to come to terms. However,
once its tension has been brought under control, it can prove quite
productive. The Quindecile: 24° When the circle is divided by 15, the resulting angle is 24°. This
aspect (figure 7) was used by Llewellyn George, who assigned a
weakly harmonious significance to it. Rather surprisingly, Kepler
did not show much interest in it; but his comparison of musical
tones and planetary aspects does mention the interval of 24°, which
he equated musically with a minor second. So Kepler definitely
knew the aspect even though, as we have said, he did nothing with
it. In any case, little agreement exists over this minor aspect, which
is seldom noticed in the literature. According to Llewellyn George, IS 1 A\f>ii/i jtul PirtOHjhl} N 40° o. ¥ of T 108° 36° C5>
'fTTTTTTTTIfTTTTffn
Figure 6. The novile (A), and tridecile and decile (B). Kinds uf Aspect! 19 3 150 A Plutão r'
30
JL.
<c? Plutão V
24 o Figure 7. The inconjunct and semisextile (A), and the quindecile (B). Ji) . \ fa Saturno jud Pcrunhihty p
A. v- <?
€ Mercúrio Netuno 165 X Plutão 15 75 105 s>
o Figure 8. The vigintile (A) and an unnamed 15° aspect (B) Kinds of Aspect / 21
its influence (and that of the vigintile, the decile and the tridecile)
is so subtle that the radical effects are extremely difficult to trace.
Oddly enough, he goes on to say that they ought to be studied in
progressions. The Vigintile: 18° Here the circle is divided by 20 and the angle formed is 18°. See
figure 8. This minor aspect is regarded as harmonious. It is said to
promote new possibilities. Kepler left this aspect out of consideration. Unnamed: 15° In this, the circle is divided by 24 but the resulting angle of 15° is
not usually treated as an aspect (figure 8). However, it is used to
form the rarely mentioned aspects bilien (5 X 15° = 75°), trilien
(7 x 15°= 105°) and tero (11 x 15°= 165°). Interestingly enough,
Kepler does not consider the aspect of 15°, but he does speak of
the bilien, to which he ascribes malice, treachery, passion and grief;
also the trilien which, according to him, leads to restlessness, conflict and shocks. In his view, the tao aspect exposes the native to
ambushes and crises. 2 Detennining
the
Aspects The Orb
The previous chapter explained the angles between the planets that
qualify as aspects, but these angles don't have to be exact in order
to exert influence. The angles enjoy a certain tolerance known as
an orb. Assuming that the orb of a trine is 6°, we can say that two
planets are still trine if the angle between them differs from 120°
by no more than 6°. The orb holds good in both directions, so that
a trine is operative between 114° (= 120° - 6°) and 126° (= 120°
+ 6°).
Table 1 (on page 5) indicates the specific orb which has been
allotted to each aspect. Because they are more concrete and clearcut in their effects, the major aspects are permitted bigger tolerances than the minor, which are less definite and more subtle. The
sextile and the inconjunct occupy an intermediate position in this
respect. Some orbs are larger than others. In the minor aspects
only one value is listed, e. Vênus ., 2°; but in the major there are two
values, such as 6 to 8° for the conjunction. The reason for the
double listing is that aspects involving the Sun or Moon (the two
lights of the horoscope) are granted a bigger orb than that given 24 Aspt'its and Pfnoriti/tli to aspects involving the other planets, the Ascendant or the Midheaven (6°). For example, if the Sun is trine the Ascendant, a
maximum orb of 8° is allowed; but if Venus is trine the Ascendant,
the maximum orb is only 6°. Therefore the higher values do not
enter into the picture unless either the Sun or the Moon is involved.
With any of the minor aspects there is no such distinction, and
the orb for all the planets is equally small. In any case, it is safer
to use as small an orb as possible for these, seeing there is no
definite agreement about their influence. Because the closer an
aspect is to being exact the stronger it is, the first thing to do with
a minor aspect is to study it under a very narrow orb. If, after it
has been carefully studied in many charts, such an aspect does not
appear to contribute much, we can set it aside as questionable in
our opinion. But if a minor aspect does seem to work when it is
exact, then is the time to take up the question of its orb, and to
ask at what orb it begins to lose its effect. However, this demands
a practical, comprehensible and well-researched description of what
the aspect does.
The inconjunct has a maximum orb of 3° for all planets. There
is still no agreement as to whether this aspect is major or minor.
But if we call it major and concede to it an orb of 6°, a fresh
problem arises: the area of influence of the inconjunct now overlaps
that of the biquintile—an impossible state of affairs for interpretation. With the "old" original series of major aspects (the conjunction, sextile, square, trine, and opposition), this could not
happen; but with the minor aspects it is quite likely to happen if
they are given major orbs. Thus an orb of 6° extends the tridecile
to 114° since 108° + 6° = 114°. This is also the boundary of the
trine for the ordinary planets (120° - 6° = 114°), but it falls within
the trine of the Sun and Moon (120° - 8° = 112°).
Where the limits really lie is a problem with no easy solution.
Different values are offered by different textbooks. The older writers tend to propose fairly large orbs, whereas the modern are more
cautious. The values given in this book are on the safe side.
Orb sizes have always been an uncertain quantity. For as far
back as we can go in the history of astrology, we find conflicting
opinions on the subject. Views sometimes differ sharply. One
school of thought in India did not worry about orbs at all, but took Determining the Aspects / 23
sign difference as its basis. Another Indian school studied specific
angles. The famous French astrologer, Morin de Villefranche, the
last European court astrologer, devised a completely individual system of orbs. He started from the moment at sundown when the
planets were clearly visible—which is when the Sun is 18° below
the horizon. In other words, Morin and his followers suggested
that the Sun ought to have an orb of 17° or 18°. He looked to see
when a planet on the horizon became visible after the Sun had set
and calculated how far the Sun had sunk below the horizon at that
moment. If it was 10° below, for example, he subtracted this number from the orb of the Sun: thus 17° — 10° = 7° would make
7° the orb of the planet concerned. An involved but ingenious
system which Morin apparently borrowed from the Indian Taijak
method.
In this form, the system has long been given up, although a
few astrologers may still employ it. Nowadays, we are inclined to
think that it is more appropriate to decide the orb from the nature
of the aspect involved rather than from the nature of the planets,
although it is in fact useful to bear the latter in mind, as we have
seen: the Sun and Moon being allowed a somewhat bigger orb than
that of the other planets, at least in major aspects.
Various modern astrologers are experimenting with orbs derived from the theory of harmonics. However, the resulting orbs
differ so much from those currently accepted that many are having
second thoughts about them. Thus, according to harmonics, an
opposition ought to have an orb of 12°, but a square would have
an orb of only 3°.
These are merely a few of the attempts that have been made
to find a basis for the orbs; so far, no ideas or theories have proved
satisfactory. As long as the debate continues, the beginner will have
to personally choose whom to follow. The orbs proposed in the
present book are, as already mentioned, on the cautious side. They
have proved useful in practice without bringing the risk of overlapping aspects.
If we make the orbs too small, we curtail the number of possible aspects in a chart and increase the chance of having unaspected
planets. Now the unaspected planets so found do not always display
the characteristics of genuinely unaspected planets (see chapter 6),
and this warns us against the use of overly small orbs. Wide aspects J(i / zl.i/'fi /i jnJ PersOHdhty
sbxdh TV1
2^
?<» uxr ^ JX
TJP l V„fi >? 5D
^6
^ M?
Ms Oil9.
'^o • Lua >
* %32, Ak Lua li '> ^
r ©'I? rp Netuno - Ae
tr Chart 1. Carl Gustav Jung, born July 26, 1875. are like a blunt knife: it is still possible to cut with them, but their
cutting power is inferior to that of exact aspects. Therefore the line
has to be drawn somewhere: we must be realistic. Since aspect
theory is more confusing than helpful, our best guide is practical
experience.
Let's take a look at Carl Jung's horoscope in order to clarify
thinking about orbs (chart 1). If we examine the Sun's major aspects,
we shall see that the Sun makes a square (90° 16') with Neptune
and an opposition to the Ascendant. The Sun is 3° 19' Leo and
Neptune is 3° 03' Taurus. This is an orb of only 16 minutes (not Determining the Aspects / 27
even a degree!), and so the aspect is almost exact. Hence the effect
of this aspect is very powerful. Weaker, but still obvious, is the
opposition (177° 36') of the Sun and the Ascendant: here the difference is 2° 24'. This too is a close aspect, although not so nearly
exact.
The Midheaven is 28° 48' Scorpio, and Saturn is 24° 12' Aquarius. Saturn makes a square of 85° 24' with the Midheaven and is
therefore Júpiter ° 36' away from an exact aspect. Since the permitted
orb for a square is 6° (see Table 1, page 5), this still counts as an
aspect. Had Saturn been 20° Aquarius, there would have been no
aspect with the MC because the permitted orb of 6° would have
been exceeded. Saturn in Aquarius would certainly conflict with
the MC in Scorpio but, in the absence of an aspect, the situation
would no longer be acute. When there is no aspect, sign position
comes into general play.
Now look at Jupiter (23° 48' Libra) and Venus (17° 30'
Cancer). The maximum orb for a square is 6°, but Jupiter lies a
little beyond this limit. The addition of 6° to the 17° 30' of Venus
gives 23° 30', and Jupiter is at 23° 48'. The difference is 18 minutes,
which means that Jupiter is 18' out of orb. In the ordinary way,
that would be that; we should have to say there was no aspect. But
this is an exceptional case: Jupiter is in Libra, the sign ruled by
Venus, and so Venus is the dispositor of Jupiter. There is a special
relationship between them even before we come to the question
of aspects. Now then, when a relationship already exists between
two planets, it is allowable to use a slightly wide orb, but not more
than by one degree for major aspects and by much less (say 10 to
15 minutes at most) for minor aspects. Here we have a square
between Venus and Jupiter; but let it be noted that the aspect is
not particularly powerful since the orb is so great. To sum up:
• The more nearly exact the aspect, the stronger is its effect;
• There is no unanimity on the question of orbs, therefore it is
advisable to use fairly modest orbs which have proved their worth
in practice;
• The Sun and Moon can be allowed somewhat bigger orbs than
those given to the other planets, Ascendant or MC; 28 / Aspects and Personality
• A slightly larger orb can be used when the two planets concerned
already have a relationship with one another by means of dispositorship. The Effects of the Signs
In determining aspects, we shall encounter a phenomenon known
as the "out of sign aspect." Turning once more to Chart 1, we find
the Ascendant is 0° 55' Aquarius. The Ascendant opposes the Sun
(3° 19' Leo). Now suppose Jung's Ascendant had been 28° 45'
Capricorn—would that also have been an opposition? Astrologers
give different answers to this question. Some say that since the
difference of Júpiter ° 34' is still within the orb allowed for an opposition
to the Sun, what we have is certainly an aspect even though it is
an out of sign aspect. That is to say, the opposition exists even
though the signs involved—Leo and Capricorn—are not themselves in opposition, but are inconjunct.
Others say that when the relationship between the signs is not
in keeping with the type of the presumed aspect, then there is no
aspect. Here we have two completely opposed opinions. The first
lays emphasis on the aspect as a self-sufficient quantitative entity
depending on the division of the circle; the second lays emphasis
on the aspect as a qualitative entity and on its setting in the signs.
The problem is rather thorny, and there are numerous charts with
borderline cases where a great deal turns on whether or not certain
aspects are present.
As far as we know, Ptolemy was the first to turn his attention
to the major aspects: possibly he was the one who introduced them.
Apparently he knew nothing about the problem of orbs, seeing
there is nothing in his Tetrabiblos to suggest that his aspects are
determined in any other way than by signs. In other words, he
obviously went from sign to sign to find aspects; he didn't go outside
the signs to find them. Hindu astrology still employs the same
method, and does not have any problems with aspects out of sign.
In this system, major aspects exist only when the occupied signs
are in major aspect to one another. A trine to a planet in Aries,
say, can be formed only from Leo or Sagittarius. Determining the Aspects / 29
Kepler, on the other hand, treated the aspects purely mathematically and, in doing so, stressed the separation and the orb.
He attached no value to the sign background. In his mathematical way, he divided the circle by various numbers and introduced
hitherto unknown aspects and, incidentally, a hitherto unknown
problem.
For whereas it was still possible to move from sign to sign
by major aspects, this was no longer possible with the minor
aspects. A sesquisquare from Leo can be made to planets in Sagittarius (naturally trine to Leo), in Capricorn (naturally inconjunct),
in Pisces (also inconjunct), or in Aries (trine again), depending
on the exact position of the planet in Leo. According to astrologers who follow Kepler, the difference in sign setting is completely immaterial. Sign-oriented astrologers make much of the
distinction between these aspects, however, and many astrologers
reject the minor aspects altogether because of this and other difficulties.
Quite apart from the problem of orbs, the minor aspects confront us with a further problem. Certain practitioners are convinced
that the minor aspects do not work, while others regard them as
no more than a refinement. Those who reject them often argue
that the minor aspects have a very weak influence and are anyway
unreliable. A minor aspect such as the sesquisquare may produce
difficulties for one native while it seems to have no effect on another. That the effect of minor aspects differs from one horoscope
to another is an undeniable fact—but does this justify the conclusion that they are therefore inoperative or untrustworthy? This
problem has exercised my mind for years, and the following observations are based on my practical experience.
When we speak of aspects, we may well be thinking of distances
measured round the circle. But what exactly are aspects? In psychological astrology, aspects connect certain planets or the Ascendant or MC with one or more other planets. As intimaters of
character, planets psychologically represent psychic factors or reaction patterns. Each planet has its own features and type of reaction, and thus forms a clear-cut, self-contained unit. However, a
planet is influenced by the sign in which it is posited and this,
although it does not alter the planet's nature, does determine the
way in which it expresses itself. ■if) / Aspects and Personality
Mercury always remains the planet of communication, the
planet that arranges facts and governs how we talk and make contacts. It preserves this meaning whatever sign it is in. But when it's
in Aries, its mode of expression is Arian—decisive, forceful, rapid
(sometimes too rapid), pointed, explicit, often thoughtless, spontaneous, and so forth. On the other hand, Mercury in Taurus will
express itself thoughtfully, quietly, slowly, and cautiously; it will
incline the native to make sure of his or her ground before having
anything to do with strangers. This is quite different from the Arian
method. Obviously, an aspect to Mercury in Aries is noticeably
different from the same aspect to Mercury in Taurus, since the
modes of expression of the two signs are diametrically opposed.
All aspects are invariably colored in this way.
A further question follows: it concerns whether or not a planet
on the cusp of a sign is affected by the adjacent sign. Here, also,
there are two schools of thought. The first states that there is no
sharp transition and that the last degrees of one sign and the first
degrees of another shade into one another and share the influence
of both signs. Those who hold this opinion are unlikely to be
worried when major aspects are out of sign, because in their system
there is always an overlap of sign influence.
The second school of thought states that the transition between
signs is indeed clear-cut, and this is an opinion that has been steadily
gaining ground in the last few years. Studies in hour-angle astrology
have shown that the two-hourly change of sign at the local Midheaven coincides with a sudden change of activity. There is nothing
gradual about this change: its suddenness is quite dramatic. Students
can verify this fact. All we have to do is calculate for several days
in a row the moment when 0° of any given sign reaches the
Midheaven. Many of us have already found (and may even have
thought it hilarious) that almost on the dot of the moment of
transition the telephone rings, the atmosphere or topic changes
at meetings, or all at once we have something else to do. We
may be standing quietly in the supermarket when there is a
mad rush of shoppers. In short, a switch-over from one sign to
another is usually associated with a very abrupt and rapid change
of activities.
It goes without saying that this runs counter to the theory of
gradualness. And not only so; I have been fortunate enough, in
examining this question, to be closely acquainted with several in- Determining the Aspects / 31
dividuals having planets in the last degrees and minutes of signs,
and thus have had plenty of opportunities for observing their responses. One of them, with the Moon at Gemini 29° 37', displays
not a single Cancerian reaction even though the Moon is so close
to that sign. Then there is the Sagittarian (with the Sun, Mercury
and Ascendant in Sagittarius) who has Venus at Scorpio 29° 55'.
He is a real swashbuckler and revels in his free and adventurous
lifestyle. Yet, where women are concerned, he is as jealous as can
be and keeps them tied firmly to himself. The possessiveness that
is otherwise foreign to him is developed to the full in his love life.
Venus is a mere 0° 05' away from Sagittarius, which is already quite
well tenanted, and we might easily suppose that Venus would pick
up some of the influence of that sign; but not a bit of it. We should
therefore be very wary of presuming there are such things as transitional areas at the beginning and end of signs, especially as practical experience seems to refute their existence.
We can also draw a wrong conclusion on this matter if we fail
to take into account other relevant factors in subjects' charts. Here
is an example of the kind of mistake I mean. A beginner in astrology
once claimed that his Ascendant at 28° Libra displayed an obvious
transition into Scorpio, for he did not always react in a balanced
fashion to the outside world and was often reproached that his
hackles were raised too quickly. What he had overlooked was that
he had a Moon/Mars conjunction in Scorpio in the 1st house. It
was not the Ascendant in the last degrees of Libra, but this conjunction, that was responsible for his behavior. Since there are so
many factors in the horoscope, it is sometimes hard to tell just
where any of them comes into play; experiences like the above
teach extra care when it comes to aspects. Minor Aspects
Effects and the of the Elements In character interpretation, the background influence of the signs
must be considered if we want to know how the planets are going
to express themselves. We all know that the reaction of a planet
in Pisces (an emotional sign) is strongly influenced by a planet in
Cancer (also an emotional sign). The signs are trine one another; Aspects and Personality
if the planets are also trine, their action is completely harmonious
and supportive. But what happens if the same two planets in the
same signs form some other aspect? Say one of them is at 3° Pisces
and the other at 18° Cancer: the signs are trine, but the planets
now form a sesquisquare, an aspect associated with tension. Seeing
that the planets are in harmony because of their similar mode of
reaction (that of the water signs), how can the sesquisquare spoil
their relationship? Numerous examples have shown me that the
signs are the deciding factors. And this explains why one sesquisquare is not necessarily like another. When, as in the above instance, the zodiac background is favorable, the sharp edges of the
aspect will never or hardly ever be felt. But when the background
is conflicting, a disharmonious aspect will have a disharmonious
effect.
The background of signs, to which Ptolemy attached (and the
Indians still attach) such prime importance, can also explain why
some people call the semisextile (30°) weakly harmonious while
others call it weakly disharmonious. Look at the signs. A semisextile
from Aries to Taurus joins two planets that are completely at variance, and this can cause nothing but tension. But with a semisextile
from Virgo to Libra, tension is not so marked; on the contrary, the
planets work together quite well.
The next step is to consider the elements to which the signs
belong. Each element represents a certain primary function of the
mind as distinguished by Carl Jung. These psychological functions
relate to four basic ways in which an individual can view or experience the world and its phenomena. Jung called these functions
intuition, sensation, thinking and feeling. They correspond as follows to the elements of astrology:
• Fire corresponds to the intuitive function: the irrational "knowledge" of where a phenomenon originated and/or how it will develop. Fire examines the inner connections lying behind the
outer form; in general, scant attention is paid to the material side
of things.
• Earth is analogous to sensation: it assures itself that something is
there. Earth is interested in concrete phenomena and in their definiteness. In principle, the native accepts nothing but what is revealed by the sense organs. Determining the Aspects / 31
• Air answers to the function of thinking: the establishment of what
it is that is there. The element encourages the native to gather data
and to order it in thought patterns that can be interlinked. A thing
is accepted or rejected on logical grounds. The native thinks and
communicates.
• Water represents the function of feeling: the appraisal of whether
or not a thing is pleasant or if its results would be agreeable.
Naturally this classification does not imply that an earth-type person
is brainless, or that an air-type person is unfeeling—far from it. It
is merely meant to show how each type is oriented and how it
operates in the outside world. There is no question of one being
better or worse than another. All four elements are needed for
grasping reality entire, even though one or sometimes two of them
invariably come to the fore.
Polarity is an important facet of Jung's typology: he opposes
thinking to feeling, and sensation to intuition. Astrologically, air
contrasts with water, and earth contrasts with fire, e. Vênus ., we cannot
think rationally (air) about certain events when we are responding
to them emotionally (water). The four functions are mutually exclusive. This means that when something happens, an individual
will respond through one of the four functions (all according to his
or her particular psychological make-up). He or she evaluates the
happening by means of emotional experience (water), or thinks it
over and tries to analyze it logically so as to fit it into a preconceived
mental framework (air), or perceives it in its widest extent (earth),
or experiences only half of it and tries to integrate it directly into
a sequence of further possibilities for self and others (fire).
Thus fire always contrasts with earth, and air always contrasts
with water. This psychological thesis may seem to conflict with
analogies sometimes used in astrology, but it works splendidly in
practice. The traditional view is that fire is much less compatible
with water than it is with earth but, in reality, there is more in
common between fire and water signs than there is between fire
and earth signs. Owing to incomprehension of each other's opposite
lines of approach, fire and earth are a much more ill-matched pair
than are fire and water. Intuition, or fire, does not see things as
they are in themselves, but grasps their connection with other facts
and possibilities. It looks largely to the future and to the oppor- •H / Aspects and Personality
tunities the future may bring, and is not deterred by the uncertainty
of an adventure. Earth dwells in the present, which it sees as concrete consequence of the past. It values security, and therefore
deals in hard facts and has little sympathy with fire's apparently
"airy-fairy" visions of the future. A likely fire-sign reaction to something is, "What can I do with this in the days ahead, what possibilities
does it offer me?" Earth, on the other hand, thinks first of its effects
on the safe and solid basis of existence—a thought that would never
occur to fire.
When earth appreciates the beauty of something, what is being admired is the solid or handsome material, the lovely outlines
and colors, the exquisite proportions and harmony of the object
itself. Fire can also find beauty in it, but beauty that resides in its potential or in the story lying behind it. For lack of interest in earthcriteria, fire is often unable to remember even the color of the
object.
Much the same is true of the duality of air and water, which
are poles apart and have entirely distinct ways of looking at things.
The chart as a whole will reveal to which type the native belongs,
due weight being given to the Sun sign. All we are considering
here is the background of the elements, in order to point out that
conflicts between an element and its contrasting element should be
more severe than those it has with the remaining elements. And
my experience proves that this is so. It will be found, by anyone
who takes the trouble to investigate, that a square between Sagittarius and Virgo (fire and earth), where the signs conflict, is more
unsettling than one between Gemini and Virgo (air and earth),
where the signs do not conflict. Of course, this is only a very sketchy
approach to the four psychological functions alias the elements.
The astrological implications are worked out in detail in my book,
Elements and Crosses as the Basis of the Horoscope.'
By considering the meanings of the elements in addition to
those of the signs, we can gain a much better understanding of the
difficulties surrounding the minor aspects. Take the quintile for
example. According to Kepler, this is an easy aspect; but what are
2 Elementsand Crosses as the Basis of the Horoscope (York Beach, ME; Samuel Weiser,
1984). Determining the Aspects / 35
we to make of a quintile from 29° Capricorn to 11° Aries? The
elements are in conflict, so there are bound to be problems. Is the
aspect really easy in this case? Probably. All we can say with certainty is that the planets will express themselves in ways that do
not integrate. So the aspect brings us some benefit in situations we
might prefer to avoid, even though good comes out of them in the
end. The benefit, then, is one we may not acknowledge, or one
that seems doubtful due to attendant circumstances; yet we may
eventually profit by it.
If the elements are more compatible, say for example, in a
quintile from 3° Aquarius to 15° Aries (with non-conflicting elements in sextile), the benefit will be easier to see and the native
will consciously recognize it.
With this understanding of the background effects of the elements, it is possible to differentiate between instances of the same
aspect between the same planets. If we ignore the elements, we
shall be hard put to see how the minor aspects work: sometimes
they will live up to their textbook descriptions and sometimes they
won't, and it will be tempting to dismiss them as unreliable. Yet
the elements are generally the cause of the problem.
Let's got back to the previously mentioned example of the
square between Virgo and Sagittarius, and interpret it on the basis
of the elements. Suppose the square is between Mercury in Virgo
and Mars in Sagittarius. We can read the situation as follows:
Mercury can express its analytical, planning ability to the full
in this equally methodical and analytical sign. Because Virgo is an
earth sign, Mercury's activities will tend to have a concrete and
practical bent. This position gives a good sense of proportion and
reality. Mercury in Virgo favors what is visible, tangible and actual,
and will approach things in a critical, analytical and classificatory
way.
Mars in Sagittarius, on the other hand, is busily engaged in
everything but what is concrete. Here the energy of Mars is directed
toward the future, encouragaing the native to hope for whatever
lies ahead, to underrate the present, and to go through life with
fire and verve. The risk-taking of a Sagittarius Mars is enough to
throw the painfully conscientious Virgo Mercury into fits! They
have hardly anything in common. The square between them makes i() / Aspects and Personality
the conflict acute because, as soon as one of them is activated, so
is the other, and the two planets influence each other directly.
Mercury in Virgo will certainly be sharpened by the square
with Mars, and this may appear both in the native's conversation
and in his or her feverish mental activity. But Mercury in Virgo
reacts in a secondary way towards the outside world, whereas Mars
in Sagittarius is very outgoing. Here, therefore, there is an obvious
conflict—which is fueled by the square.
Now, if Mars makes a square to a Virgo Mercury not from
Sagittarius but from the air sign Gemini, it will give mental alertness
and activity, possibly with a tendency to jump from one idea to
another. The native will be very diligent in gathering all kinds of
information, will have enormous curiosity, and will know everything that is going on. The square to Mercury in analytical Virgo
sharpens the tongue and can earn the native a reputation as a pedant
and stickler for accuracy. However, there is not such tension in the
aspect. Mercury in Virgo can get on reasonably well with Mars in
Gemini; the latter being much less averse to concrete reality than
is Mars in Sagittarius, which is so keen to gallop away into the
future. When Mars is in Gemini, its energy is easier for Mercury
in Virgo to handle: there is no longer a pull in two completely
different directions; the problem is simply one of investing the
energy wisely.
So the square between Mars in Sagittarius and Mercury in
Virgo is more difficult because it brings together such incompatible
psychic factors, and this increases the strain.
Turning now to the inconjunct aspect or quincunx (150°), we
find two possibilities: the inconjunct between conflicting or nonconflicting elements. For example, we can have an inconjunct between Aries and Virgo and between Aries and Scorpio, that is to
say, between fire and earth and between fire and water. Obviously,
the former will create more difficulties than the latter, and this
explains why the level of trouble caused by inconjunct aspects is
not always the same.
It is impossible to account for these differences in effect by
an appeal to such factors as incoming and outgoing or inclining and
declining aspects, as these supply indications of a completely different sort and have little to say about the seeming unreliability of
the aspects. We will study this later in chapter Júpiter . Determining the Aspects / 37
Let's summarize the important considerations so far:
• Be careful about cuspal influences. Transitions from one sign to
another are more important than is often thought.
• The nature of the sign in which it is posited is decisive for mode
of expression of a planet (though not for its meaning).
• Have as little as possible to do with aspects out of sign, or adopt
a minimum orb for them, since their validity has not yet been
established.
• Consider the signs, and especially the elements, when studying
minor aspects; this will show if their effects are likely to be stronger
or weaker.
• Major aspects, too, can be evaluated by looking at the elements. 3 The Psychological
Influence of Aspects What Does an Aspect Do? An aspect links two or more psychic factors and decides the manner
in which they will work for or against one another. It refines chart
interpretation in the sense that it symbolizes the dynamic interplay
between psychic factors (and the Ascendant and Midheaven). However, it can never nullify other factors in the horoscope.
If the panning out of the elements in the horoscope points to
emotional problems (for instance, if there is an air/water conflict
or no planets in water), a harmonious aspect between two emotional
planets will not remove these problems. It may ease them or it may
make them more acute. For instance, someone endowed with the
great sensitivity indicated by the Moon trine Neptune can feel
uncomfortable when the background distribution of the elements
is not supportive. Therefore, before judging an aspect, we need to
inspect the radix as a whole. It is wrong to take isolated aspects
blindly from books: the latter do not give us the shades of meaning
essential to chart interpretation. All they can do is to put us on the
right track. 40 I Aspects and Personality
So, in any aspect between two psychic factors (planets), more
is involved than whether the aspect is harmonious or disharmonious. The main thing to observe is the nature of the planets concerned. Saturn always represents soberness, plainness, limitation and
restriction, irrespective of what aspect it makes, and its aspects can
be inhibiting whether they are harmonious or disharmonious; the
difference being that with harmonious aspects people seem better
able to cope (apart from some exceptions to be mentioned later).
In my own practice, I have had a number of cases of women
with Moon/Saturn aspects, both trines and squares. What is so
striking is that, regardless of whether the aspects were easy or hard,
the women had fallen out with their mothers: in each case there
were feelings of distance and a lack of warmth between mother
and child—even with the trine. I am not suggesting that everyone
with an aspect between the Moon and Saturn is going to fall out
with her mother—let us beware of jumping to conclusions! What
I will say, however, is that planets are not changed in character by
particular aspects, but that aspects ought to be viewed, first and
foremost, as links between psychic contents. The important thing
is the existence of a link, and although the nature of this link
does contribute something, its contribution is subsidiary, not primary. Otherwise, if the nature of the aspects were as important
as is often thought, harmonious aspects between Saturn and the
Moon would not have led to breaks between the women and their
mothers.
Of course, when there is only a single indication in a chart,
the effect, whatever it may be, is not so certain to follow. Two
indications pointing in the same direction make it more probable;
but, for real likelihood, three or more indications are required. In
the charts of the above-mentioned women, there were several indications; but this does not entitle us to deny that the traditionally
harmonious trine was one of them, or that it was unable to solve
the problem that its association of the motherly Moon with cold
and distant Saturn had raised. Therefore it is best to regard an
aspect as a connection between two or more psychic factors, enabling them to interact without losing their natural characteristics;
and as an intimation of the way in which these two or more factors
influence one another (the type of interaction). The Psychological Influence of Aspects / 41
Working Out Aspect Meanings
This section is a useful exercise if you are just beginning to study.
Select an aspect to interpret. Write down a set of keywords for the
planets concerned (you can get a list of keywords from many textbooks). Try to combine the planetary meanings into a coherent
picture and use the nature of the aspect to color in that picture.
To give a short example: Let us assume we want to know how
Mars square Saturn behaves. Some keywords for Mars are: energy,
executive ability, aggression, combativeness, egoism, passion, etc.
Some keywords for Saturn are: limitation, restraint, restriction,
structure, ambition, concentration, anxiety, uncertainty, austerity,
etc. These two planets create difficulties when they are combined,
because they are so incongruent. Mars joined with Saturn can represent a reduction in energy, owing to the fact that a great deal of
Martian energy has to be spent in overcoming the inertia or stiffness
of Saturn. But because of the Martian drive and the Saturnine
tendency to overcompensate, there can be occasional bursts of
hyperactivity. It is also possible for Saturn to channel the energy
of Mars into a steady output. The ambition resulting from a Mars/
Saturn aspect can be great due to the added self-assertion, but we
may expect to find mixed in with the ambition a measure of Saturnine fear and insecurity—and this is a recipe for harshness.
A square is a hard aspect and can create difficulties and tensions
because it lacks the means to combine planets harmoniously—to
begin with, anyway. But a square also gives the strength to tackle
the problems it causes. With a square between Saturn and Mars,
the problem of energy expenditure (now too little, now too much)
and its consequences will certainly plague the native. The fear of
underachieving can easily trigger a swelling ambition. The problem
is not insurmountable, and we must never assume that the owner
of such an aspect will have an unpleasant character. The character
may eventually mature through exposure to the jostling of the
planets. Positive Mars/Saturn traits can also be produced by a
square, usually in the native's riper years.
Learning to combine the planetary meanings makes reference
books superfluous when the basic rules are understood. It is most
important not to lose sight of the essential nature of a planet by 42 / Aspects and Personality
concentrating on externals. This is the error that introduces such
confusion into textbook interpretations. To give an example: when
we open various treatises (old and new) to see what they say about
the square between Mars and Jupiter, we encounter a number of
apparently very divergent opinions. The following are brief readings of the Mars/Jupiter aspect found in a number of books taken
at randem (the accounts have been condensed here and there for
reasons of space):
Book 1: Tendency to resort to force in social activities; divisive
family and community life. A fondness for lawsuits, and
the probability of divorce. The aspect has a bad influence
on the character, and the native may drink too much.
Book 2: Skepticism and atheism. The native disregards God and
His commandments. Wasteful and "couldn't care less"
attitude. Cheats, and quick-tempered individuals who act
on impulse or who are not too particular about meeting
their obligations. Book 3: The gambler; a dishonest, mendacious character. Always
behaves impulsivelyBook Júpiter : A loud-mouthed demagogue, not to be trusted. Takes
more than he earns. Armed robbery and murder. Eating
the profits. Wastefulness. Or: ambitions always running
up against ethical objections. The sinner who cannot resist temptation. The criminal. Inability to handle money.
The struggle between crime and the forces of law and
order regarded as a game, a passion for detective stories,
etc. Unsuitability for business life. Book 5: Extravagant or impulsive generosity. No sense of the
value of money. Runs the risk of being exploited by
others. Difficulties with or owning to religion. Losses
through speculation and gambling. Indiscretion, dishonesty, deceit, miscalculation. Difficulties abroad or when
traveling. Book 6: The individual's natural courage is given full rein, but
often rather unwisely. Physical, emotional and business The Psychological Influence of Aspects / 43
risks are taken in complete confidence that everything
will turn out fine. There is great optimism, which is not
always well-founded, and losses can be suffered which
should have been anticipated.
Book 7: Normally a quite positive aspect, provided we can cultivate self-control. Otherwise we shall take unwise risks.
Tendency to rush things and to leave them half done.
Great optimism and lots of energy; utter confidence that
everything will be all right—a confidence that is justified
provided a little foresight is used. A liking for being always on the move, and a hatred of marking time. Restlessness and impatience. Many people enjoy your
company because of your energy and enthusiasm. However you may behave thoughtlessly towards others and
step on their toes through a genuine lack of tact. They
will forgive you, however, since they will quickly realize
you meant well. Book 8: Dishonesty and doubtful morality; the will of the ego
opposes the principle of solidarity, resulting in dissension, dishonesty, egotism, dissipation, and atheism. Many more books could be quoted if we had time, but this is enough
to show how confused you are likely to become when looking up
your aspects in a number ot different texts. The descriptions run
from "criminality and dishonesty" through "enthusiasm and wellmeaning tactlessness." So which of them shall we choose? Which
book is right? It may sound strange, but each is right in its own
way. We can work this out by combining the key meanings as
before.
Let us assume that Mars is square Jupiter. Mars represents
aggressive self-preservation, self-proving, executive ability, energy,
pugnacity, desire, strong personal involvement, fierceness, sexuality, licentiousness, courage, subversiveness, rashness, egoism, passion, coarseness and adventurousness. Jupiter represents spiritual
and religious needs, propagation, expansion, improvement, increase, growth of awareness and insight, justice, generosity, leniency, protection, preservation, healing, liberty, conceit, arrogance,
extravagance, fanaticism, and optimism. 44 / Aspects and Personality
A combination of the two gives many possibilities, among
which are an enormous need to prove oneself or an overabundance
of energy and executive ability. Since Mars already has its full quota
of these things, a Mars/Jupiter aspect can spell trouble. Or the native
could be pugnacious, with great independence and dissoluteness,
or have overfondness for adventure. There might be an active interest in religious, spiritual and social affairs, or a great confidence
or ultra-fiery enthusiasm, or the native might be energetic, sometimes rough and angry, insisting on his or her own views. Great
generosity and protectiveness might be displayed with plenty of
energy; a readiness to fight or stand in the breach for noble and
righteous causes, or indulgence in wastefulness and dissipation
might be expressed.
With the square, the more disagreeable sides of this combination come more to the fore, but there is enough energy for the
better sides to put in an appearance. The activity of the square also
provides energy for problem-solving, so we should not think of it
as wholly "bad." A fair recognition of difficulties and potentials
ought always to be given to aspects of this kind. Returning now to
the book definitions mentioned previously, you might pass the
following comments:
Book 1: An inclination to use force in social life is certainly one
possibility. The quarrelsomeness is due especially to the
fact that the square produces a conflict between the planet
of personal ambition and feelings of self-importance
(Mars) and the planet of the social milieu (Jupiter). But
the square has many more ways of expressing itself than
that! Book 2: Atheism can result from egotism (Mars) struggling with
the religious instincts (Jupiter), yet in practice people with
this aspect are often quite religious in their way. What
they are seeking is an individual (Mars) experience of the
more-than-human or religious (Jupiter). Such an experience is entirely possible for them but is likely to bring
them into conflict with the established creeds. One should
pause, therefore, before calling them atheists.
Paying no heed to God or His Law can be due to
self-will and self-conceit coming to the fore. But this does The Psychological Influence of Aspects t 45
not always happen. Fighting for justice and discovering
inner values (and God dwelling inwardly) are also typical
of this aspect. The difficult character traits mentioned in
Book 2 may make their appearance but it is not a foregone
conclusion that they will do so.
Book 3: The same remarks as above.
Book Júpiter : There is a striking contrast between what is written
here and what is written in Books 6 and 7. The statements in Book Júpiter come from an author who has concentrated on combining the meanings of Mars and Jupiter
negatively. The task of interpretation is not made easy
by the fact that it may have to cover a very wide field.
There is a great need for concrete and cut-and-dried
interpretations, but it is dangerous to offer them without
qualifying them.
We can hardly say that all persons with a square
between Mars and Jupiter are ranting politicians; some
of them are not remotely interested in politics. But those
of them who do enter public life certainly tend to be tubthumpers promising more (Jupiter) than they can deliver
(Mars). In a word, it is better to confine attention to the
native's psychological springs of action than to categorize
him or her as a criminal, a demagogue or a spendthrift.
The fundamental conflict between the ego (Mars) and
community life (Jupiter) can (in the extreme case) lead
to crime, but is more likely to make the native keen to
carve his or her own place in society. He or she may be
a spendthrift; but only because of the desperate desire
for a better social life (a desire created by the dissatisfaction felt with this aspect). Money is spent in an effort
to impress others.
Book 5: The commentary is the same as above. The warning about
difficulties abroad is given because Jupiter, as lord of Sagittarius, can symbolize foreign countries. Any conflict with
Mars therefore carries a potential for problems in a foreign country. Since, however, this is only a single externally small facet of the total aspect, there is a great chance 46 / Aspects and Personality
that nothing of the sort will eventuate. Once again we
must be careful not to jump to conclusions.
Book 6: This is a more cautiously worded, less black-and-white
account.
Book 7: Like Book 6. We can profit by this interpretation. It is
no good thinking of the native as a miscreant or prodigal
with no prospect of improvement. Insight into the reasons for behavior, as given here, can help the native deploy energy more sensibly.
When the native reads that he or she can display
optimism and confidence, but can also make mistakes
through recklessness, this may be encouragement to hold
his or her horses a little. What is more, the positive form
in which the interpretation is cast avoids damaging the
psyche.
Book 8: Here we have a reversion to a rather negative explanation
of the aspect: a statement of what could be, but certainly
need not be. Summing up, we can say that there is a grain of truth in all these
interpretations, but that many books are very one-sided. Just because, in this instance, they are dealing with a square, some authors
concentrate on combining the worst characteristics of the planets—
after all, a square is known as a "bad" aspect, isn't it? Fortunately,
modern books (e. Vênus ., Book 7) are beginning to take a much more
humane and balanced view and are showing an awareness that aspects are never either all good or all bad.
Nevertheless, it must be confessed that interpretation becomes
more difficult when we abandon the old black-and-white style. For
now we are faced with a question of choice and, in making choices,
the rest of the chart has to be taken into consideration. The statement in Book 5, for example, that this aspect gives difficulties in
foreign travel could be confirmed by a placement of Mars in the
9th house (the house of long journeys) and a conflict between the
9th house ruler and Uranus. But if the Sun is in the 9th and if
the ruler of the 9th is in trine Jupiter, there should be a little
evidence of the trouble abroad supposedly threatened by Mars The Psychological Influence of Aspects / 47
square Jupiter. To repeat the golden rule of astrology: one indication on its own gives a possibility, two indications give a probability, but three or more
bordering on certainty. indications can give a probability A whole set of possible everyday situations can be deduced
from the basic textbook definitions. Mars square Jupiter alerts
us to the fact that the native's expenditure of energy, executive
power and egotism are being put under strain by a need to spread,
expand, or to come to terms with religious and spiritual values.
Among other things, this leads to an uncontrolled and/or unbalanced use of energy. Often the native has too many irons in
the fire, and acts far too vigorously. This can have the following
effects:
• Too much risk-taking in business, and launching ventures too
quickly;
• Planning on a larger scale than is realistic;
• Defending one's opinion in religious matters even to the point
of adopting an inquisitorial role and showing scant respect for the
opinions of others;
• Active devotion to a certain church or sect or other spiritual
movement, but also:
• Adopting a very personal form of religious belief;
• The danger of physical exhaustion due to an unbalanced expenditure of energy and overexertion;
• Disorders of the blood (Mars) and liver (Jupiter) will also need
guarding against;
• In social intercourse, there is a risk of creating problems by airing
personal opinions too freely, but it is also possible to win support
by daring to stand up and fight for one's ideals;
• Difficulties caused by promising more than one can deliver, but
also:
• Appreciation for one's application, enthusiasm and optimism.
Mistakes will probably be made, but any blunders will often be
gladly forgiven because of the positive attitude. tS / Aspects and Personality
These are all potential modes of expression of the square between
Mars and Jupiter, and they are only a few of many.
What matters is that, taking the basic properties of two planets
in aspect, we set ourselves to work out their joint effects in the
many areas of life. Simply to class someone as a political windbag,
etc., is to block all insight into what that person is really like. But
if we can show the native that his or her potential difficulties stem
from underestimating or misjudging a situation because the available energy does not match the urge to expand, then he or she can
try to correct certain character traits. If someone reads or hears
that he or she has criminal tendencies when this is untrue, that
person will take a very dim view of chart interpretation and astrology as well.
As astrologers, we should endeavor to make our own basic
combination of two planets and then to refine this combination in
accordance with the aspect linking them. It is very important to
test conclusions thoroughly. Suppose, for example, we encounter
someone with Mars square Jupiter who really is a criminal; this
does not entitle us to assume that everyone with a Mars/Jupiter
square will be tarred with the same brush and, indeed, further
experience will teach us that they are not. It takes more than this
one aspect to make a criminal. Most individuals with the aspect are
law-abiding citizens.
There is no need to be worried by the traditional so-called
hard aspects such as the square and opposition. They form the
astrological power-houses in a personality, they are the engines
that keep an individual running. I have all too often seen people
with none or only a few tensions in their charts (with a socalled green horoscope) fall into difficulties for this very reason!
When they are always so lucky, what chance do they have of
maturing in the school of hard knocks? The traditional concept
of what is entailed by a "green" horoscope5 fails to allow for
the possibility of alienation from oneself and others, and for a
real sense of loneliness. On the other hand, those who have a
lot of "red" in their charts, who are continually wrestling with
themselves and contending with a fate that seems to be lead'A horoscope full of sextiles and trines. The Psychological Influence of Aspects! 49
ing them along rough paths, can grow into very balanced and
understanding individuals. Júpiter A chart full of hard aspects certainly
need not imply that its owner is a sinner; even less does a chart
with plenty of green lines depict a saint. How the aspects behave depends on the situation elsewhere in the horoscope, as we
shall see. ' A red horoscope would include many hard aspects. These are squares and oppositions, etc. Júpiter Approaching and Departing,
Inclining and Declining
Aspects The Speed of the Planets When casting a horoscope, it is always wise to take a separate sheet
of paper and jot down the daily motion of the planets. We know
how far the planets move in a day on average, but the average
values are no use for determining whether an aspect is approaching
or departing. What we require is how fast the planets were moving
on the day of birth—this often makes a big difference!
For example, Mercury can sometimes cover a distance of 1°
58' in one day, while later in the year it crawls along at a mere 0°
07' a day. Mars, which has a smaller average daily motion than
Mercury, can move 0° 40' on the day that Mercury only moves 0°
07' so that, on that date, it is traveling more swiftly.
In order to discover whether an aspect is approaching or departing, we must refer to the quickest planet in that aspect. Say,
for the sake of argument, there is a trine between Mars and Mercury
when they are moving at the above-mentioned speeds; shall we
refer to Mercury because it moves much more quickly than Mars
through the zodiac? No, this would be a mistake. We are not
concerned with how fast the planets move in a year but with how V1 Aspects and fast they are moving on the day in question. Mars is moving faster
on that day, so we start with Mars.
To press the point home, then, it is extremely important when
working out a chart to record the precise daily motions of the
planets. This will prevent many errors later on. Approaching and Departing Aspects We call an aspect approaching, regardless of its type, when the
quicker planet is going to meet the slower—in other words, when
the quicker planet is moving toward a conjunction with the other.
A departing aspect, again regardless of its type, is one in which the
quicker planet is separating from the slower planet and is moving
in the direction of an opposition to it.
Let us see what we have in Chart I (page 26)—Carl Jung's
horoscope. His Moon is square Uranus. Of these two, the Moon
is the quicker, so it must be our reference point. (The only "planet"
over which there can be no mistake is the Moon: it is invariably
the fastest moving of the planets).3 On tracing the course of the
Moon, we find that it is nearing Uranus and, to judge by its current
speed, will soon be in conjunction with Uranus. The square is
therefore approaching.
The Sun also makes a square: a square to Neptune. Being the
quicker of the two, it is taken as the point of reference. On examination, it turns out to be separating from Neptune and, to judge
by its current speed, is moving toward an opposition to that planet
(at 3° Scorpio). This square is therefore departing.
If we simply bear in mind that when the quicker planet is
moving toward a conjunction with the slower planet, the aspect is
approaching, and when the quicker planet is moving toward an
opposition to the slower planet, the aspect is departing, we can
hardly go wrong.
Retrograde planets form a special case. These have a certain
speed, but the direction in which they move is the reverse of that
of the direct planets. Now because direction is vitally important in
The Moon is not a planet. However, many astrologers call the Moon a planet just
to give it an easy "term," but we all know it isn't. Approaching and Departing, Inclining and Declining Aspects / 53
deciding whether an aspect is approaching or departing, we do have
to keep an eye open for retrograde planets.
In Jung's chart, Neptune is retrograde and forms a square with
the Ascendant. At this point, it should be mentioned that for the
purposes of determining whether aspects are approaching or departing (and, for that matter, whether they are inclining or declining), the Ascendant and Midheaven are treated as stationary points.
Therefore Neptune automatically becomes the quicker of the two
factors, which means it is the point of reference. If it were direct,
it would be separating from the Ascendant but, since it is retrograde, it is moving toward a conjunction with it and thus forms an
approaching square. As soon as it turns direct, the square will be
departing.
Opinions vary over the significance of approaching and departing aspects. Sakoian and Acker regard the departing aspect as
more personal and subjective than the approaching aspect, and the
latter as much more impersonal, objective and social. This is at
variance with Th. Ram's view that the departing aspect is primarily
projected outwards on circumstances and other people, while the
approaching aspect relates everything to the native's inner being.
On this theory, a departing square would signify external struggle
and hard work, whereas an approaching square would signify internal struggle and distress.
The latter theory appears to spring from an ancient idea about
new and full Moon. When the Moon is new (i.e., conjunct the Sun),
everything is present in potency and the light-power of the Moon
increases from day to day. In this phase, activities lie in the outer
plane. When the Moon is full (i.e. in opposition to the Sun), reification is at its peak and from then on the light-power of the Moon
decreases from day to day. Attention is directed more inward until
the conjunction is reached and the process begins again.
A lot of research still needs to be done on the subject of
approaching and departing aspects. My own experience leads me
to believe that approaching aspects tend to affect the inner life
more, and that departing aspects tend to affect the outer life more.
The problems associated with an approaching square are certainly
liable to occupy the mind, though not necessarily to the extent of
causing it distress. In any case, departing squares are not always
easier than approaching ones: much depends on the planets con- 54 / Aspects and Personality
cerned, on the placements of the dispositors of these planets, and
on the rest of the horoscope.
Any insights gained from considering whether an aspect is
approaching or departing are supplementary. The main thing to
note is the type of the aspect as such. Also very important is the
fact that two (or more) planets or psychic energies are aspected at
all (irrespective of the nature of the aspect). Only when we want
to fill in the details of a judgment, or in doubtful cases, do we use
such things as approaching and departing, inclining and declining
aspects (see the next section). Certainly, they are informative, but
we do need to distinguish between what is really significant and
what is subsidiary.
Two situations can arise in a conjunction: either the swifter
planet applies to the slower planet (approaching), or the swifter
recedes from the slower (departing). The latter situation is the more
agreeable of the two, because the swifter planet is supported by
the slower one and there is a natural association of forces. With
the approaching aspect, the swifter planet is impinging on the slower
and arouses more resistance.
Suppose we have a conjunction of Mars and Saturn. These two
planets do not go well together, and the energy of Mars will be
restricted and suppressed by the heaviness of Saturn, even when
the conjunction is departing. There is no chance of them agreeing
naturally in a conjunction—they are too much of a contrast for
that. If the conjunction is departing, that does not mean that it may
be interpreted as comfortable! Before thinking of it in such favorable terms, we have to study the aspect-forming planets (here Mars
and Saturn) in relationship to one another and to the aspect they
form. Only then should we go further. Departing aspects never
improve matters, even though they may make them feel more
pleasant. And although approaching aspects are thought of as more
difficult, they will never make matters worse. What happens in the
present case is that people with an approaching conjunction of Mars
and Saturn are more likely to withdraw into themselves in an effort
to come to terms with problems; whereas people with a departing
aspect are inclined to blame the environment and also to cause
themselves trouble externally. It is a moot point which is the better
off of these two individuals. Owing to the psyche's projection mechanism (see the first chapters of my book Houses and Personality Approaching and Departing, Inclining and Declining Aspects / 55
Development), we often attract into our lives things that are in
keeping with our inner world. Now people with an approaching
conjunction between Mars and Saturn are inclined to fret internally
and may seem to be more miserable than those with a departing
conjunction of the same two planets, but the latter has to wrestle
with problems brought into life by their own expectation patterns.
Conflicts of the departing-aspect type are often easier to recognize, since their attendant circumstances are very obvious. With
approaching aspects, the conflicts are internal and are usually harder
to identify, since at first we are unable to tell the nature or extent
of the problems over which the native is brooding. Only when he
or she talks about them or takes action because of them, do we
discover what is amiss—or even that something is amiss.
Just because its impact is more immediate and therefore keenly
felt, we must not think of the approaching aspect as worse than the
departing aspect; things are not as simple as that. To some extent,
this feature of aspects shows whether their consequences will affect
us internally or externally, but we need to know much more. Judgments can be made only on the basis of the horoscope as a whole,
not on the basis of a few small details.
Suppose we have many approaching aspects but a strongly
outgoing Arian tendency in the chart; it is no good saying without
more ado that the approaching aspects will make the native very
inward looking. We are entitled to suspect that he or she will be
more inward looking than is normal for fire and Aries, but we must
not confuse this with introversion, which refers to something quite
different.
How much one assimilates under the influence of approaching
aspects is a big question: the assimilation mechanism is governed
by the crosses, and by the situation around the 8th and 12th houses,
not by whether aspects are approaching or departing. Persons with
many approaching aspects and a strong emphasis on the fixed cross
will be inclined to assimilate everything slowly but surely, and will
be absorbed in reflection and rumination and in applying things to
themselves. On the other hand, persons with many approaching
aspects and a strong emphasis on the cardinal cross, although they
will still be inclined to refer things to themselves and to be very
This book was published by Samuel Weiser in 1986. 56 / Aspects and Personality
self-occupied, will come to terms with what happens by orientating
themselves to their environment. A combination of approaching
aspects and the mutable cross has an intermediate effect.7 Inclining and Declining Aspects That an aspect is inclining or declining is not the same as one that
is approaching or departing. The distinction should be borne in
mind because it is often ignored. We term an aspect inclining when
it is not yet exact. As before, reference is made to what the quicker
planet is doing.
Turning back again to the Chart 1 (page 26) for Carl Jung, we
see that the Moon makes a sextile to Venus. The Moon is 15° 31'
Taurus and Venus is 17° 30' Cancer (hence they are 61° 59' apart).
The Moon is the quicker of the two, so we look at its path to
discover whether or not the aspect was exact earlier. The sextile
would be exact with the Moon at 17° 30' Taurus; therefore it is
not yet exact—there is still a short space (1° 59') to travel. Because
the Moon is applying to Venus, the angle of 61° 59' is decreasing
and the sextile (60°) is becoming more exact; this being so, we call
it an inclining aspect.
If the Moon in Jung's chart had stood at 18° 30' Taurus, it
would still have made a sextile with Venus, being once more within
the required orb. But it is leaving behind 17° 30' Taurus, the exact
point of the sextile. Soon it will be more than 1° away, so the aspect
is growing steadily weaker. This means it is a declining aspect.
Jung's Sun is at 3° 19' Leo, well within orb for an opposition
to the Ascendant, which is at 0° 55' Aquarius. But the Sun has
already passed the exact opposition point at 0° 55' Leo, and the
aspect is a declining one. (It should be noted once more that the
Ascendant and Midheaven are treated as stationary points.)
Here, as in the case of approaching and departing aspects,
retrograde planets call for careful handling. A retrograde planet
moves backward in the zodiac. Look at Neptune in Jung's chart:
the planet is retrograde at 3° 03' Taurus, from which position it
7 See my book Elements and Crosses as the Basis of the Horoscope. Approaching and Departirig. Incltntngand Declining Aspects / 57
forms a square with the Ascendant at 0° 55' Aquarius. If Neptune
were direct, the aspect would be a declining one since Neptune
has already passed the point where the aspect is exact. But, because
it is retrograde, it is returning to 0° 55' Taurus (the exact aspect
point) and we are compelled to treat the aspect as inclining. Should
the planet turn direct before reaching the exact point, we would
again speak of a declining aspect.
Now examine the sextile between Mars and Saturn: this is a
real snake in the grass! On the face of it, we might be inclined to
use Mars as our reference: Mars ordinarily moves much faster than
Saturn. However, on this occasion Mars does not. Saturn's daily
motion here is greater than that of Mars and so Saturn has to be
used. If Saturn were direct, we should have a declining sextile: the
aspect is exact at 21° 22' Aquarius and the planet has already passed
this point. But Saturn is retrograde and therefore is returning to
the exact point. The sextile is inclining.
In interpretation, the difference between an inclining and a
declining aspect is substantial but subtle. Essentially, a declining
aspect was exact before birth, while an inclining aspect is not exact
until afterward. This has important consequences in the sense that
inclining aspects give experiences during early life. In primary progressions, these aspects always become exact in the most impressionable years of youth. Since the movement of planets under
primary progression can vary approximately from half a degree to
two degrees per year, quite irrespective of their positions in the
houses of the horoscope, it is safe to say that the majority of inclining aspects will be exact within the first six to eight years of
life. Exceptionally, an inclining aspect (always starting with the
quickest planet of course!) may hang back until the twelfth year
before becoming exact.
Therefore, inclining aspects indicate experiences in a vulnerable period of our lives and can exert a profound influence on what
happens later. On the other hand, the characteristics of declining
aspects are present before birth and are not attributable to events
clearly affecting the psyche. As aspects, they admittedly play an
important role in the horoscope, but they lack the impressiveness
and power possessed by experiences and events—they do not have
the same formative action. Not only are inclining aspects more 5iS' / Aspects and Personality
telling in their effects, but they also offer a point of application in
analysis. Astrological tradition has always attached greater value
and strength to inclining aspects.
Perhaps a practical example will demonstrate the difference
between inclining and declining aspects. Two women of my acquaintance each have a square between Venus and Saturn pointing
to emotional inhibitions. Each of them finds it hard to express her
feelings directly and spontaneously, and each of them gives the
impression of being rather reserved. Superficially, the aspects appear to be operating in the same way. However, one of the women
has a declining aspect and she has been very reserved and somewhat
difficult to approach from birth. The other woman was a bright,
jolly baby until several nasty things happened at home that deeply
upset her. That was when the square between Venus and Saturn
became exact under primary progression. Snapshots taken at the
time reveal how a shadow gradually fell over the child's face; and,
from then on, she was more quiet and solemn and less spontaneous,
and had greater difficulty in expressing her feelings.
There are no events associated with declining aspects as there
are with inclining aspects, and this makes a big difference. The
woman with an inclining Venus/Saturn square has undergone a
change (which may or may not have been completely conscious),
and this change has had a recognizable cause. Therefore her problem is get-at-able to some extent, seeing it is assimilated in the 8th
house. She experiences the influence of the event on her character
as something that affected it from outside and is not natural to it,
and she would gladly shake it off. The need to fight and overcome
the consequences of the emotional wound is great, and can turn
out to be very creative. What is more, psychotherapy can bring a
childhood trauma like this to the surface and can help its assimilation.
With the declining aspect, there is no such personality: no
specific cause can be assigned to its effects. Simply fighting against
these effects—for want of any other point of attack—only intensifies the struggle. (A conflict cannot be used to combat itself.)
Initially, creative potential is paralyzed, but the energy and frustration will gradually be applied to integrating the aspect in the
personality. Its unshakeability, its elusiveness and the impossibility
of combatting the conflict it entails make the declining aspect appear Approaching and Departing. Inclining and Declining Aspects / 59
less energetic than the inclining aspect and less far-reaching in its
effects. But by integrating it in oneself—in a different manner from
the way in which the declining aspect would be integrated—there
is still a great deal that can be done about it. The Combination of Approaching/Departing
and Inclini ngiDecli n i ngXspects The reader has already been cautioned not to lose sight of the
difference between these two classes of aspects. They are easily
confused, especially as they technically coincide in the case of the
conjunction. If a conjunction is inclining, it has yet to become exact:
the quicker planet has not yet reached the exact aspect point. But,
by the same token, the aspect is approaching: the quicker planet
is still catching up with the other planet!
Take a look in Jung's chart at Mercury and Venus in Cancer.
Mercury (the swifter planet) stands at 13° 47' and Venus (the slower
planet) stands at 17° 30'. This is a conjunction, because they are
within the required orb. Mercury is nearing Venus and so makes
an approaching conjunction. And, since the aspect is still not exact,
it is also inclining. Thus, in the case of the conjunction, approaching
and inclining always coincide, as do departing and declining—although their meanings never coincide!
The situation reverses itself in the case of the opposition. In
Jung's chart, for example, the Sun opposes the Ascendant. The Sun
is quitting the exact aspect point and this makes the aspect a declining one. At the same time, it is moving toward the Ascendant
itself, and so the aspect is approaching. With oppositions, approaching and declining always go together, as do departing and
inclining.
In the case of the other aspects, approaching can go with either
inclining or declining, and the same applies to departing. Note the
Mercury/Venus conjunction in Cancer and see what the Moon is
doing. The Moon is making a sextile with both Venus and Mercury.
In other words, the Moon is getting closer to both planets and the
aspect to each is approaching. But, in the case of Mercury, the ()l) i Aspects and Personality
Moon has already passed the exact sextile point for Mercury (13°
47' Taurus), and so we have an approaching and declining sextile
between the Moon and Mercury. But the Moon's aspect with Venus
is not yet exact: again the sextile is approaching, but now it is
inclining.
Finally, let us examine the square between Saturn and Pluto.
Saturn is retrograde and is the quicker of the two, so we start from
Saturn, which is backing away from Pluto and therefore forms a
departing square. Also, Saturn has already passed the point for an
exact square with Pluto (23° 22' Aquarius), and so, at first sight,
the aspect seems to be declining as well as departing. But, because
Saturn is retrograde, returning to 23° 22' Aquarius, the retrograde
motion gives us an approaching inclining aspect.
It is important to discover the combination of approaching or
departing and inclining or declining for every aspect; then we can
apply the meanings discussed earlier. 5 Unaspected
Planets General Features Unaspected planets are just as important as aspected planets. By
unaspected planets I mean planets that are not linked by major
aspect with any other planet. Even if a planet has many minor
aspects, I still treat it as unaspected for our present purposes, because a planet with no major aspect manifests itself in a very specific
and unmistakable way, and the interpretation must allow for this.
So what exactly is implied when a planet is unaspected? If a
planet forms some aspect, you know that the psychic factors represented connect up with certain others. Numerous factors can be
joined in this manner and they indicate a continual interplay in the
horoscope. An unaspected planet does not share in any of this group
activity but stands rather aloof: it is neither inhibited nor stimulated
by other planets, but acts in isolation. Because of the lack of contact
with other factors, the native may have difficulty putting it in perspective. Recognizing what the planet expresses is not particularly
easy; the native may sense its potential but wonders how and when
this could be exploited. By virtue of its detachment from the rest
of the psyche, the energy of the planet exercises a mysterious (t2 i Aspects and Personality
fascination over the native, who feels impelled to find out more
about it. He or she feels its effects all right, but is somewhat at a
loss to account for the causes.
Accordingly there will be an inclination to emphasize the contents of any unaspected planet. The emphasis (which is generally
totally unconscious) improves the planet's "visibility" for the native;
but it can create problems, because others already see the planet's
traits clearly enough and are likely to find the overcompensation
annoying. Thus someone with an unaspected Sun has great difficulty
in experiencing internal unity and will endeavor to lay extra stress
on the Sun's traits in order to find him- or herself. Those around
may feel that there is excessive preoccupation with self and, in fact,
the native may exhibit egocentricity and a lust for power—but also
loyalty, and other more amiable solar characteristics.
This emphasis is not constant however. The way in which an
unaspected planet expresses itself is not uniform and, in this sense,
is unreliable. Its form of expression are often ill-adapted to the
situation (to the time and place): sometimes the response is too
strong and sometimes too weak. Lack of control over the behavior
of an unaspected planet readily leads to ups and downs in life and
an all-or-nothing attitude. For instance, unaspected Mercury can
produce a very quick-thinking person; a person who, once he or
she starts talking, inundates everyone with a veritable torrent of
speech. However, the same individual can dry up completely when
others want to listen or when something really needs to be said.
On such occasions he or she is at a loss for words, being unable to
deploy the Mercurial talents to order. Students should note that
unaspected planets tend to display their overcompensating side
more often then their non-manifesting side.
So, unaspected planets make their presence felt in no uncertain
terms. It would be foolish to belittle them just because they have
no ties with other planets. They are definitely not weak and certainly
not bad—far from it. Unaspected planets are found in the charts
of very gifted individuals, and often these planets will indicate the
direction of their lives. For example, unaspected Venus figures in
the horoscopes of a number of musicians and artists. The native
usually has a fairly compulsive interest in the contents of an unaspected planet and may well turn the interest into a career. Don't
make the mistake of thinking that nothing can be done with an U naspected Planets / 63
unaspected planet or that what it has to offer is rubbishy or inferior.
The reverse is often true. Normally the planet expresses its own
nature; the native has to find some way of grasping what it offers.
The possibilities of using it may even be enhanced by all the attention being paid to it, though to some extent it will always remain
elusive and hard to manage.
There are plenty of well-known examples of the positive effects
of unaspected planets. Bertrand Russell immediately springs to
mind, who, with an unaspected Mercury in his chart, wrote very
analytical and critical philosophical works including one on the
typically Mercurial theme of the extent and limitations of human
knowledge. He carried out a study, so to speak, on an incomprehensible part of himself with which he had become obsessed. Yet
his clear expositions have proved useful to many who have come
after him. Further examples of famous people with an unaspected
Mercury are Madame Curie, Karl Marx and Mahatma Gandhi.
David Hamblin, who carried out a study on over one hundred
composers, found clear indications that the character of their music
was usually related to the nature of some unaspected planet. In
Beethoven the planet was Jupiter; in Haydn and Mozart, it was
Venus.
But what shall we make of a planet that is trine the Ascendant
yet forms no aspect with other planets? This planet must be regarded as virtually unaspected; for, though it can easily express
itself externally through the trine to the Ascendant, internally it
has no planetary contacts. Even if it does not behave like a completely unaspected planet, the latter's typical exaggeration of its
own solitary traits will certainly be there. The trine simply runs to
an exit point (the Ascendant) and is not a freeway to other parts
of the psyche. Outlets for Unaspected Planets Even for unaspected planets there are occasional outlets which can
help to relieve their restiveness. Apparently, reception can bring
them out of isolation—perhaps not a hundred percent, but to a 6-V t Aspects and Personality
large extent. For example: if Mercury is in a sign ruled by Venus
and Venus is in a sign ruled by Mercury, they will also rule one
another and are said to be in mutual reception. A reception, although not an aspect, does couple planets indirectly. There is no
direct meshing to prevent them from acting independently but,
because the smooth working of the one depends on the smooth
working of the other, they tend to act in harmony and to lend each
other continual support. What is more, the functioning of the unaspected planet is influenced not only by that of its reception partner but also by that of any planets aspecting the partner. Hence it
becomes more manageable and loses some of the qualities of an
unaspected planet. Of course, the nature of the reception partners
(the planets) will decide what the reception means to the native.
(A reception between the Sun and Jupiter is a much pleasanter
affair than is a reception between Mars and Saturn, but in both
instances the reception provides an outlet.) However, I must confess that cases in my own practice have had something of a "split
personality" about them, as if two people were rolled into one: the
reception seemed to be intensifying the independent action of the
planets rather than encouraging them to combine.
Aspects to the Ascendant or Midheaven never seem to bring
all their anticipated benefits when they are hampered by a dearth
of aspects with other planets. And we may as well forget aspects
to such points as the Part of Fortune and the Dragon's Head—
these would help even less.
What can help enormously to bridge the gap is another person.
When the native's unaspected planet makes aspects with planets in
someone else's chart, it can express itself through these. The native
needs the other person; you'll see a bond formed which neither
party can explain in so many words although it means a great deal
to both of them. So be careful not to ignore unaspected planets in
relational astrology: their role is not to be underestimated. An
unaspected planet may be safely considered a sensitive and vulnerable spot. If tense aspects are thrown from another person's
chart to the native's unaspected planet, the native may feel very
exposed or uncomfortable, endangering the relationship in some
way.
To sum up the unaspected planet: Unaspected Planets / 65
• Unaspected planets tend to make themselves felt in no uncertain
terms, but in rather erratic, all-or-nothing manner;
• Their action can be very powerful on one occasion and altogether
absent on another—the powerful action is more usual;
• The native finds it difficult to recognize the factors represented
by an unaspected planet, is unable to secure a firm grip on them,
but is continually searching for them;
• Overcompensation and heavy emphasis on these factors can rouse
up opposition, but also serve to make the native seem talented;
• Unaspected planets can be integrated by means of a reception or
through the horoscope of someone else;
• Aspects with the Ascendant and Midheaven are insufficient for
integrating an otherwise unaspected planet. The Duet It frequently happens that two planets form a major aspect with
one another but no further aspects elsewhere in the chart. In that
event, the two bound psychic factors "float about" in the psyche
and have as little connection with the rest of the horoscope as they
would have if they were single unaspected planets. We may therefore interpret this duet, as it is called, in the same way as an unaspected planet is interpeted. Here, then, is another form of the
unaspected state; with this distinction that, in a duet, two all-ornothing planets become jointly involved in situations. Individually,
they behave as if they were unaspected. Someone with a duet is
searching for two inseparable but unintegrated factors in him- or
herself.
Like the single unaspected planet, the duet can find a means
of expression through reception of one or both of the duet partners,
and this of course will modify its effects. Again like the single
unaspected planet, this is often a disruptive influence, but this does
not entitle us to assume that the native might become schizophrenic
or mentally fragmented. Little or nothing of this is seen in practice. 66 / Aspects and Personality Significance of Unaspected Planets In order to learn what the unaspected planets signify, we can proceed as follows: consider the usual meanings of each planet, add a
sense of isolation, and understand that the harmonious and inharmonious activities will express in a more extreme form. The following is a list of how an unaspected planet might work. Sun
Natives with an unaspected Sun have difficulty in finding themselves, in discovering who they are and what they really want in
life. They do not realize how bent they are on having their own
way or how they keep pushing themselves foward in and out of
season. Initially, they fail to see that this is what they are doing.
The creative urge is great, and they are full of pep and vital energy,
but their enthusiasm comes and goes. At one moment, the unaspected Sun glows warm and bright and, at another, recedes behind
a cold, dark cloud of uncertainty. Often these natives will act in a
purposeful and independent fashion when feeling anything but purposeful and independent. Their insecurity drives them on; possibly
until ordinary honorable ambition becomes power-lust. And yet,
in spite of these traits, they have difficulty in holding their own.
An unaspected Sun can indicate identity problems in either sex.
In female horoscopes, an unaspected Sun frequently implies
problems with the father or husband. The native may even go from
one extreme to the other in her choice of partner. Examples are
known to me of women who have fallen in love first with very
dominant men and then with weaklings. Moon
When the Moon has no aspects, the native finds it hard to give
shape to things. The Moon is very important in the form-giving
processes and when unaspected, the native's talents are not easy to
deploy; the emotional life is beset with problems, too. The orientation and sensitivity of the Moon is erratic; unaspected, this can LInaspectedPlanets I 67
make the native extremely emotional, hypersensitive, easily influenced on one occasion and completely unapproachable on another.
Such a person will have a pressing need to give full rein to the
lunar side of the nature with all the side effects that accompany
that form of expression.
The Moon represents the self-protective attitude we adopt
whenever we feel threatened or insecure. When unaspected, either
we may fall prey to increasing uncertainty, or may isolate ourselves
by, metaphorically speaking, going to live on our own little desert
island. With no aspects to restrain it, the Moon will tend to make
the native exceptionally caring, cherishing, motherly and protective.
The imagination is often well developed too. An aspectless Moon
offers few handholds and little stability: by nature, the Moon has
such an uncertain quality that when it is allied with a (sometimes
extreme) all-or-nothing attitude, there is no telling what the native
will do from one minute to the next.
Women with an unaspected Moon often have difficulty in experiencing their femininity. Frequently (and this is true of both
sexes), the bond with the mother is not a happy one, and they
themselves may not be really maternal. In a man, there can be
incomprehension of what to expect from a partner and of how to
treat her, and he can flit from one type of woman to another. Mercury
The analyzing, arranging, classifying, and reflecting abilities represented by Mercury are usually strikingly brought out when the
planet is unaspected, although sometimes they fail to appear. There
is a passion for endless analysis, for chewing over details and problems, for organizing everything. But perhaps the most striking thing
about these natives is the way they chatter. Those with an unaspected Mercury find it hard to hold their tongues and rattle on
interminably. They know perfectly well that there are times when
they ought to keep quiet, but they have so little ability to recognize
the communicative side of their natures that they don't see what
they are doing until they have done it.
There is great curiosity about all sorts of things, but as soon
as their interest is aroused by one thing, they drop it to go chasing 68 / Aspects and Personality
after another. So an unaspected Mercury generally makes for restlessness, excitability and even nerviness.
Because the brain is always working at full stretch, these people
think a lot and can gain many insights. Not infrequently, there is
an ability to do well (or very well) at school. An unaspected Mercury
does not imply faulty intelligence; on the contrary, the constant
alertness will give these children a head start, although they will
not usually be aware of this. Because they outstrip children of their
own age quite early in life, problems over human contacts can
arise—but these are typical of the contact planet Mercury when it
is unaspected. Logic and analysis play a large part in the unaspected
Mercury thought-processes, but these people are also quite capable
of throwing all logic out the window and expressing a completely
impulsive and unexpected opinion. The lack of aspects makes Mercury capricious. Venus
When Venus is unaspected, the way we express our need for safety
and security in emotional and material affairs can swing from one
extreme to the other, and can take many forms. Where feelings for
others are concerned, we can expect the native to be very amorous
at one moment and utterly cool and uninterested at another. Also,
the enjoyment of a safe and cozy relationship can quickly give way
to the pursuit of a string of casual affairs.
The creation of harmony and beauty, so typical of Venus, can
assert itself very strongly when the planet is unaspected; the drawback occurs when the native wants harmony when temporary disharmony or confrontation would prevent conflicts from being left
to fester under the surface. Talking things out and quarrelling over
them can clear the air to make room for a genuinely harmonious
situation, but an unaspected Venus shrinks from squabbles. Nevertheless, the native will plunge into difficulties time after time, because he or she somehow unconsciously and unwillingly involves
him- or herself in difficult situations or in relationships that make
for disharmony. The best thing to do is to learn how to live life
harmoniously in spite of its discords, but this ability usually develops rather late in life. The person with unaspected Venus is Unaipected Planets / 69
interested not so much in serious pursuits as in pleasure and entertainment. Careers relating to some facet of the entertainment
field might be in order.
Laziness and idleness can accompany a Venus with no aspects,
and sudden tactlessness can destroy a carefully cultivated relationship in one fell swoop. The native does not seem to know how to
display feelings of good will, friendship or love: at one moment he
or she is being overdemonstrative and at another is unnaturally
reserved. Particularly for a man, this can cause problems with the
opposite sex. Mars
The aggressive form of the self-preservation instinct, executive
power or energy will tend to express in extremes, usually on the
side of overcompensation. This can show itself in restlessness, the
inability to sit still, trying to prove oneself, pouring a great deal of
energy into endless activities, etc. Also there is likely to be a passion
for sport.
The fierceness and determination of someone with an unaspected Mars can be very great. To see if there will be any unpleasant
consequences, the rest of the chart must be examined. An unaspected Mars will not in itself produce dangerous situations. Nevertheless, a spirit of courage and daring can suddenly grip the
individual unaware, and can incite the native to take very big
risks.
As a planet symbolizing passion and violence, Mars in its unaspected state can produce sudden tantrums and outbursts, or short
but powerful internal explosions. An unaspected Mars is like a
tightly wound spring which can fly open at any moment, but generally does not. What gives it its violence is the difficulty in adjusting
the Martian energy to given situations.
Where sexuality is concerned, the native often has a tremendous urge to make conquests owing to the exaggerated need to
prove him- or herself. Sometimes several affairs are kept going
simultaneously (although this is not a hard-and-fast rule). The possibilities for sexual expression when Mars is not aspected are quite
considerable. However, the native in trying to prove him- or her- 701 Aspects and Personality
self, may beg off at a vital moment, or else may be inflamed by
someone who is sexually incompatible, and so on.
People with an unaspected Mars sometimes give unintentional
offense by being caustic, tactless and blunt. Sometimes they shock
their nearest and dearest. A woman with an unaspected Mars may
not know what to expect of her man or the best way to handle him;
sometimes she enjoys being very masterful.
Mars begins much and finishes little. Its energy is not steadily
applied. Those who have an unaspected Mars should restrain their
enthusiasm and remember that while it is easy enough to start things
it costs time and trouble to bring them to completion. Jupiter
The desire for expansion, extension and grandeur really spreads its
wings when Jupiter is unaspected. The religious faculties are well
developed, too, although the individual may not attend a regular
place of worship—for the native with a strong Jupiter is naturally
opinionated and prefers to follow the dictates of his own conscience
regardless of what the authorities direct. He is likely to magnify
the importance of everything and to do everything in grand style.
He may accomplish a great deal, but also runs considerable risks,
especially where health is concerned. The enjoyment of rich food
is a Jovian characteristic and, when Jupiter is unaspected, this can
easily become overindulgence.
Jupiter works to extend knowledge and understanding, and is
a great promoter of philosophy. When the planet is unaspected,
the native may espouse some rather bizarre philosophy or soar to
rarefied metaphysical heights where none can follow. The data gathered is comprehensive, there is extensive knowledge but, either
the native manages to make one gigantic synthesis of it all even
when some parts are not entirely relevant, or overshoots the mark
and litters the field with a lot of stray arrows. This person is always
active, however, and will infallibly arrive at some philosophy of life
or other. Theories and ideas can be extremely stimulating, but
seldom satisfy, and though his soul "sail leagues and leagues be- i!naspected Planets 171
yond—still, leagues beyond those leagues, there is more sea" (Rossetti).8
An unaspected Jupiter may indicate someone who has an inflated self-opinion together with belligerent fanaticism. Yet these
intensely human religious feelings can make this person very charitable and protective and willing to help others. With boundless
(and not always well-justified) optimism, he can put fresh heart into
other people. Jovian professions will appeal, and he could make a
fine priest, physician, teacher, or attorney. Saturn
When austere Saturn is unaspected, the native will experience a
strong urge to push self-control to the limit and to impose a life
of austerity on self (and often on others, too). But the mask of iron
inflexibility can slip at times to reveal unpredictable moods, after
which he or she has the task of getting everything back under control. There is a great need for structure. Admittedly, this need may
not be any more urgent than it is in some cases when Saturn is
well aspected, but it will be expressed in a more exaggerated way.
An unaspected Saturn certainly does have the property of giving structure to things, but the sense of responsibility is often so
strongly developed that it becomes distorted. There is a tendency
to act very responsibly in small matters but to pass over the really
important ones quite irresponsibly.
Anxiety may lead to overcompensation. Saturn's limiting and
localizing character (which does have its positive side) can, when
aided by the anxiety, deter the native from seizing opportunities
because he or she gloomily underrates natural talents, and time
may be wasted on trifles.
The individual with an unaspected Saturn may seem very cold,
hard and unapproachable. He is usually inscrutable as well. Suppose
the native has a problem and someone gives advice: he listens to
it eagerly, appears grateful, and may even act on it, but will be
more inclined to do himself a disservice by flinging it to the winds.
8 From Dante Gabriel Rossetti's poem 'The Choice." 72 / Aspects and Personality
You may feel that this native cannot be understood or pinned down.
And you are not alone in this—the native often feels the same
about himself. Uranus
Normally the contents of the trans-Saturnian planets are beyond
the reach of our conscious minds. So, for other reasons, are those
of unaspected planets. Therefore unaspected trans-Saturnian
planets differ from the aspected ones mainly in the extreme way
in which they express themselves, with an accent on heightened
activity.
Unaspected Uranus goes hand in hand with great restlessness,
an almost compulsive need for independence, and sudden inventive
ideas. The need to break the mold and to cross boundaries is very
acute and can lead to rebellion, provocation, mutinousness, controversy and a liking for whatever is unusual or alternative. Personal
originality and resourcefulness are very pronounced. Often there
are flashes of inspiration in which all sorts of possibilities are seen.
For example, completely unconventional solutions to technical
problems may be found by the individual with an unaspected Uranus. This native may have brainstorms that are also very practical.
Someone with an unaspected Uranus is uncommonly restless and
cannot sit still for long. Difficulties and tensions are liable to make
him nervy. Therefore leading characteristics will be restlessness,
nervousness, capriciousness, and sporadic brilliant hunches. Any
attempt to tie him down would be asking for trouble, but, if allowed
freedom within reasonable bounds, he will do well and will reward
us with all sorts of good ideas. When Uranus is unaspected we are
in for one or two surprises, some of them pleasant and some of
them not so pleasant.
The native's insights frequently verge on the paranormal and
it is sometimes hard to tell how he arrived at a certain conclusion.
Apparently he just "knew it all along" or "suddenly saw it." Paranormal cognition is quite common with unaspected trans-Saturnian
planets.
It is the nature of Uranus to demolish old values in order to
replace them with new ones. When unaspected, the planet can stress U naspected Planets / 73
this iconoclastic principle, making the native on one hand a free
spirit and, on the other, a fervent advocate of social reconstruction.
His outlook is thoroughly modern, and he grants others the freedom and opportunities for development he so avidly seeks for
himself.
We should not be surprised if someone with an unaspected
Uranus suddenly changes course, perhaps in career, once or twice
during his life: he has such a yearning for new pastures. He may
seem tense and unsettled, but feels happiest when living a varied
existence full of change. Internal restlessness and external hustle
and bustle are all part of the same picture. Neptune
The need to refine, improve, idealize and disassociate, as well as
the urge to blur distinctions are very prominent in an unaspected
Neptune. The possibilities are extreme. The native can be an impostor and a cheat who is full of deceitful promises or, on the
brighter side, he can be interested in the spiritual and metaphysical
plane and in such objects as meditation and yoga. Clairaudience
and clairvoyance are other possibilities.
There is always a marked ability to sense things, even though
the native may not necessarily be able to exploit it. Probably this
person will be fascinated by what he feels, experiences and thinks
he sees. Driven by uncertainty, he will try to formulate this part
of his world, will try to investigate it and put it inside some sort
of conceptual framework. Sometimes the deepest insights can flood
the conscious mind but, by the same token, the conscious mind
can be invaded by utter nonsense; for there is no knowing what an
unaspected planet will do. The person with an unaspected Neptune
may excel in Neptunian pursuits: if he is a musician, for example,
his playing is likely to go straight to the hearts of listeners, and a
healer with this Neptune will immediately know where the trouble
lies.
An unaspected Neptune often bestows a vivid imagination, a
rich dream world and a gift of fantasy. The native will probably see
more than the average person sees; for example, he or she may
easily see auras and the like. This must not be taken to mean that Aspects and Personality
it is impossible to see auras when one's Neptune is well aspected;
it simply shows that an unaspected planet need not be inferior to
a well-aspected one. When Neptune is unaspected, reality mingles
with fantasy. This is fine for writing novels, but it can be something
of a drawback in the matter-of-fact world of everyday life.
What is more, people with an unaspected Neptune tend to
have a subversive effect on situations, because they unconsciously
misrepresent the facts or confuse actual events with something they
have dreamed up, etc. The rest of the horoscope will reveal if and
how this will happen, but one must never forget how easily the
native can lose sight of the dividing line between reality and imagination. Pluto
When Pluto is unaspected, the power-hunger it symbolizes will be
given its head unmistakably yet very subtly. Generally the native
manages to manipulate the environment in a way that others can
sense but not describe. An unaspected Pluto gets his own way
without seeming to insist on it.
Pluto is the power that brings to light repressed and hidden
contents of the mind in order to force a healing process. When
unaspected, it still hauls unconscious material to the surface but is
of little use in helping the native to deal with it. For whatever
specters are raised cannot be laid to rest except in a very roundabout
way. Therefore the unaspected Pluto is just as susceptible to anxiety
as is Saturn, though for a different reason. The native sees clearly
enough what Pluto has unearthed, and looks about for ways of
tackling the problem only to find that none are available. Some
help can be obtained from other planets (they may, for example,
encourage the native to face circumstances), but this will take time.
Fears and phobias can unsettle the native and may induce various
compulsions and neurotic symptoms.
Nevertheless, for the very reason that the planet is so closely
associated with all our repressions, it offers considerable scope for
studying the unconscious facets of life; these natives will certainly
be interested in such things. People with an unaspected Pluto are
often good at soothing and encouraging those who are a prey to Unaspected Planets / 75
anxiety. They know from personal experiences what it is to battle
with themselves. Pluto is an intrinsically difficult planet for the
conscious mind to cope with: the ego is liable to be overburdened
by the unconscious contents that press in on it. If it identifies with
these contents, a power complex can arise ("I am the best") or a
so-called manna-personality or, on the other hand, self-destructive
tendencies. The latter need not be literal. For instance, at a certain
point in life, these people can change so dramatically that they seem
to be rising from the ashes of the old. Very often the occasion is
caused by shock or sudden intense experiences.
Pluto is the planet that allows each individual to peer into his
or her own depths. If it is unaspected, sooner or later the very
thing he or she thinks is totally inaccessible will be dredged up.
Possibly this will give deep insight, but it may also leave the individual on the edge of a precipice. 6 Aspect Configurations
and the
Ruling Aspect The Ruling Aspect When you make a list of all the aspects in a horoscope, you sometimes find that one predominates—perhaps there will be more
sextiles than other aspects, for example. The horoscope is then
influenced by the character of the leading type of aspect. However,
you need to be sure that the latter has a clear superiority; for
example, three trines and four sextiles do not make a typical sextiletype chart because the margin is too narrow. Not all horoscopes
are weighted by a given aspect type but, for those that are, the
imbalance should have due allowance made for it in the analysis.
A predominance of aspects helps you understand the chart.
The following list will bear this out:
• Conjunctions as the leading aspect type provide plenty of talent
for getting on in life and give lots of energy. There is a risk of onesidedness but also a likelihood of great powers of concentration.
• Sextiles show considerable potential. Basically it's a harmonious
aspect that requires development. To begin with, it may indicate iS Aspects and Personality self-doubt because a preponderance of sextiles can generate uncertainty.
• Squares indicate that the native will encounter a number of difficulties during life. He or she is not someone who chooses the
path of least resistance. In fact he or she is likely to be quite resolute.
A predominance of squares may mean an inability to assess the
strengths and weaknesses of relationships, and this can lead to
broken marriages and the loss of friends; at the same time, energy
and inner determination are available to sort out any problems.
• Tm/ef,when they are the most important aspects, tend to smooth
the native's road through the world. He or she has a lot going and
things seem to fall into his or her lap with very little effort. "Isn't
everything swell for him!" we might think, as we notice what a
good impression he makes, how little opposition he meets, and all
the opportunities he has for forging ahead. But, because the native
is unused to stress, it is very hard to cope with tensions formed
later by progression—temporary they may be, but they can come
as a big shock. It is not unusual to find that the native with the
trines caves in more readily than does the native with the squares.
The latter is always under some degree of strain and knows how
to cope with it. The person with trines may live in luxury, but runs
the risk of remaining rather childish because he or she doesn't have
the opportunity (or necessity) to mature. Love of ease is another
characteristic of trine horoscopes.
• Oppositions, when they rule, give the native a need to confront
whatever he encounters. And this can be anything: friends, enemies,
ideas, and even his own activities—including what surfaces from
the subconscious. A person of this type gives the impression of
being cross-grained, of being always "in opposition" in fact. Opposition arises whenever one thing is balanced against another. The
person born with an opposition structure is always aware of this
and instinctively feels that both sides should be recognized in any
question. When somebody adopts one opinion, the native will defend the other, so that each may receive a fair hearing and the
overall balance may be preserved. The initial seemingly negative
attitude is most likely due to tension and wariness in the native
and in others. Whereas someone with a chart full of squares will Aspect Co»fiy,uratlonsand the Ruling Aspect / 79
spring into action spurred on by the acuteness of the energy, someone with an opposition chart will mull over a problem longer.
Even among the minor aspects we can look for a leading aspect
but, because they are so variable, little reliance can be placed on
them. The major aspects, however, give a picture that is reliable
enough to work with. Aspect Configurations In addition to aspect frequency you must also consider the occurrence of certain patterns. Well-known examples are the grand
square and grand trine. Here you have a further opportunity to
sharpen your interpretation. The most significant patterns are the
following. The Stellium
When four or more planets occupy a single sign or a single house,
we speak of a stellium. The sign or house containing the stellium
plays an important part in the character and, in some cases, can
overshadow other material factors in the chart. Thus an Aquarian
with a stellium in Capricorn will exhibit many of the traits of the
latter, and these will seem to push the Sun sign into the background.
Rules, regulations, formalities, and ceremoniousness will enter into
the native's world in a much bigger way than we would expect of
an Aquarian.
Generally, there is enormous power in a stellium. Quite often
it consists of a grand conjunction, either directly or by the transfer
effect (e. Vênus ., planet A is conjunct planet B while B is conjunct C;
A is not within orb of a conjunction with C, but A and C influence
one another indirectly through B). A stellium often bestows a talent,
a special ability and/or great application, with the possible drawback
of one-sidedness or obsession, and a one-pointedness that can lead
to a rather limited or narrow outlook. The person with a stellium
usually finds it hard to compromise because "vision" is restricted.
Nevertheless, with concentrated energy, he or she can accomplish
a great deal. S(l Atpii tf anil Perimuihty p Áries - Netuno <> H
K © do Figure Mercúrio . T/jf T-square (A), and the grand square (B). Aspect Configurations and The Ruling Aspect / 81
The T-square
A T-square is formed by at least three planets, with the first and
second in opposition and the third making a square to each of them
(see figure Mercúrio ). Planets are able to form a T-square only when they
are in the same cross. Thus we distinguish between a cardinal, fixed
and mutable T-squares. The smaller the orb, the more powerful
will be the T-square.
The T-square is not the most easy-going of configurations. It
is associated with a great deal of tension and agitation and imparts
considerable drive to the horoscope. It is as if, with a T-square, the
energy represented has to find an outlet come what may. The native
is always on the go, usually in spite of himself. He is certainly a
great achiever, since this is one of the most dynamic configurations.
However, the nature of the component aspects means that a lot of
energy is wasted in pure conflict without being usefully applied to
the object in view, and that the response to stimuli is rather uneven.
There is no easy solution to this problem and usually the native
will wrestle with it for much of the life. It will lead to irksome and
frustrating experiences. This person will be active and will long for
balance (a square combined with an opposition) while the T-square
is prone to over-emphasis and overcompensation. This energy can
raise the native above the average level of humanity. The T-square
often indicates one who feels compelled to do something with
talent.
• • • The above description presents the general situation, but how this
will develop depends on a number of factors that I will now detail
for the reader.
Elements Containing the T-square: The cardinal cross produces
the maximum activity and creates a desire to solve T-square problems by means of social, corporate or political measures. People
with a powerful cardinal T-square do not need anyone to motivate
them; they set to work with a will and are often very enterprising.
Frequently they are quite impatient.
The fixed cross imparts perseverance, and people with a fixed
T-square are adept at maintaining and extending what cardinal T- 82 / Aspects and Personality
square individuals have started. Where problems are concerned,
fixed T-square folk lie stretched on the rack longer; they dwell on
their troubles more and feel them more acutely. Their introversion
is sometimes stifling. Inwardly they may be nervous and tense, even
though outwardly they seem calm and collected. Sometimes such
people can appear egotistic and tyrannical and, sometimes, that is
just what they are.
Will power and tenacity are exceptionally well-developed with
a fixed T-square. Fixed signs are not inherently quick, and people
with a fixed T-square will be slow off the mark. However, once
they get up steam they thunder unstoppably along the track like
a locomotive. There is nothing better than a fixed T-square for
work that demands prolonged concentration and constructiveness. However, the inner turmoil underlying the outer calm makes
these fixed-sign natives more than usually open to alternatives. The
way in which (sometimes though not always!) they adjust is quite
striking.
The mutable T-square makes for general liveliness and increased restlessness. People strongly influenced by mutable signs
often shrug off their problems; not because they do not wish to
see them, but because they like to think that problems can be solved
at a glance. Sheer inattention prevents them from immediately
discovering the full extent of the trouble. But, because they are so
mobile, they are not easily trapped by adverse circumstances. The
latter may prompt them to take evasive action but are unlikely to
worry them. Once it dawns on them that things have gone badly
wrong, they study all their options, for the mutable cross is noted
for finding loopholes. The danger with a mutable T-square is that
wrong decisions fail to provide a genuine solution. These natives
often seem to be governed by caprice.
Planet at the Apex of the T-square (the Focal Planet): The whole
situation of this planet enters into the T-square: its nature, its placement by sign and house, and its dispositorship of one or more
houses in the horoscope. The other aspects of the planet are important too. Each of the aspecting planets makes its own mark. A
great deal can be gleaned from the focal planet: it is the point of
application through which the T-square is activated, and its effects
can be erratic and explosive. Aspect Configurations and the Ruling Aspect / 83
Planets in Opposition: These planets have to be examined in order
to learn the nature of the two squares and the opposition—for no
two oppositions are alike. If personal points such as the Ascendant,
the Midheaven and the personal planets are involved, the T-square
will be more flamboyant than when the slower planets are involved.
As house rulers, the planets in opposition provide information on
the nature and tendencies of the T-square, since they draw the
house ruled by them into the conflict.
Empty Point Opposite the Focal Planet: This point is quite frequently overlooked. Yet when some planet reaches it by progression or transit, the problems associated with the T-square suddenly
flare up. There is nearly always some crisis or far-reaching change
which, seen in retrospect, was sorely needed. The Grand Square
Two T-squares back to back with their focal planets in opposition
(giving four interlocking squares and two oppositions) constitute a
grand square. In a way this is an intensification of the stressful but
stimulating T-square. It should also be noted that a grand square
does not arise unless the four or more planets or points involved
are in the same cross.
A grand square usually implies intense inner tensions and a
self-defensive attitude. From time to time, individuals with a grand
square will enter a period of tranquility but, because they do not
know how to enjoy it, they soon become stressful again. Life for
them is like riding along a bumpy road on an old bone-shaker with
plenty of opportunities for colliding with fellow cyclists. But they
do make progress, which is more than can be said of some who are
ruled by other aspect constellations. Each corner of the grand square
brings a fresh problem to solve: there seems to be no rurnoffonto an
easier route. Many internal and external obstacles lie between them
and their destinations, but their energy is a match for them all.
If these people know how to harness tensions, and this is not
asking too much, they will find plenty of opportunities for development. Even so, they will still not choose the path of least resistance but will work hard and keep all options open. ,v-v and Personality TnTTTrriTrmwi Plutão v - Mercúrio Figure 10. The grand trine (A) and the kite IB). Aspect Configurations and the Ruling Aspect / 85
People with a grand square often feel they are being pulled
from all sides and are continually being tossed to and fro. This can
lead to outwardly capricious reactions; relations with others are
often strained, especially as grand-square natives frequently manage
to do the wrong thing. They tend to act before they think, above
all with a cardinal or a mutable grand cross. Fixed-cross natives
seem to be more level-headed but they are smoldering inside. So
we definitely have to pay regard to the type of cross involved (see
the notes above on the T-square).
If we look for a single focal planet here, we shall not find it.
In a sense, it could be said that there are four focal planets, each
of which forms a focus for its own section of the grand square.
Thus each of the four corners of the grand square is important,
and transits and progressions over any of them will set the wheel
in motion. The Grand Trine
When planets are mutally in trine to one another from ail three
signs of a given element, we call this a grand trine (see figure 10).
For example, we could have Mars in Aries trine the Sun in Leo
and both of these planets trine the Moon in Sagittarius to give a
grand fire trine. Just as the crosses are important for the T-square
and the grand square, so the elements are important for the grand
trine.
All things to do with a grand trine appear to come easily: these
people encounter little resistance and are relatively very lucky.
Quite often a grand trine points to definite gifts or talents, but
before these can be exploited the natives have to overcome natural
laziness, love of ease and/or a tendency to avoid confrontations.
The grand trine forms a stopping place in the horoscope; it is
a part of us on which we gladly rely in times of stress and difficulty.
The element shows how we do this: fire, by displying burning zeal
in the development of new activities; earth, by returning to a safe,
solid basis—perhaps even by literally working with earth (in art,
flower arranging, gardening, etc.); air, by flying to the world of
communications, contacts and commerce, or by letting caged
thoughts take wing—perhaps in reading; water, by immersing in a 86 Aspects and Personality welter of dreams and emotions, by listening to music or by dwelling
in a world where no one else can come.
And yet the grand trine is not without its problems. To some
extent these natives are on their own, because they find things so
easy that they cannot conceive that others could find them hard.
Thus grand fire trine natives can make sparkling companions, but
can be so energetic that they weary others who are unable to
keep up.
Naturally, we must not venture an interpretation of a grand
trine before looking closely at the nature, the house placements,
the dispositorships and the further aspects of the planets concerned. The Kite
When there is a planet in opposition to one of the planets of a
grand trine and in sextile to each of the others, we have what is
known as a kite. See figure 10b. The planet which does not form
part of the grand trine but makes the nose of the kite is particularly
important. Its opposition introduces some tension into the otherwise relaxed collocation of trines, and individuals having this pattern
in their charts tend to be more enterprising than those having a
pure grand trine. So we may interpret the kite as an active grand
trine with an added focal planet creating a center of activity. Generally speaking, these natives approach life's problems in a sensible
manner and they carry everything to a successful conclusion. This
is why the kite has earned its reputation for happy landings. The Grand Sextile
The term grand sextile has two meanings. Some astrologers speak
of a grand sextile when planet A is sextile planet B on one side
and planet C on the other, while B and C are in trine (See figure
11). But this is not really correct, because the name grand sextile
ought to be restricted to a rare constellation of six interlocking
sextiles and three oppositions. It is this genuine form of grand
sextile that we shall consider here. Ast'eit Conft^umtuiiis tind tht Ruling Aspect / H7 z> x p Áries - nS : Mercúrio O X Plutão v- ^8 rv Trm
Figure 11. The grand sextile (A) and the Yod (B). 88 I Aspects and Personality
Now the easy but weak-acting sextile has already been noticed
in chapter 1, and we have seen that, although it is potentially beneficial, the native does need to be aware of its possibilities and
does need to set to work to bring them to fruition. With a sextile,
things can run smoothly but they will not happen by themselves.
Therefore the grand sextile may turn out to be a rather dubious
factor.
What is more, there are not only six sextiles in this aspect
constellation but also three oppositions, and the opposition is the
very embodiment of doubt. So the picture is often one of searching,
perplexity and indecision on the one hand and, on the other, of
the natural inertia of the sextiles being overcome by the disruptive
influence of the oppositions (which play a part similar to that played
by the single opposition in the kite). The upshot is that, provided
its uncertainty can be reduced, a great deal can be accomplished
with the grand sextile. With the help of this constellation, we can
learn to travel in a balanced manner through life, which—when we
have dusted ourselves down after a tumble or two—is likely to
turn out well.
The purposefulness of the kite is greater than that of the grand
sextile, but the manner of the grand sextile is more friendly and
less ostentatious. The Yod
The Yod (see figure lib on page 87) is a constellation that is still
underrated. It is in the shape of an isosceles triangle with the planet
at its vertex inconjunct two other planets sextile to one another at
either end of its base. The Yod has been called the finger of God,
a name introduced by Carl Leipert following study of this pattern.
He came to the conclusion that the Yod is like a finger pointing
out our destiny in a very unmistakable manner. If we watch what
happens to it by progression, we shall see that when it is activated,
pronounced and often very radical changes occur in the native's
life, changes strong enough to affect the personality. Frequently
these herald an inner upheaval which, in the end, enables him to
run his life with increased efficiency.
The two inconjuncts make the Yod hard to handle (even one
inconjunct links planetary factors in a way that produces much Aspect Configurations and the Ruling Aspect / 89
uncertainty and unusual tension). A feeling of unrest accompanies
longings for something vague and impossible to specify. Kepler
thought that the aspect produces sharp cleavages, and we can test
this idea against our sense of unity: with the inconjunct, and especially with the Yod, the sense of unity is broken and replaced
by a poignant desire for something undefinable.
The sextile at the base of the triangle does not seem in practice
to form a support or resting place. Although it is a harmonious
aspect, it also contains an element of uncertainty and because the
constellation is so tense this uncertainty will come to the fore.
In the Yod we have two dissimilar inconjuncts which are unalike not so much because of the different planets concerned as
because of the different background elements. That is to say, one
of the two inconjuncts always draws together extremely conflicting
elements. For example, suppose a focal planet in Aries is inconjunct
planets in both Virgo and Scorpio: the connection between Aries
fire and Virgo earth is between incompatible elements, whereas
the other connection, though not entirely problem-free, is easier
to reconcile with itself—being an inconjunct between fire and
water. The point where the unequally stressed inconjuncts meet
marks a center of gravity in the aspect pattern.
And so a significant feature of the Yod aspect is that it contains
two inconjuncts, one of which is more difficult than the other,
though even this represents a degree of stress. The planet making
the hardest aspect with the focal planet also makes a sextile with
the other base planet which, in turn, makes its own not quite so
hard aspect with the focal planet. The overspill of all this tension
is carried by the sextile. What is more, a planet is colored by all
the aspects it forms in the radix. Therefore the three (or more)
planets involved in a Yod generate as much stress as do those in
the traditionally stressful grand square; however, they bring this
stress to bear indirectly. Yet the most difficult leg of the Yod is
one of the most important links between the conscious and the
unconscious.
A further thing to notice is that the three (or more) planets in
the aspect pattern are found in three different crosses. Here is
another source of tension, this time between the cardinal, fixed and
mutable crosses.
Quite often these natives are inhibited by circumstances, or
mn into so many difficulties and/or mental conflicts that they are 90 / Aspects and Personality
virtually compelled to take action. Generally speaking, they will
start to tackle problems when the Yod is being activated by progressions or transits from the slower planets (over the empty point
opposite the focal planet). At such times these people feel hunted
and oppressed, or suddenly lash out like cornered animals.
The Yod may represent shattering experiences that revolutionize basic attitudes, personality structure, lifestyle, relationships,
work environment, finances and so on, due either to serious illness,
bad luck or the criminal activities of others, or else to some stroke
of great good fortune. One thing is indubitably true of the Yod,
and that is that once we have passed through the dark valley and
learned to cope with feelings of frustration (perhaps even by making
them work for us), there generally follows a more peaceful and
relaxed period in which we learn to travel our own inner road.
Not for nothing has the Yod been called the finger of God:
this aspect pattern often indicates hidden talents which do not come
out into the open until after confrontation, but can then bestow
insight, balance and understanding in the matters ruled by the given
planets. It can therefore reveal the profession, especially when this
is taken up fairly late in life. 7 Judging the
Composition of
Aspects What to Look For
Aspects provide valuable information but it is also very important
to look at their composition and context. As we have already seen
in the case of unaspected planets, not every planet has immediate
egress to the external world, and even the duet can exist in splendid
isolation. So when judging the composition of an aspect we must
first determine whether or not it has an outlet, in other words
whether it is directly or indirectly connected with the Ascendant
or Midheaven, the rwo exit points of the horoscope. The energy
of a planet can express itself openly if it:
• makes an aspect with the Ascendant, or
• makes an aspect with the Midheaven, or
• stands in the 1st house, or
• makes an aspect with the ruler of the Ascendant, or
• makes an aspect with a planet in the 1st house. 92 / Aspects and Personality
If any of these conditions are fulfilled, the effect of the planet will
be visible and we can get to know it through our everyday activities.
Because it has an outlet, we are free to express it directly and to
integrate it in ourselves via the mirror held up to us by the external
world.
If planets without outlets are aspected by other planets without
outlets, this will not mend matters, for the energy will remain caged
in the horoscope, so to speak, unable to be expressed until released
by various transits and progressions.
But note that the ruler of the Ascendant is always at liberty
to express itself. This produces a refinement, because if one of the
planets in a duet rules the Ascendant, we can no longer treat it as
if it were totally unaspected.
A certain amount of confusion could arise here, so I shall try
to clarify matters. Even though a single unaspected planet (or a
duet) may have access to an exit point, it will retain the main
characteristics of an unaspected planet. The outlet reveals these
characteristics in one of rwo ways: either giving the native a better
opportunity of seeing them as they are reflected in the mirror of
the outside world, or else expressing their difficult side in a rather
extreme fashion. So the outlet improves recognition of the problems created by an unaspected planet, but can make these problems
more acute. How it behaves at any given time will depend on the
situation in which the native finds himself.
A planet or aspect never operates in a complete vacuum, therefore we need to take note of the following two points: 1) the
coloring imparted to a planet by all the aspects it receives; and
2) the way in which one aspect affects another.
As far as the first point is concerned, each planet has its own
characteristic reaction patterns and contents which distinguish it
from all others. These features are invariable. Thus Mercury is
always the planet of communication, fact-gathering and classification, etc. Also a planet shares the color of the sign in which it
happens to be posited; in other words, the sign determines how
the planet's characteristics are expressed. But, and this is what
particularly interests us here, the planet is exposed to the further
influence of the aspects it receives.
The Moon reveals the behavior we adopt whenever we feel
insecure. This Moon-sign behavior is designed to restore a sense Judging the Composition of Aspects / 93
of comfort. If the Moon is in Taurus then, as soon as we feel
insecure, we shall be inclined to adopt a wait-and-see policy, to
retire within ourselves, and thus to assimilate whatever is troubling
us. Others may find us uncommunicative. Perhaps we putter around
in the garden or start fixing things in the house—anywhere where
we can do something in peace and quiet. Usually this is enough to
bring us back to normal.
But if the Moon in Taurus makes a square to Mars and a square
to Uranus, we have problems! As soon as we feel insecure and start
withdrawing into our Taurean behavior, the hard aspects deny us
the intended tranquility. We become even more painfully aware of
our tension. The square to Mars incites to action—at its worst to
aggression, at its best to sporting activity, with a whole range of
possibilities in between. The square to Uranus makes for stress,
restlessness, nervousness, inventiveness, etc. This may prove very
creative, but the Moon in Taurus can find nothing restful in it.
And so the tension and agitation grow worse. These hard aspects
can be used creatively, yet the fact remains that only via unrest
and tension can we learn to come to terms with the creative
energy.
What is more, aspects can be influenced by other aspects, which
can either assist or hinder them. Aspects difficult in themselves are
often integrated by subsidiary aspects, even though the latter may
be thrown from somebody else's chart. Admittedly, this final possibility takes us beyond the bounds of individual character reading,
but it is worth mentioning here.
For instance, an opposition between two planets represents a
tension field in the horoscope. If a third planet is trine the first
pole of the opposition and sextile the second, it helps to relieve
the strain and may indicate the kinds of activity that enable the
native to unwind. So we should not feel intimidated by the opposition, but must allow for its possible integration due to the
harmonious aspect. Of course, the opposition itself will not encourage this.
There is no need to worry if your own chart does not allow
for integration. Another person can provide this, if that person has
a planet, the Ascendant, or the Midheaven at the required position.
Personal planets (and also Jupiter) seem to lend considerable support in such instances. Often the horoscope of friend or partner 94 / Aspects and Personality
supplies what yours lacks, so that you feel relaxed in this person's
company because the tautness in your own chart is released via the
other person's. The reverse can also be true. A tense aspect in your
chart may have a second tense aspect latched onto it to give constellations such as the T-square or the grand square. But we have
already dealt with these.
It goes without saying that easy aspects can be connected with
other easy aspects, too. This makes for a very restful state of affairs
but not for a great deal of activity; therefore it is good when at
least one hard aspect is made with a planet that is otherwise harmoniously aspected. Then things begin to hum and the native can
achieve something.
So if someone rejoices in a purely "green" horoscope, there
is no need to turn green with envy! For the other side of the coin
is the risk of mental stagnation and stunting of the personality. The
best thing to have is a mixture of hard and easy aspects, with
the tension of the former aiding development and the relaxation
of the latter providing periods of repose. Of course, in order that
the picture painted by the aspects can be seen in context, it needs
to be set against the background of the elements and crosses and
of the planets in sign and house. For instance, a horoscope with
planets placed chiefly in air and water signs will benefit from one
or two hard Mars aspects because Mars can inject some energy into
this rather sluggish setup. On the contrary, a horoscope with the
emphasis on fire signs can do without even a trine from Mars—it
packs more than enough initiative and energy without that!
The above is meant to serve as a warning not to interpret the
aspects in too black-and-white a manner. Everything without exception in a horoscope hangs together. Beginners in astrology often
treat aspects as if they were the most important factors, because
they are so easy to identify and look up in books of stock interpretations. In reality they are not the most important. They are
very useful for refining an interpretation, but they certainly do not
play the leading role and are heavily influenced by the rest of the
horoscope.
A point over which considerable confusion still exists is the
so-called combust state. Planets are called combust when they are
only a few degrees away from the Sun and are rendered invisible ludgtng the Composition of Aspects / 95
to us by the intense solar light. This is a simple matter of optics,
but it has led people to infer that combust planets no longer work,
that their influence in our charts is nullified, together with other
things equally negative. Various studies have meanwhile shown that
this does not tally with the facts of the case, yet the fear of combust
planets obstinately persists.
Combust planets are actually in close conjunction with the Sun.
Mercury and Venus, which are never far away from the Sun, have
the most frequent opportunities of being combust. But people with
a combust Mercury seem to be endowed with a great ability to
handle contacts, to talk and analyze, and a combust Venus is definitely not bad for the love life. All that we need do with combust
planets is to treat them like ordinary conjunctions—nothing more
than that.
Hence in a Sun/Mercury conjunction, the two factors invariably go hand in hand. Sometimes they create difficulties, but not
because of anything inherent in the aspect itself. The popular belief
concerning their effect on character seems to be wrong. The presence of combust planets does appear to make a difference in horary
astrology but horary is a different study. People who work with
horary charts do not agree on the effect of combust planets even
in horary charts.
A minor point that is easily overlooked is the following. Anyone who has had some experience in interpreting charts will have
noticed at one time or another certain puzzling trines that generate
unexpected tension, and certain squares that are less troublesome
than one might expect. There is nothing in the trines or squares
themselves to account for this, but a reason can be found in the
sign and house positions of the aspected planets.
The houses in the horoscope are by no means all the same
size. Mercúrio Because the houses vary in size, there may be quite a difference between the background influences of the signs and houses—
and this is what causes the apparent anomaly. Thus it is possible
for two planets to be in trine by sign but square by house. The
areas of life symbolized by the houses being in conflict tend to
spoil the harmony between the signs. Basically this means that, on
'Except in the equal house system, of course. Tr. 96 Aspects and Personality occasion, the native can be hampered by circumstances indicated
by the houses, although the helpful effect of the trined signs is
never completely nullified. In the same way, a square can fall in
houses that are trine or sextile to one another. Its tension is always there but, from time to time, circumstances will favor the
native. Part 2 Aspect
Interpretation 8 A Few
Words on Interpretation Working With the Chart A book such as this always has its dangers because we are tempted
to cookbook the chart. Generalized interpretations are never sufficiently complete or differentiated to describe the unique individual situation. Therefore everything said here must be adapted to
what is found in the remainder of a chart.
For instance, in a conjunction of Jupiter and Saturn it is generally true that the expansiveness of Jupiter is held in check by
Saturn. If the conjunction is in Sagittarius, the restraint exercised
by Saturn will not be great, because Jupiter is very powerful in that
sign (Jupiter rules the sign). But if the conjunction is in Capricorn,
then Saturn has the presiding influence and will impede Jupiter
considerably.
A thousand and one illustrations could be given of how we
need to allow for many more factors than the aspects alone.
Nevertheless, we do have to learn to read the aspects before
we can study them in their wider context. The examples produced
here are intended merely to serve that purpose; no claim is laid 100! Aspects and Personality
completeness. Combination is the keynote, so keep in mind the
following:
• On the basis of your knowledge of any given planet and aspect,
you can work out a basic interpretation for comparison with the
present analysis;
• It is strongly recommended, when examining an aspect, to consider all the possible combinations of a pair ot planets, as this will
provide a better insight into what they can do. For instance, before
jumping to conclusions about a Sun/Mars square, it is best to look
at each and every Sun/Mars aspect for the full picture.
• Especially where the trans-Saturnian planets (Uranus, Neptune
and Pluto) are concerned, it is wise not to make too clear-cut a
distinction between harmonious and disharmonious aspects. Our
power to exploit these outer planets is very limited. They do more
with us than we do with them. All their aspects contain a range of
possibilities. Sometimes their easy aspects behave as if they were
hard, and their hard aspects as if they were easy; so we have to be
very cautious when interpreting them.
• Finally, only use the interpretations in this book as a starting
point; never follow them blindly\ Review
The essential points about the interpretation of aspects listed below
are those which have not already been summarized in previous
chapters.
1) Note the extent to which the characters of the aspected planets
harmonize with one another. An aspect is first and foremost a
connection between planets, and the nature of the planets concerned is particularly important.
2) Look at the signs in the background: these determine how the
planets express themselves.
3) Do not forget to include unaspected planets in your interpretation. A Few Words on Interpretation! 101 Júpiter ) Observe the exactness of the aspect: the most exact it is the
more powerfully it will work.
5) Treat such things as approaching and departing aspects as refinements, not as the main feature.
6) Equally useful as refinements (again not as the main feature)
are the aspect shapes and the ruling aspect type.
7) Aspect interpretation always has two sides, and this is often
forgotten. A square, for example, generally stands for hardships
and problems, but it also indicates the potential for spiritual growth
and the energy to tackle problems. A trine frequently makes things
easy but the native is then inclined to be idle. Trines are much less
of an incentive to spiritual growth. This shows that, in themselves,
aspects are neither good nor bad; they are simply tense or relaxed
and have both positive and negative qualities. A horoscope full of
squares does not make a criminal any more than a horoscope full
of trines makes a saint.
8) Refine your aspects interpretations by looking not only at the
admittedly very important sign-settings but also at the housesettings. It will then be possible to infer the degree to which the
native's disposition (shown by the signs) is able to express itself in
his or her circumstances (shown by the houses). Mercúrio ) Planets in their essential dignities (e. Vênus ., the Sun in Leo or Aries,
the Moon in Cancer or Taurus) make it easier to integrate hard
aspects than do planets in their debilities (e. Vênus ., Saturn in Aries or
Mars in Pisces or Libra).
10) Note whether any planet is without an exit point in the chart.
11) Never consider an aspect apart from other aspects touching
the same area(s). These other aspects will tend either to resolve
problems or to introduce difficulties of their own.
12) Do not worry about combust planets; they seem to mean nothing in character interpretation.
13) Linally, relate each aspect to the total horoscope, which alone
is decisive. View them against the background of the elements and
crosses, which are very influential. Lor instance, if the native has / 02 / Aspects and Personality
no earth in the horoscope but a trine between Saturn and Mercury,
which ought to make him or her extremely practical, the absence
of a "down-to-earth" background will mean he or she is not so
business-like but will tend to display other characteristics of the
aspect. Aspects function solely as part of a horoscope in close cooperation
with all its other parts. Mercúrio Aspects
of the
Sun Sun/Moon Aspects Sun/Moon Conjunction
The Sun and Moon go together to form a unit, which certainly has
its good side, for the behavior we adopt in order to feel comfortable
(the Moon) coincides with the way we naturally develop and realize
our potential (the Sun). This gives a certain poise and sang-froid.
Much can be achieved, both socially and in the inner life, thanks
to the sense of unity imparted by a Sun/Moon conjunction.
Astronomically speaking, a conjunction of the Sun and Moon
is a new moon; the symbol of a fresh start, a propitious moment
to sow. If the Sun is well placed, the conjunction can give plenty
of drive and enthusiasm. But if the Moon is the stronger of the
two, involvement in new undertakings is often much more impulsive, and their consequences are not properly thought out—which
is not to say that these initiatives are any less important.
At its best, this conjunction unites the male and female principles—anyway, the native always seeks to unite them. Sometimes
this leads to strained relationships, because the native does not 104 I Aspects and Personality
know which ought to have the upper hand, the active male side or
the passive female side. Both sides are inseparably bound together.
Because the Sun sign receives added emphasis from this conjunction, there may be an identity problem or a poor understanding of
the nature of activity and passivity. More explicitly, the relationship
with the partner can become confused.
On one hand, the emotions (Moon) can be stimulated by the
conjunction with the Sun (the Sun acts as a stimulus in all its
aspects); on the other hand, the emotions can sometimes have a
detrimental effect on the resilience of the Sun.
The con junction of the planet of personal awareness (Sun) with
that of unconscious reactions (Moon) often gives great immediacy
and application. Whatever is done is done wholeheartedly. Sun/Moon Sextile; Sun/Moon Trine
Our behavior (Sun) fits in with the way in which we seek safety
and certainty (Moon), and this makes for inner tranquility. Of the
two aspects, the trine imparts greater composure, since the Moon
is always in the same element as the Sun, and the two lights are
even more in phase than when they are sextile.
Creative power and formative ability go hand in hand, which,
in principle, gives great ingenuity. The consonance between the
Sun and Moon produces creative thinking which can be brought
to bear on difficult circumstances: problems are tackled with a bold
determination to resolve them. Very little internal tension arises
with easy Sun/Moon aspects, so a great deal of energy is available
for other things.
Nevertheless, there is a less prepossessing side to harmonious
aspects between the Sun and Moon. Nice as it is to feel quickly at
home wherever we are, they can also make us lazy and inattentive,
and blind to the real extent of problems owing to the fact that,
unlike people with hard aspects, we find problems fairly easy to
live with. The danger is even greater with a trine than it is with a
sextile because the latter still injects a modicum of doubt. A marriage that is starting to fall apart is not seen as much cause for
concern when the Sun and Moon are trine, and problems are allowed to grow instead of being nipped in the bud. Aspects of the Sun / 105
Sloth, love of ease, and apathy can result from the otherwise
welcome balance between being and feeling. Sun/Moon Square; Sun/Moon Opposition
The uncertainty generated by the square arises from the fact that
the conscious behavior (Sun) conflicts with the behavior needed to
give a sense of security (Moon). Therefore a square between Sun
and Moon can make the native very unsettled, especially if the
background of the elements is tense.
In the opposition, the kind of uncertainty is different. An
opposition between the Sun and Moon is a full moon, of course,
and both lights are completely visible. In the horoscope, this opposition makes us painfully aware of our duality. Conscious behavior and unconscious reaction patterns clash with one another,
yet always have something in common because the signs in which
they are posited lie on the same axis. Therefore, when they are in
opposition, the Sun and Moon can complement one another well
once they make common cause. Until such time as they do (and
this may take quite a while), the native will suffer from a nagging
sense of discomfort and insecurity.
In either case, the native is inclined to adopt a certain form of
behavior to the virtual exclusion of its alternative, and so the latter
seeks to express itself indirectly. But if he does give both forms of
behavior a chance, he generally ends up feeling like "two individuals
rolled into one" with now-one-now-the-other in the ascendancy.
Those around him never know what to expect and the native feels
plagued by inner instability. Usually, he has an identity problem
and often wonders, "Say, which character is the real me?" The
answer is "Both of you."
The uncertainty can result in many things being left half done,
or in perpetual changes of opinion, or in general dissatisfaction with
one's performance; in short, tense aspects between the Sun and
Moon mean that a great deal of energy has to be expended on
tackling inner insecurity before the native can begin to solve external problems.
Nevertheless, hard aspects do have considerable energy at
their disposal. The uncertainties and the obstacles produced by their / 06 / Aspects and Personality
tension compel the native, sooner or later, to start sorting things
out. The tension between the Sun and Moon send him in search
of answers to such questions as "Who am I?" "What is really implied
by the difference between male and female?" and "What is significant in a relationship?"
It is not uncommon for conflicts between the Sun and Moon
to present problems with the life partner. Since, among other
things, the Moon represents what a man is looking for in a woman,
and the Sun represents what a woman is looking for in a man, the
native tends to fall in love with somebody who jars him or her in
some way. At the same time, the hard aspects provide sufficient
energy to deal with any problems that may arise. The latter are
usually caught in time because, being so insecure, the native is quite
sensitive to them and is prepared to work hard to stop them escalating. Therefore it is entirely possible for people with a square
between the Sun and the Moon to make happy marriages. Sun/Moon Inconjunct An inconjunct between the Sun and Moon gives a dormant, clandestine tension that does in fact produce a great sense of insecurity,
although the native is only marginally aware of it. Something is
quite likely to keep bothering him but he is unable to say what
it is.
Because the two lights have to do with the life force, this aspect
can undermine the vitality every now and then. However, nothing
need be seriously wrong; the cause is usually an inability to relax
properly.
There is a complete cleavage between the conscious behavior
and the unconscious reaction pattern. This leads to considerable
confusion in everyday life: the attitude adopted to the outside world
is entirely different from the attitude the native would like to adopt.
Because the active and passive sides operate quite independently, it is often hard to strike a balance between work and repose.
The restlessness indicates a need to keep occupied and there is a
danger that energy will be expended at the wrong time and place.
Problems the native should solve tend to become intractable because he dithers over them or even tries to ignore them. Aspects of the Sun / 107
Troubled relationships may be expected too with this Sun/
Moon aspect. Usually husband and wife have completely different
dispostions and expect to lead their own lives. The inconjunct is
more likely than the other hard aspects to obstruct the view of
problem areas, which can therefore become more painful and tiresome. The inconjunct between the Sun and Moon can raise false
hopes about the partner which end in disappointment.
After a crisis, the dilemma connected with the inconjunct can
be seen more clearly and the situation can be resolved. In other
words, a sense of balance can be developed through weathering a
crisis—although the native will always be aware that the balance is
precarious. Sun/Mercury Aspects Mercury is one of the so-called inferior planets; that is to say, it
orbits between the Sun and the Earth. We never see it stray far
away from the Sun, its maximum distance being 28 degrees. Therefore its only major aspect to the Sun is the conjunction. Sun/Mercury Conjunction In this aspect the Sun and Mercury usually occupy the same sign
of the zodiac and, since they share the same background, being
(Sun) and communication and reflection (Mercury) express themselves similarly.10
When a person's way of thinking and communicating is tied
to the Sun, this ego-involvement will compromise the neutrality of
Mercury to some extent. The native's ideas and opinions are vitally
important and he will enjoy airing them in conversation. The Sun
conjunct Mercury gives a great need for exchanges, information,
talking and analyzing, in whatever way the nature of the sign suggests.
'0However, it is also possible to have one of them in the last degrees of one sign
and the other in the first degrees of the following sign. Tr. I <IS / Aspects and Personality
The individual with the Sun and Mercury in conjunction knows
how to enter into a discussion and will turn out to be a fount of
information, yet is unlikely to be a good listener because he says
and does whatever he happens to think is significant. And so a Sun/
Mercury conjunction makes the native both successful and unsuccessful in his contacts. Since it fills him with a sense of importance,
this aspect can make him very subjective.
Mercury is a very mobile planet, and a Sun/Mercury conjunction can make for liveliness and restlessness. Sometimes (with other
difficult aspects) the nerves are bad. Mercury makes the individual
(represented by the Sun) hard to pin down. On the credit side, he
or she may be very skillful and good with tools. Sun/Venus Aspects Venus is an inferior planet too, although it is further out from the
Sun than Mercury is. The maximum separation of Venus from the
Sun is 48 degrees. As with Mercury, the conjunction is the only
major aspect formed. Sun/Venus Conjunction
When conscious behavior (Sun) is attended by the need for emotional and material safety and comfort and the desire for beauty
and harmony (Venus), the behavior is generally friendly and accommodating. Friends are easily made and the native also finds it
easy to move in society. The feeling for harmony in relationships
gives diplomatic ability.
On the other hand, the native finds it difficult to air problems
or to talk them through, since he or she loves to be surrounded
by a pleasant atmosphere. The danger is that this attitude will result
in a false bonhomie and in superficiality. And so the conjunction
will deny depth to the personality if the native is content to smooth
things over on the surface.
Yet, as we have seen, this conjunction does have its good side.
Generally, the native is very agreeable and has no difficulty in being Aspects of the Sun / 109
friendly and sympathetic to others. There is also a need for shared
experiences, preferably with the life partner. Showing affection is
an essential mode of expression for the native and he or she is
extremely romantic.
The feeling for art is often well developed, although the background of the signs will have a say in this. The individual with the
Sun conjunct Venus is fond of pleasure and the good things of life,
and may sometimes overindulge in them. By and large, the aspect
is an enjoyable one to have, even though it may make the native
a trifle lazy. Sun/Mars Aspects Sun/Mars Conjunction
Two active planets join forces here, signifying a ready identification
of the self (Sun) with ambition, executive ability and energy (Mars).
Often the individual is rather pugnacious, competitive and fond of
sport. Such a fiery combination as the Sun and Mars can make for
great liveliness and enthusiasm. There is a capacity for hard work
and the native's sights are set on solid achievement—also on the
honors that go with it.
Mars is inflammable and, when conjunct the Sun, can give a
very volatile personality. The native is excitable and subject to
bursts of enthusiasm; sometimes being short-tempered and aggressive into the bargain. Because Mars is uncompromising, the
individual is one of those go-getting, turbulent people who display
scant consideration for others and are intent on making the most
of their own opportunities.
The person with a Sun/Mars conjunction pulls no punches and
is not easily thwarted. But, though quick to flare up, he or she is
not usually one to bear a grudge.
The Sun conjunct Mars frequently opens up opportunities in
sport, but the native also treats everyday life as something of a
sporting event. Excellent outlets are sports such as boxing, fencing,
wrestling, or sports that require explosions of energy. Frequently
there is a fondness for high-risk sports and for sports demanding I 1(1 / Aspects and Personality
courage and speed. The Sun conjunct Mars can warn of violence,
but only when there are insufficient outlets for the enormous
amounts of energy generated by this aspect.
People with this conjunction know where they stand and are
not afraid to make their position clear. Others may be apprehensive
of them because they seldom mince words.
The native is more forceful than he or she realizes, and unintentional and unwanted ruptures with others can occur. So restraint is advisable, especially as there is a tendency to act before
thinking. Sun/Mars Sextile; Sun/Mars Trine
Although these aspects are harmonious, the fact that they are between the Sun and Mars is liable to produce an excess of energy
and a somewhat selfish outlook. Often, in the harmonious aspects
between the Sun and Mars we find a positive, incisive attitude to
life; whenever anything needs to be done, it is tackled straight away.
The native is resilient and has good powers of recuperation.
The self-interest produced by the conjunction of the two
planets is not removed by the sextile and trine but is displayed
more subtly and less forcefully than it is with the other aspects;
therefore companions find it less objectionable. With harmonious
Sun/Mars aspects there is often a natural leadership. The natives
tend to push themselves forward, and will have a go at anything.
Speed, competitiveness and ambition complete the picture.
Although the natives encounter less resistance than would
be the case if the aspect were difficult, they do not fit in well
with others and prefer to go their own way. Children with these
aspects are often stubborn and wilfull and, young as they are, crave
to be independent. They are certainly not so easily suppressed
as their playmates are, for they know how to stand up for themselves.
Like the conjunction, the harmonious Sun/Mars aspects incline
the natives to do whatever appeals to them: practically everything
is made to revolve around what they want and hardly anything
around what others want; naturally this can cause problems every
now and then. But if a harmonious Sun/Mars aspect finds a good
outlet, it can impart the energy and enthusiasm to move mountains. Aspects of the Sun I 111
Sun/Mars Square; Sun/Mars Opposition
With these hard aspects, we generally experience difficulty in handling our energy: often we have too much or we use too much
unnecessarily. There is an area of tension between conscious behavior (Sun) and ambition or the ability to get things done (Mars).
It is a struggle to regulate the urge to work hard and gain recognition, and we may give vent to impulsiveness, recklessness, aggression, temerity and ferocity.
Although the zest for work is great, we must be careful not
to wear ourselves out. Certainly we can accomplish a great deal,
but we are liable to find ourselves with too much to do.
Along with the potentially great enthusiasm in Sun/Mars conflicts comes a tendency to be irritable: we can flare up and react
more sharply than meant. We are always spoiling for a fight, even
to the point of coming to blows with someone, and this shows in
our attitude. Perhaps we are not very aware of our pugnacity—we
manage to make it obvious to others nevertheless, and a spirit of
contention pervades our surroundings even though we may not
know why. Others often accept the challenge we seem to be making
to them.
With the square, action is quicker and more unthinking; with
the opposition, it is somewhat more irregular. But both aspects
raise the problem that behavior and executive power are out of
phase with one another and can block one another. The combination can make these people accident prone, not least because of
thoughtlessness and imprudence. Sun/Mars Inconjunct
The inconjunct between the Sun and Mars enters the unconscious
realm more deeply than the other aspects do; therefore it is more
awkward to handle. As with the square and the opposition, the
conscious attitude is out of phase with actual performance, but in
the case of the inconjunct the natives have little awareness of the
fact. Initially, they don't know the cause for the inner unrest and
aggression or for the tension they project. However, they can become extremely irritated and may fly into a rage without good
reason. / 12 / Aspects and Personality
As with all Sun/Mars aspects, these people have considerable
will power and a desire to please themselves. However, the snag
with this aspect is that it is often hard to tell what they really do
want because nothing they undertake gives rest or satisfaction.
Neither are they aware of how much they try to ram their opinions
down other people's throats until others become resentful.
Because the nature of the aspect makes it so hard to comprehend or come to terms with the interaction of the planets, there is
a chance that they shall become overexcited internally. This can
affect the health, and the fact that the aspect is between the Sun
and Mars adds the risk of accidents.
A good safety valve for this conflict (as for other Sun/Mars
conflicts) are sports that use up plenty of physical energy, but anything that helps let off steam is good. Sun/Jupiter
Sun/Jupiter Aspects Conjunction The expansiveness and progressiveness of Jupiter go hand in hand
with the way in which the psyche seeks to develop: a combination
that frequently results in self-reliance, optimism and success. An
air of confidence usually has a stimulating effect on others. However, people with this aspect need to be careful not to think too
highly of themselves: big-headedness and megalomania are the bad
side of Jupiter. In principle, Sun conjunct Jupiter can heal both
literally (the physician) and immaterially. Properties such as joviality, fair play and optimism come well to the fore in the aspect,
enabling these people to put fresh heart into others. Also they are
quite likely to be open-handed, magnanimous and protective, but
run the risk of acting in a spirit of self-importance and so of extinguishing the spark of true humanity.
Thinking too highly of themselves can also be expressed in
the optimistic laying of grandiose plans with an inattention to detail
that is bound to produce mistakes and disappointments. But then,
doing things with a flourish is typical of this aspect.
Natives with Jupiter in combination with the Sun tend to see
things in broad perspective. Quite often they have philosophical, Aspects of the Sun / / / 3
pedagogic or religious interests, and are keen on anything that gives
food for thought or widens the horizons. Tolerance results from a
deep conviction that humanity is essentially freedom-loving; people
with a Sun/Jupiter conjunction like to make up their own minds
and to arrange their own lives.
Moderation is not Jupiter's strongest point and, when the
planet is conjunct the Sun, psychological and physical problems
can arise through an unwillingness to exercise restraint. These problems are seen in such varied activities as speaking, eating, and
drinking. Nevertheless much of the damage can be repaired thanks
to the native's irrepressibility. Sun/Jupiter Sextile; Sun/Jupiter Trine
The sextile and trine between the Sun and Jupiter are generally
regarded as very favorable aspects. Under such aspects, these
people exude self-confidence and hopefulness, and this in itself
is often all that is needed to bring success. Their optimism can
(without their realizing it) cause what was obviously going wrong
to turn out well in the end, making it seem that luck is always on
their side.
As ruler of Sagittarius, Jupiter, when linked with the Sun, gives
a natural buoyancy, usually accompanied by warmth, openness and
a sense of fair play. Idealism is a pronounced feature of all Jupiter/
Sun aspects, as is the need for freedom. People with harmonious
aspects often get what they want for themselves in this direction
and are also ready to come to the aid of others struggling for liberty.
But the Sun in easy aspect to Jupiter does have its drawbacks:
it encourages laziness and self-indulgence. The natives are so used
to fortune's smile that, when times are hard, they are slow to help
themselves. It is true that with this aspect, many problems will sort
themselves out of their own accord; nevertheless, passivity can
prove very detrimental. They can be so sure that there is never
anything to fear that they sit back and fail to gain the experience
necessary for tackling difficulties; then, when good luck eventually
runs out, they are left stranded.
Generally, most natives benefit from the positive outlook encouraged by this aspect. Only they must be careful not to behave / I-f Aspects and I'cruiHiihl) like someone who is always right, because, even in its harmonious
aspects, Jupiter can make people a bit of a know-it-all.
With this aspect, natives are in a position to lend others a
helping hand and to have a healing effect (as pastor or physician).
It is an aspect under which they usually know how to make themselves loved. Sun/Jupiter Square; Sun/Jupiter Opposition Jupiter's expansive activities are easily overdone. When the planet
is in disharmonious relationship with the Sun, representing the ego,
we are inclined to lay great emphasis on Jupiter/Sun characteristics,
and run the risk of indulging in unfounded optimism, unrealistic
idealism, bragging and an inordinate love of freedom. We shall
probably attempt too much and take some pretty hard knocks, but
our indestructible enthusiasm and buoyancy usually see us through.
And, when we learn a measure of self-control, we can gain much
from these energetic and enterprising aspects.
Another danger is that we may overestimate ourselves; our
capacity for expansion is invariably out of keeping with the ego,
and the latter all too easily becomes puffed up. Opinionatedness
and imprudence may act as bad advisers and lead us to take foolish
risks under the delusion that we shall always find some way of
evading the consequences of our stupidity, or, if not, that our
guardian angel will inevitably fly to the rescue.
The square and opposition also give the need to apprise others
of our outlook on life and our various opinions, but it is not unlikely
that we shall exaggerate the significance of our message, shall be a
little too cocksure in the way we present it, or too impervious to
criticism or suggestions from outside. For with Sun/Jupiter conflicts
we make very poor listeners.
Nevertheless, with these aspects, we have a great deal of
warmth to radiate and can be exceptionally generous. And although
we like to exaggerate, this is ordinarily not due to insincerity but
due to a tendency to see things (including ourselves) as bigger and
better than they are.
Sun/Jupiter conflicts can help us in all kinds of ways because
they are creative and active aspects but, before they can do so, we Aspects of the Sun ! Gêmeos )
need to substitute self-discipline and low-key planning for hurry
and a blind trust in impulsive action. Sun/Jupiter Inconjunct The more trying facets of the Sun/Jupiter association emerge in
the inconjunct. Although with this aspect we can radiate optimism
and self-confidence, we are not particularly aware and may actually
feel very insecure. We are inclined to push ourselves forward or
prove ourselves, without seeing what we are doing. This uncertainty
can result in subliminal feelings of self-importance or in a need to
mean something to others. Whether deep down we are seeking
recognition or only reassurance, there is a danger that we may
attempt too much. The consequence can be overwork, because we
accept too many responsibilities, or because we do not delegate
properly. Also, we may land ourselves in trouble through promising
more than we are able to perform.
With this aspect, there is a possibility that we shall have unfair
advantage taken of us because we are too willing to be at the beck
and call of others, because we are unsure of ourselves or because
we fall for flattery. Each Sun/Jupiter aspect has a tendency toward
self-glorification; the inconjunct is the least able to handle it.
Under this quincunx of the Sun and Jupiter, matters often get
out of hand due to a lack of estimating and planning ability; therefore care is needed. We can unintentionally overdo things, and are
sometimes arrogant, but usually possess a cheerfulness that helps
us to recover from any setbacks. Once we come to terms with this
aspect, we can use it to fine advantage and should do well in fields
represented by Jupiter—law, philosophy, religion, etc. Sun/Saturn
Sun/Saturn Aspects Conjunction With this aspect, even as a child the native is painfully self-aware
and vulnerable. Just as the keynote for Jupiter aspects is optimism,
so pessimism is the keynote for Saturn aspects. The conjunction, / / 6 / Aspects and Personality
in particular, is liable to make any outlook seem bleak and unpromising. Therefore, the attitude of someone with a Sun/Saturn
conjunction is one of caution, of wanting to bet on certainties, and
of expecting the worst. Actually, this means that the native can
function very efficiently, because he or she allows for almost anything that can go wrong. But the refusal to look on the bright side
discourages positive action in others. The latter would not be to
his or her liking anyway: the native wants all the credit.
People with this aspect can be very disciplined and hard on
themselves, working long hours and exercising patience when they
must. They are practical and austere, grave and melancholy, selfpossessed and tenacious, and capable of carrying a considerable
weight of responsibility.
When it is in conjunction with the Sun, the insecurity and
anxiety induced by Saturn can make the natives very reserved: they
keep others at a distance due to uncertainty, and to the fragility of
their egos. This has a weak side of which they are painfully aware;
nothing would induce them to expose it to the outside world. So
they may hide behind an impenetrable mask; sometimes appearing
cold and forbidding, sometimes solemn and withdrawn.
People with an aspect between Sun and Saturn should try to
avoid being too stiff and unbending, and should try not to cling
unreflectingly to existing structures and patterns. If chances are
passed up from a dread of what is new and unfamiliar, progress in
life will be arrested. Sun/Saturn Sextile; Sun/Saturn Trine Even the harmonious aspects between Sun and Saturn present a
picture of plainness and sobriety, uncommunicativeness and restraint. Such aspects make for early ripeness and wisdom, and these
natives are likely to accept responsibilities when still quite young.
Often we observe that children with these aspects do not get on
very well with others of their own age but enjoy the company of
older playmates, and this is reflected later in life by the choice of
serious-minded, more mature or older friends.
The harmoniousness of the aspects prevent the apparent dullness from being too much of a hindrance to the natives. By working Aspects of the Sun / 117
hard and by laying realistic plans, they can become very successful
both in their own eyes and in the eyes of others, although never
in the exuberant manner typical of Jovian aspects. But then, exuberance is not in this nature; they would find it far too embarrassing.
Sun/Saturn aspects always give a measure of ambition and love
of prestige, because Saturn is still Saturn even in the easy aspects,
and gives the natives a need to prove themselves. With the harmonious aspects, achievements come rather easily and goals are
generally fulfilled in the native's own way. Considerable patience
can be exhibited in pursuing a pet ambition.
A sense of responsibility compels these natives to abide by
current rules and regulations. In many cases they are keen to see
that other people observe them too; the reason being a dislike of
anything informal or slack—order and regularity are always top
priority in these aspects. Therefore, even when the relationship
between the Sun and Saturn is easy, natives can strike associates
as stiff and starchy.
Generally speaking, the trine and the sextile tend to encourage
inertia: continual good luck breeds laziness. However, the feeling
of uncertainty generated by Saturn greatly reduces this danger.
Insecurity, a sense of duty and perseverance keep these natives
constantly on the go. Sun/Saturn Square; Sun/Saturn Opposition
Self-confidence is usually low with these aspects. We feel inhibited,
often inferior, and suspect that we mean little to others. The vulnerability of the ego is great and can show itself in all sorts of ways.
It is not unusual for Saturn to take refuge in overcompensation
and, when Saturn is at odds with the Sun, the natives talk with a
great air of conviction and like to lay down the law about everything,
although inwardly they find it impossible that anyone should believe
in them.
Perhaps they become critical cynics, instinctively lashing out
for fear that someone will get too close and then creeping back
into their shell or withdrawing behind the impregnable wall where
they while away many melancholy hours. A very common over- 11 SI Aspects and Personality
compensation is galloping ambition spurred on by an enormous
desire for prestige. These natives want to lead the race and ride
roughshod over anything that would seem to disqualify them. However, when the Sun in conflict with Saturn stands for some very
difficult situation, they can save the day by getting down to a stint
of really hard work. For, although this combination brings problems
enough, a great deal can be achieved with it and, in fact, many top
executives have a Saturn conflict (provided, for example, the planet
is well placed in sign and house).
With Sun/Saturn conflicts, we shall on more than one occasion
find ourselves in a situation where we have to forego pleasurable
pursuits. Our responsibilities for other things or for work, often
with no immediate prospect of reward, demand our whole attention.
Seeing that the Sun and Saturn both represent authority, a
conflict between them sometimes implies power-struggles of one
kind or another. There is great sensitivity to any encroachment on
the natives' sphere of influence by commands, precepts or prohibitions as, owing to the vulnerability of the ego, they find them
hard to swallow. They are strongly opposed to rules and regulations
even though, in itself, the Sun/Saturn aspect gives them a need for
structure and stability. Owing to their prickly attitude, these natives
can get so uptight that they quit their jobs. Sun/Saturn Inconjunct
The inconjunct between the Sun and Saturn makes a person very
difficult and touchy. He suffers from a vague sense of inferiority,
and is haunted by anxiety for no apparent reason.
The latent inferiority complex can make the native want to
prove himself in a life of unremitting toil, or can make him try to
curry favor by being very subservient and self-effacing. In the first
instance, he can become extremely isolated through lack of time
to socialize and can begrudge himself all sorts of innocent pleasures;
in the second instance, nobody bothers with him because he never
lets them see his true worth. Either way he has problems, but Saturn
inclines him to persist in his course of action for a rather long time. Aspects of the Sun 1119
If he remains as he is, he knows what to expect; if he changes his
attitude, who can tell what might happen? Better to have certainty
with some discomfort, he reasons, than to brave the hazards of
uncertainty. And so he obstinately continues to stand in his own
light.
Nevertheless, the native can gain self-confidence from his discipline and solid hard work and, as soon as he has a better understanding of the challenge posed by the inconjunct, he can function
in a more conscious and structured way, knowing that in spite of
being just one small cog in the machinery of the universe, he does
have his own special job to do. Sun/Uranus Aspects Sun/Uranus Conjunction
The great need here is to develop as an individual and, where
feasible, to break through set patterns in order to create profitable
new openings—even though Uranus does not necessarily encourage practicality.
The pattern-breaking can sometimes be destructive from sheer
perverseness and an unwillingness to be trammeled by convention,
because the passion for freedom is sometimes unbridled. To those
around, the native's liability to shock and make sudden breaks can
be seen as irrational, deliberately provocative and very unsettling,
and to some extent they are right.
Nevertheless, the same lack of restraint and need to break
through existing structures that make the Sun/Uranus conjunction
so unpredictable are responsible for a glittering cascade of original
ideas. Some of these ideas will have little value, but many will be
useful innovations. Not for nothing do we think of Uranus as the
planet of the inventor.
All the same, the native is often too impatient to spend time
developing ideas. Restlessness finds expression in many different
areas: changes of occupation, of opinion, of life-style, etc. But one
thing is always central: personal freedom, independence and individuality. Certainly, someone with a Sun/Uranus conjunction can 120 I Aspects and Personality
have ties, but then he must (in his own eyes anyway) enjoy freedom
of movement within those ties and must be able to be himself. As
soon as the ties start to tie him down, we may expect a shattering
explosion.
The person with a Sun/Uranus conjunction goes whirling
through life; perhaps like a fresh breeze bearing the seeds of renewal, perhaps like a devastating tornado—it all depends on the
rest of the horoscope. Sun/Uranus Sextile; Sun/Uranus Trine
Like the conjunction, the harmonious aspects between Uranus and
the Sun indicate an individual who wants to live his or her own life
without any restrictions. He or she will be alert, restless, highly
strung, and full of scintillating insights. We should realize, however,
that remarkably brilliant as some of these ideas and insights may
be, there is no guarantee that they will be useable or true.
Sun/Uranus aspects promise new and stimulating ideas which
just keep popping up every so often. With the easy aspects, the
native is able to integrate such ideas into his or her daily life in a
less traumatic fashion than we would do with the hard aspects. To
be sure, the easy aspects also produce dissatisfaction with the status
quo, but they enable the native to build the new on the foundation
of the old, and this willingness to preserve some links with the past
often brings the support he or she needs from others.
In many instances, people with Sun/Uranus aspects take an
interest in all things technical. They are fascinated by whatever
breaks new ground, such as aeronautics (including aeromodeling),
radar, radiotechnology, electrotechnology, or indeed anything requiring insight, intuition and skill. The resourcefulness bestowed
by the harmonious Sun/Uranus aspects is great.
Because they are so intent on personal development, these
people are unlikely to tolerate having someone over them to tell
them what to do, but they are not averse to good advice. They
need a partner who is an equal, neither above nor below them.
However, in many cases, they act as a kind of informal leader by
setting the tone and direction of the partnership and by acting in Aspects of the Sun 1121
an inspiring manner, all the while making sure that their own freedom and that of their partner is preserved.
However, they should be on their guard against losing touch
with reality, because they are apt to venture down strange, impassable byways and to end up going nowhere. Sun/Uranus Square; Sun/Uranus Opposition When the aspects between the Sun and Uranus are disharmonious,
there is a danger that the native will act impulsively without exercising sufficient care. Uranian restlessness, impatience and provocativeness are clearly marked. The native elects to go his or her
own way in search of renewal and change. Inner striving is conveyed
to others, and he or she in turn is affected by the resulting buildup of tension in them.
Because it is so hard to express the need for change in a calm
and balanced way, we quite often find that the native exhibits destructive tendencies.
Frequently, with the disharmonious aspects, old structures are
razed to the ground and old ties are severed before any thought is
taken for what is to happen next. Much of the demolition is needless
but it is prompted by ungovernable impulses.
Like the harmonious aspects, the disharmonious give an interest in technical and scientific matters; also in recondite studies
and reforms. The square and opposition may even encourage regular activity in these areas. Impulsiveness and a receptiveness to
sudden thoughts make the native's reactions rather abrupt and expose him or her to risk. He or she tends to act on the spur of the
moment and is unable to keep still. For example, a rash decision
to overtake on the road can end in disaster. These aspects call for
special care in traffic—the native often belongs to the accidentprone.
With the disharmonious aspects, life is lived at a very high
tempo. It is hard to calm down, impossible to stagnate (that would
be unbearable), and there is a hatred of any form of restraint. If
the native is unable to keep up with himself, however, he is liable
to become distraught. 122 . Aspects and Personality
Sun/Uranus Inconjunct
With the inconjunct, as with the other Sun/Uranus aspects, the
native is inclined to go his or her own way; but in this case does
so without realizing it. The underlying cause is emotional, so that
he or she is very vulnerable where personal individuality is concerned. Therefore he or she can react negatively to commands or
instructions. Anything that threatens to thwart provokes tremendous resistance. Unfortunately, he or she often fights the very things
that would prove helpful, and ends up running round in small
circles. All Uranian aspects make for restlessness, but the inconjunct introduces a feverish hunt for who knows not what.
Nerviness is a marked feature of the inconjunct and can express
itself in many different ways, from nail-biting to hyperactivity. Sudden movements invite minor accidents.
With the inconjunct, the native is always seeking personal
transformation to an imagined "other life" full of renewal and unconventionality. Uranian aspects are renowned for producing an
interest in the esoteric and, with the inconjunct, we might even go
so far as to call the interest a fascination. The need and longing for
that "other life" can unconsciously evoke forces maneuvering the
native into situations that repeatedly compel him or her to alter
course. This is very tiring: it is as if tranquility were being denied.
But once he or she sees what he or she is doing, a life can be chosen
in which the need for change can be expressed in a more calm and
deliberate way and can stimulate both personal development and
the potential in others. Sun/Neptune Aspects Sun/Neptune Conjunction
In all its conjunctions, Neptune offers the opportunity to travel
beyond the confines of individuality and thus to refine individuality.
It can lend depth and perspective to the Sun (the ego) but, at the
same time, it leaves the boundary of the ego rather hazy and can
desert us in a visionary no man's land, a dream world from which
it is difficult to escape because appearance and reality seem to Aspects of the Sun I 12 s
mingle there. With this conjunction, we can, as it were, look
through people and sense what they are feeling and thinking even
when their terms of reference are very different from ours.
Thus Neptune conjunct the Sun gives the ego little to hold
on to; we are quite impressionable, often without intending to be
so. We are liable to feel very insecure and a flight to our trusted
dream world seems like a pleasant alternative to everyday life. But
a dream world lying beyond the already indistinct borders of the
ego poses the danger that we shall identify with the non-individual,
collective contents of the unconscious. This can pose a threat to
the inherently shaky ego.
Our insecurity can make us withdrawn, or can stop us from
standing up for ourselves. What is more, the conjunction of the
Sun and Neptune (and the same may be said of other Neptunian
aspects) brings us into unconscious contact with the emotions of
others. We sense hidden problems and undercurrents of opposition
and aggression in our environment, but cannot locate them. This
imperfect half-knowledge of what is going on in the minds of our
fellow humans can make us feel suddenly isolated and alien and
can increase our reserve and uncertainty.
Nevertheless, Neptune has a great deal to offer. Its refining
action and subtle creativity come into their own when we engage
in musical, artistic, and other forms of emotional expression, or in
spiritual and religious exercises. Thus it can be very inspirational
and can build a bridge between our dream world and the world of
the everyday.
The Sun/Neptune conjunction can make us oversensitive, not
only to things that might affect the development of our identity
but also to things affecting our body. Our health is probably good
but the least trifle upsets us. Sun/Neptune Sextile; Sun/Neptune Trine When Neptune and the Sun are in harmony, a flight from harsh
reality into the dream world is probably more likely than when
they are disharmonious. Once we have withdrawn into this comforting place we are not easily disturbed. Therefore the harmonious
aspects between the Sun and Neptune can alienate us from our 124 i Aspects and Personality
associates, from the world and, if we do not keep an eye on the
boundaries of our ego, eventually from ourselves. The temptation
to dream, daydream and fantasize is very strong, and addictions can
ensnare us in spite of the apparently beneficial nature of the aspects.
Activities going on in the environment, however imperceptible
they may be to others, are plainly felt by us. Children with such
aspects can react to emotional undercurrents and can set their parents wondering whatever has made them cry.
These natives can use the harmonious Sun/Neptune aspect in
activities involving the expression of feelings (music and other
forms of artistic creativity). They can also use this aspect in work
demanding intuitive sympathy and understanding—that is to say,
in work where they can employ paranormal abilities, as a magnetic
healer or clairvoyant say, or in social work or child care. In the
latter they find it comparatively easy to enter into the child's mind,
which treats as real many things that for an adult have no reality
at all.
As with all Neptunian aspects, we have to be on our guard
against confusing fact and fancy, for this would involve us in disappointment, lying and deception (either as deceiver or deceived),
even though these are the harmonious aspects. Sun/Neptune Square; Sun/Neptune Opposition The dream and fantasy world so typical of Neptune comes very
much to the fore. As children growing up we often linger too much
in the mythical realm of fairy tales and may suffer from identity
problems.11
Inferiority feelings are not uncommon, with the result that we
"I was wondering, after translating this, whether children still inhabit their old
mythical world, when I overheard the following exchange between a very small boy
and his mother:
Boy: What's that in the field? A pigsty!
Mother: I don't see anything.
Boy: It's a magic pigsty.
Mother: Oh!
Tr. Aspects of the Sun I 125
rights. There are two sources for these inferiority feelings. The first
is Neptune's habit of fudging boundary lines, which makes it hard
for us to see where our ego begins and ends or to discover who
we are or what we want. The second is the nagging feeling that
there is something more, a feeling that another world lies behind
the world of perception, and that our individual limitations—nullity
and failure—are in sharp contrast to it. There is also the subversive
tendency of Neptune, which is continually and insidiously undermining the self-confidence bestowed by the Sun.
Our response may be devotion to some sect, belief or ideal,
in which we find (spiritual) identity and reassurance. This gives us
a cause to champion other than ourselves. Really, we are seeking
the invisible other world and are pilgrims on the spiritual path.
Conflicts over this issue can give us the needed incentive not to
stand still. In spite of many false steps, their tensions spur us on.
With Neptune we usually find ourselves on the wrong road somewhere along the line, because the planet is scarcely renowned for
practical thought. However, the person with Neptune/Sun aspects
has little interest in being matter-of-fact anyway; what he is looking
for is a place of refuge in ideas and feelings. Therefore the native
will continue searching until he finds an ideal that meets his emotional needs and stresses him as little as possible.
There is not much sense of responsibility in all this, but this
is not to say that these natives cannot learn to become more responsible. Neptunian matters such as music, poetry and other forms
of creativity have an important bearing on the conflicts, as do mysticism, metaphysics and spirituality. Sun/Neptune Inconjunct
When the natal chart contains an inconjunct between the Sun and
Neptune, we are extremely sensitive and vulnerable. We feel an
uncertainty that has an unassignable cause. For a considerable time
we are seeking the "Great Wonder" without having any idea of
what it is like or where to find it; we just know that there is a vacant
place in our emotional life.
Our sensitivity is so acute that we suffer considerable discomfort from influences radiated by others. Our being (Sun) has nothing 1261 Aspects and Personality
in common with Neptune's world, which stretches beyond the confines of the ego into the inaccessible collective. We are ever on the
run, for want of a safe place that is not being undermined. The
uncertainty can prey on our nerves, causing psychosomatic illnesses that may be hard to diagnose correctly. In this inconjunct,
Neptune can drain us of our animal spirits and render us passive
and dreamy.
Escapism is a danger, the more so as the aspect is one that
leaves us vulnerable to abuse. All unconsciously, we land ourselves
in chaotic situations—at work, at home, or in fact anywhere—until
it eventually dawns on us that we have been throwing away life and
opportunities by never settling down: we have been liquidating
each situation and have been replacing it by a newer one that will
be liquidated in turn. The risk of creating a negative spiral is obvious.
On becoming aware of this unconscious behavior, we may well
discover that the "Wonder" we are seeking is not outside but inside
us, along with the certainty and spiritual rest that the world cannot
give. Then, if we open ourselves to what is going on around us, we
shall find outselves in possession of an extremely fine instrument,
which can interpret and understand the meaning of undercurrents
and atmospheres like none other. Sun/Pluto Aspects Sun/Pluto Conjunction
When the Sun and Pluto come together in the chart, we have
problems and repressions but also an intense awareness of the
power of the life within us. We are on a permanent war footing
with ourselves, because Pluto is often threatening to resurrect forcibly from the unconscious things that are inimical to our identity
and our ego.
The conjunction puts us in touch with the depths of the personal unconscious, the place to which we banish whatever we associate with the dissolution of the conscious or, in other words,
with the death of the soul. Pluto, by exhibiting material from the Aspects of the Sun / 12/
personal unconscious, makes us terribly insecure. We hesitate to
scmtinize the hand that life has dealt us; suspecting that we hold
some pretty poor cards but not really knowing what they are. The
strain is enormous.
With this conjunction we often build around ourselves an impenetrable wall behind which we can spy on others without being
spied on in return. Therefore in certain respects a Sun/Pluto conjunction makes us unapproachable; our insecurity and anxiety cause
us to behave in a way that is fierce and harsh—but then intensity
is characteristic of every Plutonian aspect.
Nevertheless, Pluto is not a personal factor. Its roots reach
into the collective unconscious, and the fmits it bears are often
tinged with collectivity and so look indigestible to the personal
conscious. But yet our ego (Sun) can identify with the collective
and can develop a power complex bordering on megalomania—
possibly encouraged by the fact that the union of Pluto and the
ego frequently produces a magnetism strong enough to attract followers. With the Sun/Pluto conjunction we are teetering on the
edge of a precipice: we have sufficient energy to keep climbing,
but below us plummets a long drop.
Due to our inner confrontations, we are so accustomed to
provocation (notice, incidentally, how different this is from Uranus!) that we think nothing of initiating confrontations outside
us. With tremendous determination, we make a dead set at anything we dislike, especially in situations where force is a factor.
Any curtailment of our liberties by the authorities is stoutly
resisted, we brook no interference from our friends, and we refuse to kowtow to senseless taboos. We open everything up,
often running into problems by doing so but, at the same time,
giving ourselves and others an opportunity to undergo transformation.
This is by no means an easy conjunction, especially as the word
compromise does not figure in its dictionary. But although our
attitude is one of all-or-nothing, we are perfectly capable of exercising patience, quietly tensed and ready to spring into action at
the right moment. Others can be understandably nervous of us.
The Sun/Pluto conjunction can turn us into a great detective or
strategist but, if we identify too closely with the unconscious or 12HI Aspects and Personality
with intense experiences, we can tumble down a well full of difficulties. Sun/Pluto Sextile; Sun/Pluto Trine
In the harmonious aspects between Pluto and the Sun, the desire
for confrontation is just as strong as it is in the conjunction.
But owing to the harmoniousness of the link, no direct conflicts
with the environment are involved, notwithstanding the fact that,
here too, we feel things very intensely, tackle them in depth, and
are obliged to face all kinds of factors rising from the unconscious.
Uncertainty is definitely present, but expresses itself mainly as dissatisfaction with achievements. Pluto makes mountains out of molehills, and will keep digging into things for it is fundamentally
insatiable. Therefore there is a danger, even with harmonious aspects between the Sun and Pluto, that the ego will become inflated
with factors from the unconscious. What is more, even the harmonious aspects are associated with power struggles and power
complexes. However, resistance from others is more tentative than
with the hard aspects and they are less likely to venture on a collision
course with us; consequently, we are encouraged to become unyielding and very dogmatic.
Because the immediate influence of Pluto is so hard to recognize, we can do things—even with a harmonious Sun/Pluto aspect—of which we are hardly aware. For example, Pluto gives us
instinctive timing in using the right means in the right amount to
manipulate a situation or to gain control of someone; a lust for
power and supremacy being found in the harmonious aspects just
as frequently as in the disharmonious ones.
All Sun/Pluto aspects radiate energy, and this in itself makes
our influence felt by our surroundings. It is not unusual to find
leadership qualities with these aspects.
In addition, we are drawn towards the hidden and the mysterious. Therefore the aspect is helpful for detective work, (para-)
psychology, atomic research, etc. Insights due to our powers of
penetration can bring about changes in ourselves or in what we
know, and thus can have a radically transforming effect. Aspects of The Sun / 129
Sun/Pluto Square; Sun/Pluto Opposition
Much of what has been said of the conjunction between the Sun
and Pluto also applies to these two hard aspects. However, the
need for action is greater here. The impatience with rules and
regulations can be very persistent. Whether or not the career or
personal prestige suffers in the process seems to be a minor issue
in the battle between the Sun and Pluto. In any case, with these
aspects the native will often, consciously or unconsciously, bring
about far-reaching changes in his life.
The energy radiated by these aspects is great, but it is charged
with tension and can make those around feel very uneasy—which
is something that folk with a Sun/Pluto conflict would do well to
bear in mind. For even when they do not intend to be emphatic,
they like to drive their point home just in case it might be overlooked. This is the reason for the poverty of the social life with
these conflicts.
Certainly the hard aspects between the Sun and Pluto bestow
leadership qualities, but the skills of leadership do not come easily.
The native often expects too much of others, not to mention himself, and this is liable to cause fierce rows. Violence is a distinct
possibility but is by no means inevitable. The conflicts can prove
mentally wearying too: the native is inclined to hammer away, either
at himself or at others, until he gets to the heart of a problem; but
he exasperates his associates and gives himself a tough time, too.
There is a strong temptation, with the hard Sun/Pluto aspects,
to tilt at whatever life brings. The combativeness derives from
internal strife, and the open conflicts are continually engineered by
the native to make him feel that he is coping with whatever is
bothering him. The influences of the unconscious foist themselves
on him and more or less compel him to trace them to their source.
This means that he is exceptionally sensitive to tensions and weaknesses in others—he has quite a nose for such things and could
make a fine detective or psychiatrist who would never rest until he
had got to the bottom of a problem.
Since the hard aspects have much in common with the conjunction, the reader is advised to consult what has been said about
that as well. MO / Aspects and Personality
Sun/Pluto Inconjunct With the inconjunct we come to the most difficult of the aspects
between the Sun and Pluto. All the stresses common to the other
aspects are also found in the inconjunct, with the difference that
the natives suffer from constant unrest and tension without knowing
the reason why.
The inconjunct between these two planets often gives enormous ambition and a desire to remain viable at all costs. Driven by
uncertainty, the natives seem incapable of sparing themselves.
Because they are insecure they are fiercely defensive of
others but, with typical Plutonian lust for power, enjoy manipulating them too. Not only do they shelter another person under
their protection; they swathe that person in it in order to impose
themselves on him or her. They are adept at guiding a conversation
by the interjection of seemingly casual remarks, and at engineering
situations that favor their own supremacy. Obviously they can sometimes be caught in their own net, because they are only dimly
aware of what they are doing and, indeed, prefer not to think
about it. Often they half-close their eyes to what is going on
and so lose overall control. They should eventually see that a
change of tactics is required in order to end the recurrent power
struggles.
Although they have a desire to grow through confrontation,
the realization can dawn on them that they could be on a collision
course. By improving the relationship between willing and doing,
they can avoid this and release the enormous potential that is always
contained in an inconjunct. For instance, it is not unusual for these
people to undertake serious studies in such fields as those of government, the unconscious and the esoteric. SunlAscendant Aspects
Sun/Ascendant Conjunction
This aspect indicates a direct manifestation of the self in the outside
world, a presence that makes itself felt. These people radiate self- Aspects of the Sun /HI
confidence and are inclined to take the wheel in their own hands.
With a Sun/Ascendant conjunction there is an air of authority and
these natives possess leadership qualities. What they want is recognition, not someone to give orders—-they would not take kindly
to that\ They feel that they should be the ones to decide what they
do and how they do it.
Even though the Sun sign does make some difference here,
all natives enjoy compliments since compliments appear to confirm
their place in society. A strong self-centeredness often leaves others
on the sidelines, but these natives are certainly magnanimous, honest and cordial. The characteristics of the Sun show up straightforwardly in contacts. Sun/Ascendant Sextile; Sun/Ascendant Trine In harmonious aspects between the Sun and the Ascendant there
is generally no need to worry about public image. As in the conjunction, these people make a striking impression of vitality and
self-confidence-—in the trine somewhat more strongly than in the
sextile, though less strongly than in the conjunction.
Because they function so easily, they revel in making contacts;
especially social contacts that reinforce ego even though, strictly
speaking, they are not in any need of having the ego reinforced.
A harmonious Sun/Ascendant aspect is usually good at keeping a
group of people on their toes and at seeing that everything goes
according to plan.
Also, in harmonious aspects, the Sun inclines the natives to
put themselves first and to concentrate on doing the things they
find agreeable. For the most part, this turns out well, because these
people know how to conduct themselves sensibly. Sun/Ascendant Square; Sun/Ascendant Opposition
Things are not quite so easy in tense aspects between the Sun and
Ascendant. These people's influence still makes a direct impact on / 12 / Aspects and Personality
those around them, and they do have a desire to manifest in their
environment; the trouble is that they are very uncertain how to do
so. Therefore external behavior is erratic: at one moment they
sound brimful of confidence but at the next they clam up as if they
were unsure of themselves. This makes them hard to understand
and complicates relationships with people. They shrink from criticism since it feeds insecurity. Sometimes they withdraw into a shell
or hide behind others.
With the tense aspects, the ego is out of step with expectations,
and these people have difficulty in seeing how they ought to behave.
The world does not always respond to them as they think it
should—at least, not until they learn to adjust. Sun/Ascendant Inconjunct In the inconjunct between the Sun and Ascendant, self-confidence
is at its lowest ebb, yet the wish to excel is unusually great. What
complicates matters is the tremendous discrepancy between the
Sun sign and the sign on the Ascendant, which generally have little
or nothing in common. The way in which these people present
themselves to others is very different from the way in which they
would like to behave; circumstances seem to frustrate them. What
is more, the inconjunct is so disjointed that it can make them
ungainly as well as insecure, and this in itself can hamper contacts
with the environment.
Another problem is that, underneath all their uncertainties,
these people keep feeling important and may fall prey to ambition
and perfectionism which tempt them to saddle themselves with
more than they can carry-—sometimes to the point of physical
breakdown. Nevertheless, once they understand that there are two
forms of behavior open to them—that due the Ascendant and that
due the Sun—they can stop wavering and can adopt the one or the
other as the circumstances may require. Aspects of the Sun! 133 Sun/Midheaven Aspects Sun/MC Conjunction
The ego is imposing and these people are able to hold their own
in society. Because self-assurance is infectious, others take them at
face value as capable, energetic individuals—obviously a great help
when they are applying for a position.
All the same, this conjunction does have its bad side. There
is a danger that these natives shall become so smug that they make
themselves out to be better than they really are (judging by the
rest of the radix). Also they do not brook much contradiction; they
regard themselves as important and think that everyone else ought
to look up to them. This is an attitude that either stirs up opposition,
or else attracts yes-men who are too tame to stimulate them. Another possibility is self-employment or some other form of free
enterprise that leaves them responsible to no one. This powerful
position of the Sun can indicate success in life, provided they curb
the tendency to pride and arrogance. Sun/MC Sextile; Sun/MC Trine
With the harmonious aspects between the Sun and the Midheaven,
these natives strike others as forthright yet well-adjusted individuals and so make a good impression. They are seen as capable,
purposeful and energetic, and others observe a lively response
from the natives. Once again, job and other applications are favored. And when they set some goal, their balanced approach
should enable them to reach it. Others approve of the way they
fit in.
With these aspects also there is an urge to be self-reliant and
enterprising—perhaps to be one's own boss—for, whatever the
aspect between the Sun and the Midheaven, the natives always like
to hold the reins in their own hands. Normally they are very successful in this; for example as the head of some large undertaking
or, on a smaller scale, as a wife who rules the home and permeates
it with her strong personality. / W Aspects and Personality Sun/MC Square; Sun/MC Opposition
With the hard aspects the natives are in danger of wanting to
push themselves to the front in order to win (social) recognition.
Often this goes hand in hand with (unintentional) domineering
behavior.
The conscious attitude, or ego, does not match social expectations; and the motivation to become an achiever is boosted by
the resulting sense of insecurity. Therefore the natives often succeed brilliantly as captains of industry, utterly absorbed in their
work and prepared to make sacrifices for their career and prestige.
Because hard aspects are also action-packed aspects, these people
are extremely enterprising and will strive hard to overcome any
obstacles in their path.
If the chart is passive in other respects, the native will probably
try to hide away somewhere to avoid the competition that is inevitable with these aspects.
With conflicts between the Sun and the Midheaven, these natives will be compelled once or twice in life (either by some internal
impulse or by some external influence) to revise their opinions of
themselves and of their roles in society. The chances are that they
shall manage to change course without mishap. Sun/MC Inconjunct
With the tension created by the inconjunct between the Sun and
the MC these people are often very much at a loss, having no
clue to social identity and not knowing what they want to do
in the world. The result is likely to be a vacillating frame of
mind which does not make it easy for others to understand them.
Others find them hard to deal with and may even regard them as
unmanageable.
And yet they need care and attention to help them develop
self-confidence, and are very sensitive to the opinions of others.
Because they are so keen to have a role in life and a feeling of
independence, they tend to kick against any form of authority even
though they may be longing for a measure of support and guidance. Aspects of the Sun / If)
Thus they can spoil prospects and lose the chance of genuine assistance because no one knows what to make of them.
Once they realize the great difference between conscious attitude and social behavior, and that this is the source of identity
problems, these people can face life and their role in it with more
confidence. Indeed, in the light of their own experience, they
should be able to help others overcome similar difficulties. 10 Aspects
of the
Moon Moon!Mercury Aspects
Moon/Mercury Conjunction
Neither the Moon nor Mercury are noted for stability, and this
gives great liveliness and restlessness—to a degree that depends
on the sign involved. The receptivity, emotionality and impressionability of the Moon can color thinking and the way in which
these people arrange and analyze facts, also the way in which they
speak.
Quite often, in Mercury/Moon aspects, we find a capacity to
take things in easily; the Moon retains many impressions and
helps the memory, although here again the sign is the deciding
factor.
Moon/Mercury conjunction people talk or write freely about
whatever touches their emotions. They are always inclined to see
and analyze things emotionally, according to the way in which they
have been conditioned (the Moon). At the same time, they are able
to pick up the feelings of others and find they can converse with
others on their own terms. It is so easy to "get inside other people" / ■i.S' / Aspects and Personality
that problems can arise. The Moon always represents the search
for a feeling of security; and getting under someone else's skin can
rob people with that aspect of that feeling by exposing them to
alien influences. There is a danger either that they shall act a part,
or they will be changeable and fickle.
To make these people more secure, they can activate Mercury,
however, and may engage in contemplating and analyzing things or
in talking them over with others, or they can do some writing (by
keeping a diary for instance) or make up poetry. In short, these
two planets go well together and the only drawback is that they
give a double dose of restlessness. Moon/Mercury Sextile; Moon/Mercury Trine
Despite the harmonious nature of this link between the Moon and
Mercury, the restlessness inherent in each easily shows itself. This
can make it hard to concentrate on something until he or she
becomes emotionally involved in it. When this happens thinking
is both animated and intense.
With harmonious Moon/Mercury aspects the individual often
has the ability to express fluently: he or she gets meaning across
well and very quickly grasps what others mean, and this can make
for rapier sharpness in debates. The individual is very quick at
picking up facts and figures, and at putting two and two together.
And with the harmonious aspects between Mercury and the formative principle (the Moon), descriptions are clear and explicit.
The individual has an innate gift for the spoken or written word,
so this is a fine aspect for writers and journalists.
The Moon and Mercury are both very mobile. When combined
harmoniously, they impart great flexibility of mind and body. But
because they both tend to lack a sense of direction, even their
harmonious aspects may cause one to blow with the wind.
Memory and assimilation are often outstanding with these aspects. The Moon, which has so much to do with the past, with the
tried and trusted, and with the way in which one is conditioned by
upbringing, naturally builds up a store of impressions, a store that
is constantly being enriched through the inquisitiveness ofMercury. Aspects of the Moon / My
Therefore this individual is well suited to work involving data processing and the general handling of information. Moon/Mercury Square; Moon/Mercury Opposition
Restlessness is often a marked feature of hard aspects between the
Moon and Mercury. In these aspects we are always alert, not to
say nervy and tense. There is little we fail to notice, but we are
liable to suffer from sleep disorders of one kind or another because
we have such a pile of impressions to assimilate. Besides, the desire
for security (Moon) is in conflict with the urge to gather experience
and to communicate what we have found. Therefore contacts can
be frustrating: we do not feel comfortable (in keeping with the
Moon) when conversing with others (in keeping with Mercury).
This uneasiness can provoke various reactions, one of which (quite
regardless of the sign background) is chattering away nineteen to
the dozen and jumping from one subject to another—overcompensating in fact. Sometimes we run into trouble by taking too
personally what we learn.
The nerviness caused by a conflict between the Moon and
Mercury tends to preclude steady thought. We are liable to jump
to conclusions and blurt out the first thing that comes to mind
without taking the trouble to get the facts straight. Perhaps we base
what we are saying on a mass of unrelated details and fail to grasp
the general picture. Others may regard us as sometimes lacking
maturity and balance.
These aspects, too, have their creative side. Authorship is one
possibility. Owing to an insatiable curiosity we stumble, every now
and then, on unusual and unknown facts which we can turn to good
account. However, we do need to be careful not to be too hasty
in making up our minds about their significance! Due to the tension
between activities that are emotional and formative and those that
are mental, we are inclined to be dissatisfied with our performance.
We may even tear up a good piece of work because we are not
sure that it is good enough. Or else we keep going over it with a
fine-tooth comb until it gets on our nerves. All the same, these
conflicts can be very creative. 1-40 / Aspects and Personality
Moon/Mercury Inconjunct
With the inconjunct between the Moon and Mercury, we are harried by an indefinable restlessness the source of which is difficult
to locate. We feel that the way in which we marshal and communicate facts somehow obstructs our search for peace and comfort.
We need to talk but feel nervous and insecure when contacting
others. This may even have an adverse effect on health, and may
make it hard to concentrate or to perform work properly. Sometimes we simply run round in circles. It happens fairly often that,
owing to a need for emotional security, we concern ourselves with
things that are completely different from the things we would find
mentally satisfying. Uncertainty can make us inquisitive about the
lives of others. We may even resort to gossip and caustic remarks
as a defense mechanism against insecurity.
The task of making our meaning clearly understood, and indeed our general intercourse with others, can prove something of
a problem. We are not adept at expressing ourselves and run the
risk of creating the wrong impression. Failure to comprehend the
person we are addressing prevents us from emphasizing the right
things, and any interview is likely to end in confusion.
So, whenever we feel threatened, we have an irresistible impulse to fall back on the form of behavior that makes us feel safe
(Moon). But this impulse runs counter to the need to communicate
(Mercury): our lunar behavior starts interfering and the contact is
blocked. Much energy can be invested in the struggle to resolve
such situations but, once they are resolved, it can be used very
creatively. Moon/Venus Aspects Moon/Venus Conjunction
The conjunction of the Moon and Venus brings together two factors
that are each concerned with safety in its own way. This emphasizes
the need for harmony and for smooth functioning in the environment. We endeavor to cultivate a pleasant atmosphere and aim for Aspects of the Moon I If I
a balanced existence. The danger is undue avoidance of conrrontations so as to keep everything as friendly as possible, at least on
the surface—Moon/Venus aspects frequently figure in the charts
of diplomats.
What is often forgotten in interpreting these two emotional
factors is that when the Moon and Venus are conjunct or otherwise
well-aspected, the emotions are characterized by tranquility. Either
we are inwardly unruffled, or we are in the process of restoring
our equilibrium as quickly as possible. This inner sense of peace
enables us to take things as they come. The conjunction can give
balanced judgment and imperturbability; in other words, it reaches
out to affect much more than our emotional life.
Since Venus has to do with the aesthetic, a harmonious Moon/
Venus aspect (and we may count the conjunction among these) can
point to artistry and creativity. Even if we happen not to be creative,
it would be strange if we did not have some appreciation of beauty,
and hence of color, form and proportion in art; what is more, we
may indulge a taste for luxury with this aspect.
Venus is not primarily an active planet and in conjunction with
the Moon can give a certain amount of leisureliness; probably from
fear of being rushed and thrown off balance. Moon/Venus Sextile; Moon/Venus Trine
Much of what has been said about the conjunction applies here,
too. The emotional life is normally well-balanced, the attitude is
friendly and often cheerful. As might be expected, there is also a
strong desire to see things running smoothly.
Often we appeal to others as warm, affable, well-balanced,
sociable and fairly refined. We try to keep the peace because of
our dislike for quarrels and disturbances. But here, too, just as in
the conjunction, there is a tendency to avoid confrontations when
we ought to stand our ground. If, under the influence of a harmonious aspect between the Moon and Venus, we close our eyes
to things in our environment that are wrong, we are liable to become
superficial. We may do well in society and may often step in to
save the day in awkward situations, yet we may have no deep 1421 Aspects and Personality
feelings about anything—in spite of the fact that an easy aspect
between two such emotional factors should provide ideal conditions
for the emotions to flourish.
Nevertheless, artistic activities can help to regain emotional
contact with ourselves. If the rest of the horoscope indicates the
courage to deal with confrontations, then these harmonious aspects
promise a rich and balanced emotional life which will impress
others. We are level-headed, too, because we are not easily
upset.
As in any other Moon/Venus aspect, laziness and luxuriousness
are distinct possibilities. More usually, however, we just want to
see the nice, enjoyable side of life and to have our good things in
the here and now. Moon/Venus Square; Moon/Venus Opposition
In the tense aspects our need for warm, safe relationships (Venus)
conflicts with the attitude we adopt when we feel insecure (Moon).
In practice this means that we feel insecure in warm emotional
contacts even when we act with reserve. The uncertainty involving
two planets so concerned with emotional security increases a longing to be comforted and reassured. Even so, we are not clear about
what we want and the partner finds it hard to understand us. At
one moment we are full of exuberance, at the next hesitating and
diffident.
This tension can be compensated in a number of ways. Thus
we can grow excessively fond of compliments and be almost completely dependent on the affection of others. Or we can eat and
drink the tension away (Venus gives a liking for delicacies). Or we
can flit from one lover to another, preyed on by the thought that
we may not yet have found the right partner.
In a man's chart, the Moon and Venus provide information
about his female soul-image. Thus, in hard aspects, his expectation
pattern in regard to his partner is not consistent with her true
nature. Where a woman is concerned, the problem usually centers
on her own femininity and the way in which she experiences it. At
the same time, people with Moon/Venus conflicts can radiate sex
appeal. Aspects of the Moon / 141
Laziness is a possible form of overcompensation in these aspects—though it occurs less frequently than in the easy ones—and
creativity and artistry are definitely present. Moon/Venus Inconjunct
The inconjunct between two planets so influential on the emotions
makes our emotions very uncertain. Not infrequently, with this
aspect, we have an almost insatiable longing for warmth from the
environment; more than anything else, we would like to be appreciated, and we feel very insecure when this does not seem to be
the case. We are continually walking on tiptoe so as not to disturb
others; and we spoil our own prospects by doing so. Our willingness
to compromise in this respect is far too great.
The behavior that makes us feel safe (Moon) is so alien to the
behavior we adopt in our contacts with others (Venus) that we fail
to comprehend these different sides of ourselves, and we are happy
with neither. We are plagued by feelings of not being able to function emotionally or in our contacts, and this gives rise to a sense
of inferiority. Our mostly half-conscious agitation is with us whenever we have to deal with people; and it undermines us in all our
contacts, try as we will to hide it behind a friendly and obliging front.
But if we learn to accept the existence of these two completely
dissimilar needs, each of which is trying to assert itself, we shall
lose much of our insecurity and shall be able to use the inconjunct
in a calmer and more creative manner. What we should realize is
that, by refusing every now and then to take things lying down, we
do not immediately forfeit all affection from others but, on the
contrary, can gain respect. Moon/Mars Aspects Moon/Mars Conjunction
When security-minded behavior (Moon) fuses with the extremely
energetic, fierce and executive Mars, there is a good chance that
in doubtful situations we shall make it our business to go on the l-j-l t Aspects and Personality
offensive in an impatient and quick-tempered, but also brave and
enterprising fashion. The speed of reaction that is virtually automatic in this lunar aspect may cause ruptures. Language is often
forcible and generally we do not stop to think what we are saying.
Once we have had our say annoyance is soon a thing of the past,
but the consequences of plain speaking can follow us for a long time.
A good way to let off steam is physical activity; in a word,
sport—preferably highly competitive sport, for Mars favors ambitious loners more than team players. The Moon/Mars conjunction
makes a tough fighter, even though sometimes the combativeness
is more of the mind than of the body. When contending with
someone with a Mars/Moon conjunction, one should be aware that
the antagonist has tremendous resilience. For Mars does not rule
the idler, and the person whose Mars is conjunct the Moon will
battle away without thinking too much about the odds.
The fighting spirit of a Moon/Mars conjunction finds a useful
outlet in pioneers and in champions of various ideas. The ideas
need not be reformist (or Uranus would be involved), but to be
worth defending the native must feel they belong to him.
The aggressiveness and defensiveness of this conjunction must
not be confused with militarism. The native has little patience with
the strict regimentation of the armed forces; he is and remains a
free spirit. Moon/Mars Sextile; Moon/Mars Trine
Even the harmonious aspects between the Moon and Mars indicate
great application, executive ability and energy. They also confer
the fierceness and quick temper of the conjunction. The love of
liberty is great in the sense that we will not think twice about
defending our right to do whatever we most enjoy doing. We soon
get our dander up over anything that irks us, no matter what others
might think. On the other hand, we show elation when we feel
fine, again regardless of whether it is the right time to do so. With
Moon/Mars aspects we are liable to put our own interests first,
though not necessarily with any evil intent. We are not easily
thwarted and are sometimes startlingly blunt and tactless. Aspects of the Moon / 145
Although these are harmonious aspects, the rashness of Mars
is still very much in evidence. We are both bold and reckless.
Pioneering and launching fresh projects are in our blood.
With Moon/Mars aspects, we do best when working on our
own. The harmonious aspects make us good self-starters. Here
again, sporting and similar activities are splendid for shedding surplus energy.
A woman with such an aspect is often a bit mannish and would
adapt well to military life. A man with such an aspect will feel
himself drawn to rather belligerent women. Moon/Mars Square; Moon/Mars Opposition
Hard aspects between the Moon and Mars give a sizable dose of
unrest. The influence of the Moon, which we so desperately need
to make us feel comfortable, is rendered less reassuring by the
Martian rashness, dynamism and unrest. It is difficult to use energy
evenly, and we are liable to act on impulse. Therefore this is counted
as one of the accident-prone aspects. We can harm ourselves
through lack of forethought. The harm need not be physical, although this is certainly a possibility. We can also spoil relationships
with other people. That is to say, due to the tension we are far too
eager to make our presence felt. Self-control is definitely not our
strongest point because our energy is sporadic and is therefore hard
to manage.
Feelings of insecurity can make us very pugnacious; so that,
whenever the emotional temperature rises, we sometimes react too
angrily, aggressively or sarcastically.
In athletics, we are inclined to overdo things and are probably
best suited to sports like fencing, boxing and judo or to sports
which test our endurance.
There can be a certain amount of friction between the sexes:
a woman with such an aspect is likely (often without quite realizing
what she is doing) to become unusually dominant over her husband,
by giving him regular tongue-lashings or (if the rest of the chart
points in that direction) by flying at him in a rage every now and
then. A man with one of these aspects is liable to arouse the interest /46/ Aspects and Personality
of a fierce, aggressive woman, or to have an independent-minded
partner who insists on going her own way. Moon/Mars Inconjunct
Without knowing why, people with this aspect are easily hurt and
offended. They are very touchy and need little provocation before
they blow up. Anyhow, whatever the reason, they are certainly
suffering from tension charged with aggression. Lack of foresight
is another feature of the aspect—and not only on the physical plane.
Even in associations with others they are inclined to respond much
too quickly and unthinkingly simply because feelings have been
aroused. Therefore they run the risk of being manipulated emotionally and of allowing themselves to be turned against people.
They react indignantly because they fail to see situations in their
true light.
With this aspect, these people are quite capable of standing
up for friends, but self-defensiveness gives them problems. One
moment they are unnecessarily fierce owing to insecurity and the
next moment they back off without striking a blow. All the aggressive tension tucked away inside makes them nervous of their
own behavior and so they swing from one extreme to the other.
Whenever Mars is activated, the inconjunct creates insecurity because the Moon—which normally gives a feeling of safety—usually
fails to come to terms with the Martian energy.
If they learn to control the Martian energy, then, just as in
other Moon/Mars aspects, it can be utilized in work, sport and
other demanding activities. By refusing to allow themselves to be
tossed from pillar to post, they can develop greater self-reliance. Moon/Jupiter
Moon/Jupiter Aspects Conjunction Here the optimism and jovial expansiveness of Jupiter enters into
the way one looks for a sense of security (Moon). Generally it
makes one very optimistic, keeping to the sunny side of life, en- Aspects of the Moon / 147
joying pleasure and panache, and liking to see things from a humorous angle. This is a frame of mind that helps overcome disease,
and enables one to put fresh heart into companions whenever they
are dispirited.
Now Jupiter always prompts one to seek a synthesis and to
turn the gaze to far horizons. Therefore with this conjunction one
wants to know the significance of events. The combination with
the Moon gives a keen interest in foreign nations, other cultures,
religious and educational questions, medical matters and so forth.
The individual may be really down in the dumps but, with this
aspect in the chart, can easily regain balance and a sense of perspective. Often one has a presentiment of what is about to happen
and, by taking advantage of this, gains a reputation for being lucky.
Anyhow, one is always ready for a small gamble. To gain satisfaction
one is inclined to express the Jovian aspect fairly positively in the
environment; hence one is always prepared to wade in with advice
and practical assistance, even when help has not been requested.
This person can be very generous in support of others. However,
if the conjunction is overemphasized in the chart, one may become
snobbish and opinionated—yet even then the person manages to
do things in style.
The risk of going too far is inherent in each one of Jupiter's
aspects, so it need occasion no surprise to find it in the conjunction,
the most powerful of them all. Moon/Jupiter Sextile; Moon/Jupiter Trine
The harmonious aspects between the Moon and Jupiter give inner
harmony and optimism and, for the most part, outer composure.
This person is usually so confident that everything will turn out
right that he or she attracts the good fortune in which he or she
believes. Not for nothing does the tradition reckon these aspects
as extremely beneficial.
These two aspects are likely to give a large dose of self-reliance
and, even if there are no indications of self-reliance anywhere else
in the chart, this person can count on reserves of inner strength.
Whenever one retires into Moon-governed behavior, and tries
to achieve a state of serene equilibrium, the aspect to Jupiter will / 4SI Aspects and Personality
quickly come to one's aid. This person is able to remain optimistic
even in the face of hardship and tragedy, being a person who has
a fairly wide outlook, who finds comfort in religious or metaphysical
beliefs and who is able to review situations sensibly.
Treatment of others is usually good simply because of optimism and cordiality. With these aspects one is reasonably adaptable.
A social worker, physician or psychiatrist can often start patients on the road to recovery by his or her attitude alone; so the
harmonious Moon/Jupiter aspects are splendid for this kind of career. The help given to others will always be prompted by a certain
vision—either social (social conscience, idealism or a sense of justice) or transcendental (religious or metaphysical).
These are two aspects from which one can derive considerable
support but, since they arouse little opposition, one runs the risk
of becoming lax or indolent. Also one must take care not to place
oneself on a pedestal. Moon/Jupiter Square; Moon/Jupiter Opposition
Tense aspects between the Moon and Jupiter share the optimism
of the easy aspects. The difference is that here the expansiveness
of Jupiter may also provide problems. The emphasis and occasional
exaggeration given by the conjunction and by the harmonious aspects can become excessive and go too far when the aspects are
discordant; these natives find it hard to coordinate the energies of
the two planets.
Therefore, these people can be cheery and big-hearted but
can also become too puffed up and condescending because it
makes them feel safe (Moon) to preen about having better social
standing than others. Opinionatedness and, not seldom, a certain
degree of lawlessness, are other possibilities. They may behave
recklessly, throw good advice to the wind, gamble too much, or
fling money about (maybe just because they want to be one of the
jet set).
But likewise they can become fascinated by some teaching or
philosophy of life and can enter into it heart and soul. This can
prove very beneficial: to them because it fulfills an inner need, or Aspects of the Moon / /4y
to others because they actively stimulate them. But there is always
a chance that they may fail to find the right spiritual home and may
become entangled in some sect or system of ideas that is not congenial.
The hard aspects between the Moon and Jupiter frequently
make people restless. Occasionally laziness is associated with these
aspects, but only when the rest of the chart indicates passivity.
Normally these folk are inclined to take on too much and to live
life at such a pace that it leaves them breathless; not that this
prevents them from getting the ball rolling by a positive approach
or from drawing others along in their wake. In fact, they may need
to be on guard not to injure their health. Moon/Jupiter Inconjunct As soon as these people try to feel emotionally secure (Moon), the
inconjunct with Jupiter confronts them with great insecurity due
to a need for expansion. There are all sorts of things they want to
do, but they are plagued by a vague sense that there is something
missing in life although they are unable to say what it is. Consequently they start looking for it in things outside themselves; or
become withdrawn because of a gnawing feeling that there must
be something more to life and they suspect that, whatever this
something is, it is probably beyond their reach.
The search for other things can take place on any one of a
number of planes. Perhaps they immerse themselves in Jovian matters such as religion, philosophy, foreign affairs, foreign travel, etc.,
always with the object of discovering deeper values; or they are
constantly on the lookout for material possessions, yet never enjoy
them since they don't know what they do want. Because they are
looking for something outside themselves, they can also grow envious and long to have what others have simply because it appears
that these things are making others happy. Then again, dissatisfaction can make them overeat or run to some other form of
excess.
However, once they realize that all this searching is being
caused by an unnecessary sense of insecurity, they can develop the
Jupiter factor with greater assurance. Self-confidence, generosity Aspects and Pirwiiuht]
and the desire to help and protect can then come to the tore; and
they may find that they have the ability to become good therapists
or, drawing on experience, may find they can counsel others in
whom they recognize the familiar feelings of insecurity. Moon/Saturn Aspects Moon/Saturn Conjunction
Whenever unconscious emotional reactions occur (Moon), people
with this aspect experience sensitivity and vulnerability and find it
hard to express themselves. Emotional reserve is common with this
aspect.
The sense of security is bound up with Saturn and so these
people are inclined to shoulder too much responsibility, work hard
and deny themselves many small pleasures. They seek safety in
perfectionism and the world regards them as very trustworthy and
diligent; yet inwardly they are unsure and easily hurt and, to tell
the truth, are more or less running away from themselves.
They are inclined to restrict themselves to what they see and
know. Therefore, when opportunities present themselves, these
individuals either let them slip through their fingers or study all
the ins and outs before committing themselves. This goes along
with rigid ideas and a certain blinkering of the mental vision. Flexibility is slight, owing mainly to a great vulnerability of which others
are ignorant. They anxiously hide this vulnerability behind a mask
of hard work or, if the chart is passive, behind a mask of gloom
and inertia that is hard to penetrate.
Often they feel that they are living under constant pressure
and dare not do anything spontaneous. Before showing feelings
they need to make very sure of the other person, and that can take
a long time. The cold aloofness of this aspect is a form of selfprotection. Nevertheless Saturn gives almost unbreakable faithfulness and dependability once someone has won them over; then
it would be impossible to think of a more stable relationship. Before
that point is reached, however, a host of inhibitions, fears, suspicions and sensitive feelings is waiting to be vanquished. Aspects of the Moon / 151
Moon/Saturn Sextile; Moon/Saturn Trine
Even harmonious aspects between the Moon and Saturn give a
feeling of vulnerability, and are associated with soberness, industry
and the acceptance of responsibility. Again, expressing emotions
does not come easy and these people like to put on a front of selfdiscipline, etiquette and respectability. They are admired for an
ability to remain calm and collected in all circumstances, yet inside
are full of doubts and fears.
Harmonious Moon/Saturn aspects usually indicate a serious
outlook and a practical approach to things. This, combined with
the determination to finish everything they start (due to a highly
developed sense of responsibility), can take them far in society. But emotionally they have problems; children with these
(and other) Moon/Saturn aspects are never really young and
playful. They frequently form friendships with older boys and
girls.
Women with Moon/Sarurn aspects have difficulty in expressing femininity, even when the aspect is harmonious. This can
increase emotional insecurity and/or make them behave in a forceful, mannish way, or else in a motherly, organizing way. They find
emotional fulfillment by being in charge; although, even with a
harmonious aspect, loved ones are kept at arm's length to some
extent.
Men with one of these aspects tend to be attracted by women
of the Saturnine type; that is to say, they prefer partners who are
rather older and more mature—certainly not women who are
sprightly and playful.
People with harmonious Moon/Saturn aspects can often be
very constructive within an existing framework. The Moon and
Saturn are always the two main form-givers: the Moon of formed
content and Saturn of the structure and backbone of external form.
When something has to be enlarged, structurally improved and
preserved, those with harmonious Moon/Saturn aspects are in their
element. They are not required to display initiative, which we would
have to look for in other chart factors anyway. / / Aspects and Personality Moon/Saturn Square; Moon/Saturn Opposition
Tense aspects draw attention more strongly to vulnerable aspects
of a personality. When people have the hard aspects, each time
they look for comfort and safety (Moon), they are inevitably confronted with their weaknesses, fears, and uncertainties (Saturn).
Emotional inhibitions and difficulties with emotional expression are
quite common under these aspects. These people struggle with a
sense of loneliness and often with an inferiority complex as well.
Anxiety and possibly mistrust will affect behavior. They take
a rather gloomy view of everything, preferring to expect the worst
because then the unexpected will always be an improvement; and,
in fact, are particularly prone to do so where the emotional world
(Moon) and the need for security are concerned.
For women, these are difficult aspects. Their femininity is not
easy for them to handle. Even though many can create the impression of being superwomen, they lack inner composure. Another
mode of expression is very mannish behavior. Saturn's hard aspects
can lead to extremes.
Self-control is considerable with these aspects, also the capacity
for hard work, self-discipline and level-headedness. People with
conflicts between the Moon and Saturn can be very creative in
fashioning things. Their inferiority feelings, and their fears that what
they make will never be perfect, are likely to haunt them to some
extent; but they can produce first-class work once they set their
minds to it. Although these are active aspects (which the tense
aspects always are), Saturn can be so inhibitive that either the natives' activities are paralyzed at the very beginning or they avoid
spreading their interests. Given their sensitivity, they cannot afford
to risk making too many mistakes. Shyness is common in these
aspects, while the persistent search for some ideal form in which
to express themselves makes them initially impractical and inefficient: owing to uncertainty they try their hand at all sorts of things
when they are young, being unable to settle down anywhere. Dread
of the unknown can keep them static and clinging to pet ideas;
therefore they strike others as hard and unbending.
However, once these people have made the effort to break
out of their hard shells they will be all the tougher for the experience, well equipped to patiently withstand the adversities life may
bring, and work successfully under the most trying circumstances. Aspects of the Moon / / 5 ■j
For durability and staying power are Saturn's good side, which falls
within their reach once we have come to terms with it. Moon/Saturn Inconjunct
When the search for security (Moon) is linked by an inconjunct
with the sensitive area formed by Saturn, the native will time and
again be assailed by extreme uncertainty when looking for certainty,
yet without knowing the underlying reason. He or she has the
impression that something is hanging over his or her head, or that
he/she is unable to achieve something, or else is plagued by all
sorts of guilt and anxiety feelings that seem to emerge from nowhere. Whatever the case, whenever this person is on the point of
finding a safe niche, a feeling of uneasiness arises and this serves
to intensify a need for emotional security—a need that can express
itself in countless ways.
One extreme occurs when he or she keeps slaving away for
others so that they will give rewards of support and approval. But
this no more removes the sense of insecurity than does the other
extreme, when the person is cold and withdrawn for fear that exposure to possible adverse reactions might rock his or her shaky
foundation.
Characteristics such as sobriety and industry and the like are
also found in the inconjunct; these offset the difficulty of emotional
expression. And when this person learns that emotion and anxiety
need not go hand in hand, the conviction can grow that restraint
and security are not really inimical to one another. When he or she
realizes that he/she possesses a soundly based inner security, he or
she is then in fine position to help others who are emotionally
vulnerable to overcome their problems. Moon/Uranus Aspects Moon/Uranus Conjunction
We can not expect much tranquility from a Moon/Uranus conjunction, since the restless, original, sparkling and fickle Uranus is
indissolubly bound to the longing for security. These people will / 5^ / Aspects and Personality
not know ordinary security, but that need not pose any problems.
They find reassurance by expressing themselves in an individual
and unconventional manner. They feel at home with this form of
behavior in spite of the fact that it can lead to occasional clashes
with those around them.
Certainly, great tension accompanied by alertness and restlessness are observable in the conjunction; these people are also
nervy, irritable and quick-tempered. They like to rush into everything at once, and especially into whatever is unorthodox. In fact
there is a temptation to be provocative with this aspect.
Changeable and capricious though they may be with a Moon/
Uranus conjunction, they can also keep to their chosen course with
grim determination. If they are completely sold on an idea, Uranus
makes them easily annoyed by criticism, and they cling to the idea
all the more obstinately. This apparent discrepancy (changeability
and a taste for the unusual being combined with mulishness) is
encountered in all Moon/Uranus aspects. In particular, the inability
of the Moon/Uranus conjunction to adapt to the environment can
only serve to reinforce their intractability.
Inner stability is not a strong point and, owing to the tremendous impulsiveness of Uranus—which is coupled here with a very
unconscious and variable lunar influence—they tend to be accident
prone. Also, with this aspect, brusqueness needs curbing. And yet,
with the self-same aspect, these people can retrieve some situation
in an unexpected way by striking out on a new path; for it seems
that change (and sometimes even radical change) is the watchword. Moon/Uranus Sextile; Moon/Uranus Trine
In the harmonious aspects you'll see a great need for freedom and
the chance to develop, and usually this need will make itself well
and truly felt. These people have an enormous desire for change,
renewal, for breaking established patterns, or crossing demarcation
lines.
Every time they revert to Moon behavior or, in other words,
to a search for peace and safety, Uranus springs into action, and
the planet, although intervening harmoniously, does tend to make
them restless and impulsive. In breaking free they may also want Aspects of the Moon / / 5 5
to be unconventional, and interests may include astrology or esotericism, subjects which lie outside the present scientific worldpicture. Of course, by no means everyone with strong Uranian
aspects will become an astrologer, but they will probably be interested in something pioneering—say in some innovative branch of
technology like radar.
Once they have found an interest, then they can throw themselves into it heart and soul. They become absorbed in each new
bright idea. Not all of these are likely to be usable, but that's not
important; what matters is that the idea interests them intensely,
and they have scant patience with the comments or criticisms of
others. These people always give full rein to individuality and act
according to what they think at the time. Possibly they shall bring
about reforms in society but these attitudes can also isolate them.
Not for nothing is Uranus called an eccentric, solitary planet; and
Uranians feel compelled to push themselves forward in order to
express their individuality although, incidentally, they would be
scandalized at the suggestion that they were being egotistic or selfcentered.
With harmonious Moon/Uranus aspects people feel at home
wherever they can manage to be themselves. But when restricted,
the destructive side of Uranus shows up, harmonious aspect or no
harmonious aspect, and reactions can be very uncertain and even
unpredictable. Moon/Uranus Square; Moon/Uranus Opposition
Tense aspects between the Moon and Uranus give restlessness and
a scarcely controllable urge to be provocative. Something inside
these people drives them from one new thing to another and they
have little security and little rest. Feelings are taut and they react
sharply, sarcastically, or perhaps in an overwrought way to certain
situations, but never completely normally.
These people are impulsive and easily irritated with these aspects, which is why, like the conjunction, the aspects are said to
be indicative of divorce and broken friendships. But acceptance of
the mutability of things gives these people the strength of mind to
walk away from the wreck of their world in order to start afresh. I 56 / Aspects and Personality
Sometimes the urge to demolish is so powerful that when things
have been quiet too long, they deliberately stir up trouble and try
to get some action: they are so in need of variety and new stimuli.
Often there is an extraordinary ingenuity with these hard aspects, which are freer in regard to new form than the harmonious
aspects and the conjunction are. The hard aspects keep impelling
these people to sample new things and give a measure of flexibility
due to their great unrest and tension. Nevertheless, with these
aspects, some espouse or oppose a cause just as resolutely as others
would with one of the other Moon/Uranus aspects.
Emotional problems are only to be expected. The lack of stability and love of change sometimes attracts to them people who
themselves are inconstant, not to say unstable, in their reactions.
Fickleness will tend to repel people of regular habits (the boring
old stick-in-the-muds as some may think of them) and leave them
with relationships that do not run too smoothly. Moon/Uranus Inconjunct At the same time as these people look for peace and security
(Moon), they are somehow confronted with the opposite (Uranus).
The harder they work to achieve an atmosphere of calmness and
confidence, the more inclined they are to throw a spanner in the
works by sudden uncontrolled outbursts or by creating such tension
that others shrink back from them. Also they can adopt a very
independent and provocative attitude in order to be themselves;
yet, even so, they do not feel comfortable and remain a prey to
gnawing uncertainty.
With this rather elusive hard aspect, these people are often
extremely restless and are forever seeking new ways of making
good. The urge to cross boundaries and to be original play a big,
if generally unconscious, role here. If only they would look back
on what they have already achieved, they might be struck by how
resourceful and creative they can be: frequently coming up with
the most unusual solutions—which work well more often than not.
Skill and sudden insight are characteristics of this aspect, but these
people are unaware that they possess them and therefore have little
confidence in themselves. Owing to this lack of self-confidence they Aspects of the Moon / / 5 7
do not take kindly to interference from others or to being told
what to do. By way of overcompensation they can even adopt an
"I know best" attitude.
Once they realize that uncertainty is not inevitable and that
the need to be original and individual has a different aim from the
need for security, they can achieve much with their inventive-creative way of doing things and with their unusual interests. Moon/Neptune Aspects Moon/Neptune Conjunction
When the sensitive and security-seeking Moon teams up with the
refining and disassociating Neptune, there is great susceptibility to
undercurrents in the environment. Moods can change not for emotional reasons but because the person is picking up certain vibrations—usually without being consciously aware of them.
Because it knows no set limits, Neptune intensifies the changeability of the Moon. Therefore, with a Moon/Neptune conjunction,
the individual repeatedly finds uncertain behavior, overcharged
emotions and so on. Emotional reactions at one moment can be
the complete opposite to what they were the previous moment.
Neptune slips easily past every barrier and it can be easily
followed into a vivid dream and fantasy world, which seems like
another reality offering greater security than that offered by the
world of everyday life. The result is a fertile imagination, great
powers of contemplation and a fondness for daydreams; also the
danger that one may reach a point where one is unable to tell the
difference between dreams and reality. Nevertheless, one can use
a sense of the fantastic to give an extra dimension to creative works
of music, painting or poetry, say.
Neptune often encourages an interest in religious and spiritual
values, and the Moon can associate this interest with a search for
security. Some may take up the study of metaphysics,12 for in order
'2As most readers will be aware, the primary meaning of metaphysics is speculative
philosophy (after Aristotle's Metaphysics), but occult "success techniques" seem to
be meant here. Tr. / \S' / Aspects and Personality
to feel safe one tries to create a firm base in the environment. There
is always something imaginative about the Moon/Neptune conjunction. Moon/Neptune Sextile; Moon/Neptune Trine
Even when the Moon and Neptune are in harmony, they still give
sensitivity, great fantasy, and introversion. For the effect of Neptune is to make it hard to see where anything begins or ends. The
sole difference between the easy aspects and the conjunction is
that with the former there seems to be more stability, selfexpression is easier, and the native is more readily understood by
others.
Not seldom he manages (quite unintentionally) to make use
of his sensitivity to undercurrents in the environment and in society.
Deep down he will detect that "something is going on" even if he
is not overtly aware of it. What he decides and does will be modified
accordingly: he will go where he gets plenty of cooperation and
will instinctively follow the latest trends. Therefore, although in
principle Neptune has little to do with the material world, the
aspects can be advantageous and can promote social and business
success. Yet when he is enjoying prosperity the native is unable to
say how it has come about.
Spiritual and religious interests are commonly present in the
harmonious aspects, too, and the open-endedness of Neptune can
give an insatiable hunger for these things. The person can be extremely idealistic and religious, but is in danger of overenthusiasm
and failure to preserve a sense of proportion.
As with the other Moon/Neptune aspects, the native can do
a great deal of creative work, or can develop a fine insight into the
creations of others. He senses references and atmospheres, and has
a greater appreciation of the emotional world enshrined in, say, a
painting than would be gained by analyzing each brush stroke.
As I have already said, the harmonious Moon/Neptune aspects
impart a great need for a personal dream-world. Now, because the
person with these aspects finds little to distract him externally, he
must be careful to avoid absorption by this inner world. Aspects of the Moon / / '> Mercúrio Moon/Neptune Square; Moon/Neptune Opposition
The significance belonging to Moon/Neptune aspects generally also
belongs to the hard aspects in particular, but it is not very easy to
come to terms with this energy. There are problems. For one thing,
we are oversensitive; for whenever the Moon influences us to look
for safety we experience a vague but unmistakable uneasiness because of the undermining, blurring effect of Neptune. Naturally,
we tend to lose confidence instead of gaining it. Several unfortunate
things may occur. For example, a longing for reassurance may make
us too self-sacrificing. Or we may misinterpret other people's feelings—a common occurrence with these hard aspects—and fail to
respond appropriately. Often we invite disillusionment, due perhaps to some infatuation; simply because we imagine everything to
be more beautiful than it is, as if it were part of a storybook world.
Or, by taking things the wrong way, we may sometimes appear to
be deliberately manipulative and full of intrigue.
Neptune's hard aspects are supposed to be typical of cheats
and swindlers. However, the astrologer should not forget that the
reason for the bad behavior lies mainly in defective subconscious
perceptions or emotions. Therefore we ought not to assume that
the native is out to deceive us. In fact the effect can be more droll
than sinister; and the native's Neptunian fantasizing can make
events so bright and colorful to him that he revels in things that
have not really happened. Needless to say, these aspects can be
accompanied by great creativity in art and handicrafts.
Religious and spiritual interests play a part, as in all Neptune's
aspects. The native is continually searching, since he is very active
on the Neptunian plane. With the tense aspects, he can arouse a
certain amount of opposition from those around him, but this can
be extremely stimulating as it can promote his spiritual growth. Moon/Neptune Inconjunct
In the inconjunct, we seldom understand why we are so sensitive
and vulnerable. We feel that something is wrong somewhere, but
exactly what it is escapes us. In general, we feel very insecure and
ill at ease and tend, perhaps more than we would like, to pick up !()() / Aspects and Personality
emotional trends in our environment and to reflect them as if they
emanated from us. This hardly improves our rather poor self-image.
Neptune spoils endeavors whenever we look for security
(Moon), yet, because the forms of behavior represented by Neptune and the Moon have such different objectives, we often fail to
understand the problems. In many areas there is often a sense of
having no grip on ourselves or a sense of inferiority; and this can
result in shyness, or in the need to be subservient, and we may be
prepared to be completely self-sacrificing.
In relationships, people with the Moon inconjunct Neptune
can so idealize the partner that they doom themselves to eventual
disillusionment. Often they experience difficulty in finding the right
partner and, anyway, they are so vulnerable, and so incapable of
being satisfied owing to Neptune's lack of fixed boundaries, that
few partners could cope with them (which is also to some extent
true of the other Moon/Neptune aspects).
The inconjunct can make these natives over-eager to see things
from the other person's point of view. (Unconscious) identification
with others can damage self-reliance, but does give them the empathy needed for social and welfare work. As in all Moon/Neptune
aspects, originality and artistry are great. Once they realize that
self-doubt has no basis, they can invest sensitiveness in outstanding
service and creativity. Moon/Pluto
Moon/Pluto Aspects Conjunction The conjunction of these two factors has a very intense effect. At
the same time as we are looking for security and adopting an attitude
in which we hope to feel safe (Moon), we are confronted by the
very thing from which we are trying to escape or by some other
bugbear from the unconscious. Since Pluto represents endeavors
to hold our own by gaining control of situations, a sense of safety
will be ours only when we know that we are in command. Whenever
we feel we are not, we can lash out fiercely or wait for a chance to
seize the helm again. Because the confrontation with repressed and
unconscious factors makes us inwardly insecure and compels us to Aspects of The Moon / 161
do something, we can expect to be involved in some pretty vigorous
action sooner or later.
The confrontation this conjunction brings about berween the
natives and their hidden insecurity is likely to make them bottle
up feelings in public. But they have an intense need for emotional
contact; and this, combined with a power urge, can cause them to
be motherly and protective, the danger being that they may turn
tyrant and force loved ones to obey.
Intensity is the keyword of Moon/Pluto aspects. The Moon
is highly charged by Pluto, which enhances its influence. This is
why these natives can be so emotionally fierce and demanding.
An ordinary relationship does not satisfy: they insist on much
more than that. They want depth and intrigue. With the Moon/
Pluto conjunction, the grip will tighten on partners until they
have wrung the secrets out. By the same token, this is a good aspect for researchers, (para)psychologists and the like. But the natives must take care not to be misled by feelings—an ever-present
danger. Moon/Pluto Sextile; Moon/Pluto Trine
Whatever holds good for the conjunction also holds good for these
aspects. There is the same uncertainty and craving for power. The
emotional life is no less intense, and there is an equal inclination
to banish uncertainty and to satisfy the power-drive by adopting a
"big mother" role.
And then, no sooner have we settled down with a comfortable
sense of security (Moon) than we start fishing around in the hidden
and repressed contents of the psyche, and not only into these but
into those of the psyches of others. We are not satisfied with superficial investigation; we dig deep. Anything hidden engrosses us
and we find an almost magical attraction in unsolved riddles, mysterious old civilizations, the world beneath the ocean and the deeper
layers of the mind. It does not take much for our interest to be
aroused in such things.
All our digging around frequently gives us a hold on others.
Often with Pluto's aspects we impress people as being trenchant
and powerful, and are therefore unlikely to encounter open op- / (ij Aspects and Personality position; but this does not mean that we are always in the right.
Pluto is a factor that can really distort and above all inflate and,
with Moon/Pluto aspects, we so want to indulge our emotional life
that deforming elements creep into it or nonpersonal elements from
the unconscious puff us up in a way harmful to genuine emotional
relationships. Usually, by introspection, we can find out where we
are wrong, but care is needed.
Fear of confrontation is not a normal feature of this aspect—
we are much too inquisitive concerning the backgrounds and motives of others to worry about what they will think of us. We try
to fathom them out in a more or less subtle way, but are very
reticent about our own concerns because we have no intention of
letting others obtain any leverage on us. In many cases we take
command by a show of authority.
Through all our digging around, and through constant contact
with our own psychological depths, we can undergo a profound
inner change. With the harmonious aspects the transformation occurs fairly smoothly, although none of Pluto's aspects are completely trouble-free. Moon/Pluto Square; Moon/Pluto Opposition
The hard Moon/Pluto aspects have very intense and forceful forms
of expression. Whenever we look for security, we have a painful
sense of insecurity. All kinds of unconscious and repressed contents
obtrude themselves or, at any rate, affect the emotional health, and
this is very unsettling.
More strongly than we would with the harmonious aspects,
we feel impelled to ferret out whatever is hidden, to discover the
source of things; and often we run up against very deep problems
in ourselves and others. Since the hard aspects activate us, we feel
impelled to do something. We may want to be maternal, but without
having to expose our feelings—like a kind of mother superior. In
everyday life, this aspect can express itself, for example, in the
desire to accept, help and emotionally support everyone, while
perhaps being very stoical and self-denying.
There is also a penchant for breaking taboos of every kind.
Taboos always restrict freedom of action, or so we believe. Trans- Aspects of the Moon / 163
forming Pluto makes us want to do away with limitations in order
to rule the situation ourselves. Like the aspects of Uranus, these
aspects have something provocative about them, but in a more
subtle way. We oscillate between inferiority and superiority feelings, and this turns us into restless seekers. We are not very easy
to get along with in our emotional contacts: although we may be
utterly devoted to someone, we can be equally demanding. Pluto
is never satisfied! Probably the search will extend to the impersonal
realm of mystery, the esoteric, the veiled and the invisible. It is
possible for us to travel very far in this realm.
We can get people's backs up with our endless demands, and
sometimes with our over-direct (even brazen) interest. Folk feel
spied on and manipulated; yet we can benefit from our hassles with
them, which give us insight into our own behavior as well as that
of others and also teach us about how we interact. Moon/Pluto Inconjunct None of the Moon/Pluto aspects seem to be very restful; confrontations and unsettledness are the order of the day. Nor are things
much different with the inconjunct, except that the tension and
unrest are experienced as a latent sense of discomfort and an impulse to keep seeking. Emotionally we can be extremely tensed up
and uncomfortable without knowing why. We tend to mistrust our
feelings: because we are unable to identify any inner cause of insecurity, we are inclined to look for one outside ourselves in our
loved ones, and sometimes feel they are being unnecessarily difficult.
Usually, because the Moon has so little in common with Pluto
here, we do not realize that we are expressing Pluto's power drive
or that we are being unpleasantly manipulative at times, and so we
can be puzzled by the reactions of others. Our inclination is to treat
their behavior as incomprehensible.
All this encourages further digging and probing, so that here
is a further aspect between the Moon and Pluto in which things
hidden are of interest. We seek the essence of everything and try
to get at it—an enterprise doomed to failure, although compulsive
searching may in fact give us greater depth. Emotional relationships /6-/ / Aspects and Personality
are often strained. We ask a great deal from our companions and
from those who care for us, and so we can easily repel them; besides,
tt adds insult to injury that we seem to have no compunction about
being so demanding. Our emotional reactions are often a mixture
of playing at hide-and-seek, uncertainty, not knowing how to react,
and difficulty in expressing feelings.
However, we come to see that Pluto's confrontations have their
value and that we need not always be undermined by them. Then
we can undergo an enormous transformation (often through a crisis)
and can give shape to the positive side of this aspect in all kinds
of ways. Moon!Ascendant Aspects Moon/Ascendant Conjunction
Lunar characteristics are very prominent in this conjunction. Emotional interaction with the environment is vitally important. Feelings toward others are maternal, and we may want to mother and
care for them. Our impressionability is great and we shall probably
undergo frequent changes of attitude, for the Moon is an unsettling
influence. We can be very emotional, too. Frequently we have close
family ties, and set great store by home life. Moon/Ascendant Sextile; Moon/Ascendant Trine
We are able to relate well emotionally to others. The emotional
life presents few problems, and the environment does not pose a
threat to our sense of well-being.
We are solicitous of those around us, and are prepared to help
and pamper them; yet we have sense enough not to tie them down
but to leave them as free as possible. However, we are very much
involved with others and this can sometimes create difficulties,
because we would much rather have company than be on our own.
Not everyone can live with us on these terms. Aspects of the Moon / 165
Generally speaking, though, development will be emotionally
stable as far as environment is concerned, and our need to be
caring can be satisfied both in the family circle and in social and
other work. Moon/Ascendant Square
Moon/Ascendant Opposition
The effect of the hard aspects between the Moon and Ascendant
is much more uncomfortable and disturbing. We experience the
world and everything with which we are not totally familiar as a
worrying threat to our safety, and so we do not always react with
poise or find it easy to make contacts.
The Moon, as the principle of changeability, can make us
moody for reasons not immediately apparent to the outside world,
and this can produce a vicious spiral in which we feel hurt, retire
into ourselves, get no sympathy, feel hurt, withdraw, etc., etc. Yet
that is the last thing we require, since the Moon/Ascendant aspect
gives us a need for emotional interaction with the environment.
Sometimes we are at a loss how to behave in emotional situations, or in situations where we have to care for and cherish others
(for example, as a mother or father). Then we may be inclined to
seek the help and advice of someone we trust or to solve the
problem in some other way. The activity associated with hard aspects often encourages us to explore various avenues. Moon/Ascendant Inconjunct
With an inconjunct between the Moon and Ascendant, we feel least
comfortable of all. The way in which we approach the outside world
(Ascendant) differs so much from the way in which we try to gain
a feeling of security that the contrast makes us very unsure of
ourselves emotionally. Behavior is soon affected and, depending
on the signs involved, we shall either creep into our shell or else
slip into a role. Therefore the world will have little inkling of
our feelings and emotions and may treat us as if there were some- I()6 / Aspects and Personality
thing wrong with us. As in the previous case, a vicious spiral can
be set up.
If only we can appreciate the reasons behind our different
attitudes, we shall be less troubled by the "split" feeling and shall
achieve a more balanced outlook as we go through life. Then the
positive factor in the Moon/Ascendant aspect will be free to develop
to the full. MoonlMidheaven Aspects Moon/MC Conjunction
When the Moon is conjunct the MC the individual is extremely
sensitive to emotional responses from environment and from society at large. This person lives, so to speak, on the popularity he
or she courts, for with a Moon/MC conjunction he or she desires
approval come what may; the result often being that he or she
strikes others as sympathetic, friendly and full of warmth, even
though, to curry favor, he or she may be putting on an act.
Quite frequently, the individual wants to become involved with
big groups or with the public, and usually creates a good impression.
The Moon at the MC encourages one to seek security by making
a mark in society, either by attracting attention or by doing something helpful.
However, the Moon is always waxing and waning and this
person, too, will find the need to chop and change. As long as he
or she projects this vacillation on things, he or she is likely to
change social position from time to time or, at least, to keep making
minor changes even when occupying a permanent position. Moon/MC Sextile; Moon/MC Trine
In the harmonious Moon/MC aspects the person is very sensitive
to the part played by others in his or her life, and especially to
attitudes and feelings directed toward him or her. Usually, however,
he or she gets on well with people and gives the impression of Aspects of the Moon / 167
being calm and collected. Because the search for peace and safety
(Moon) does not create conflicts in the outside world, he or she
naturally tends to feel at ease. So this person is quick to lend a
helping hand in situations that are emotionally difficult, and to do
whatever can be done for people. In essence, he or she wants to
fit in socially.
Changeability is not so marked as in the conjunction. Any
Moon/MC aspect will indicate some desire for change and variety,
but with the harmonious ones this is less of an obsession and the
person is more prepared to wait for the right moment. As already
mentioned, this individual is often very supportive. In addition,
because the Moon stands for the female principle, we ourselves
can also benefit from feminine support on more than one occasion. Moon/MC Square; Moon/MC Opposition
Whenever this person functions socially (Midheaven), feelings of
insecurity steal in because the social life is in perpetual conflict with
attempts made to be secure (Moon). Insecurity makes this person
vulnerable and, since he or she feels unsettled in any situation that
has to do either with self-image or with social position, he or she
is usually inclined to blame the world for any upsets, and keeps
changing outlooks or jobs. Also, because he or she finds it hard to
express emotions, he or she runs the risk of being misunderstood
or of offending accepted norms.
With the square and the opposition, this individual is liable
to build a little world where he can be himself but where outsiders cannot gain entrance. The Moon, typically, encourages the
native to put on a pretense. Nevertheless, he does have a need
for emotional contact with others and does have to learn how
to get on with them. So even though these particular aspects are
hard, he or she may well engage in some occupation that involves
emotional expression or caring for people. If, elsewhere in the
chart, there are further indications of emotional problems, he or
she may be totally devoted to animals, because he or she is not
so liable to be hurt emotionally by animals as by fellow men and
women. IGHI Aspects and Personality
Moon/MC Inconjunct With an inconjunct between the Moon and MC one feels decidedly
uneasy. Not only does this person lack a proper self-image but he
or she is uncertain what attitude to adopt in the outside world.
Because this person is very changeable in the way he or she views
him- or herself, behavior shifts and varies to the puzzlement of
others.
Uncertainty and vacillation are so destabilizing that any support
this person is given does little to help, even if it chances to come
along at the right time.
Emotional conversation and reactions of others make this person insecure and, because of that insecurity, he or she takes too
much notice of what others say, especially as this person already
has such a poor self-opinion. This person will experience many ups
and downs both inwardly and outwardly until he or she discovers
that most people cause their own ruin and that no one is merely
the victim of all sorts of bad luck. 11 Aspects
of
Mercury Mercury/Venus Aspects These two planets are never more than 72 degrees apart, so they
form only two major aspects—the conjunction and the sextile.
Because they always remain in each other's neighborhood, they
repeatedly form the same aspects.
In practice, there seems to be scarcely any difference in effect
between the conjunction and the sextile; at most the conjunction
is the more powerful. So we shall lump them together. Mercury/Venus Conjunction
Mercury/Venus Sextile
Mercury, as the planet of contacts, in aspect with harmony-seeking
Venus makes people generally approachable. They prefer discussions to be agreeable and are inclined to make concessions. They
desire to get on well with people and they respond to a pleasant
atmosphere. / 70 / Aspects and Personality
The way they analyze facts is influenced by Venus, too. For
the sake of harmony they may refuse to investigate too deeply.
Outward agreement is what carries the most weight.
Friendliness and sociability do not necessarily make for maturity. There is often something childish about these people. It is
not unusual to see children with these aspects remaining infantile
for longer than normal (provided other factors in the chart, such
as a strongly placed Saturn, do not counteract this). Conflicts are
painful, they do not like taking sides, and they find a strained
atmosphere hard to take. So these people are prone to back off if
this will ease the situation. Although they are vulnerable, they are,
by the same token, also naturally diplomatic and able to sort out
differences of opinion and pour oil on troubled waters.
The way in which they fulfill the need for permanent relationships and for material security (Venus) always has a mental and
communicative slant when Mercury is involved. Therefore they
need relationships where they can talk to people (although not
necessarily on anything very profound) and verbal exchange is very
important.
Sometimes a Mercury/Venus aspect can make the mental processes rather lazy. Venus is not the most active of planets and, since
Mercury has a great deal to do with the learning capacity and school,
children with such an aspect sometimes fail to appreciate the need
to study hard and are more interested in having fun with their
friends, or prefer to do something creative. This certainly does not
mean they are unable to learn, simply that their interests probably
lie elsewhere. Mercury/Mars
Mercury/Mars Aspects Conjunction Contacting people and talking to them (Mercury) is speeded up by
Mars. These people are liable to speak quickly and to the point,
and are always ready to have their say. It looks as if they act first
and think later. They are not afraid to stand up for themselves and
are only marginally interested in whether or not others agree. They Aspects of Mercury / 17 1
can vigorously defend an idea—sometimes too vigorously—and
they do not mince words!
With this conjunction, thoughts never stand still, although they
are not always steadily applied. Mars is naturally rather uncontrolled
and Mercury, too, encourages these people to jump from one subject to another. Therefore this is not a good position for prolonged
concentration, but is more suitable for quickly absorbing, arranging
and providing masses of data.
These people need to take care not to speak too fiercely. Mars
can make people tactless and can cause them to blurt out things
that others may find offensive. Indeed any aspect berween Mars
and Mercury can sharpen the tongue. With the conjunction these
people can be very sarcastic and satirical, becoming formidable
opponents in debate but also making enemies.
Mercury conjunct Mars is impatient when others take time to
put their thoughts into words, and people with the conjunction are
inclined to interrupt them in order to finish what they were going
to say—which is why this aspect is said to indicate a bad listener.
They are better at making contacts, holding conversations, gathering information, etc., than at listening to others. But, bluntlyspoken though they may be, they are often very honest and straightforward. Mercury/Mars Sextile; Mercury/Mars Trine
Much of what has already been said about the conjunction also
applies to the harmonious aspects. Mars sextile or trine Mercury
indicates an alert and acute mind, and may make a fluent communicator. Conversation is brisk and lively, pugnacious and energetic, and the native is quick on the uptake. These aspects are
accompanied by excellent powers of observation, and can give an
edge over nearly anyone with whom he or she may be arguing; so
he or she is a surefire debater. Since the aspects are harmonious,
the native is less likely to antagonize others than one would with
the conjunction or with one of the discordant aspects, and is less
likely to become embroiled in altercations. Nevertheless mental
activity is as great as it is with the conjunction. The native sees all / 7 J / Aspects and Personality
kinds of connections and snatches at all kinds of ideas from outside.
Constant alertness enables this person to pick up information readily, but thoughts give him or her little rest.
Being free to express opinions is something that is considered
important. This person has independent views on everything. Although Mars does not encourage mature reflection (so there is every
chance that ill-considered conclusions will be reached), this is offset
by the speed with which relationships can be seen and facts can be
absorbed. Even when young, this individual displays this need to
be independent in thought and deed; however, the openness of a
Mars/Mercury aspect gives the grace to admit when he or she is
wrong.
Mercury is the planet astrologers look at when we wish to
know about manual dexterity and, when it is harmoniously aspected
by Mars, we often find that the owner of the aspect is very skilled
with the hands even though Mars may encourage the individual to
leave tasks unfinished. Mercury/Mars Square; Mercury/Mars Opposition
With the tense aspects greater care is required, because it may be
difficult to coordinate Mercury's outgoingness with the combative
egoism of Mars.
When this individual is conversing with others, he or she strikes
them not only as very alert and very subtle, but also as rather too
sharp and aggressive, and this can arouse antagonism. It is hard for
this person to exercise restraint during discussions and, when attacked, he or she easily loses the temper; so these aspects present
one or two problems, but the latter can be solved if the individual
will accept that there is usually something to be said for the other
person's point of view.
Mentally, this individual can perform outstandingly well under
high pressure, but runs the risk of overstrain during more peaceful
periods because he or she seems unable to switch off. The tension
makes the person cross and irritable, or even rude. He or she is
also tempted to think a lot of self and to put self in the foreground
in thought and deed. By thrusting others to one side (often quite
unintentionally) he or she creates awkward situations. For example, Aspects of Mercury / I 73
this type easily adopts what others have said or written, if it happens
to appeal to him or her; the material may be presented as if it
emanated from him- or herself.
The biggest problem in the hard aspects is the lack of balance
between quicksilver Mercury and hasty, hot-headed Mars. Not only
can this encourage one to behave unwisely in dealings with others;
it can also make one rash and prone to accidents or near-accidents. Mercury/Mars Inconjunct In the inconjunct between Mars and Mercury, we think along a
certain line but our activities run along a line so completely different
that we end up not doing what we said we would do. Naturally,
others find this extremely irritating.
With this difficult aspect, we seem to fling advice to the winds:
it is as if the world in which we live and act is not the same as the
one in which we think and speak. And yet we may quite possibly
imagine that we are, in fact, following the advice given us.
As in every other inconjunct, the tension causes a latent feeling
of discomfort. Seeing that Mercury and Mars are involved, there
can be unusual irritation, nerviness and mental aggression. Before
we know it, we are crossing swords with someone or venturing
rash opinions. Obviously, this is no help to personal relationships.
When standing up for ourselves (Mars), the hidden conflict
with our ability to look at facts clearly and objectively (Mercury)
plays us false, and our reactions are too subjective and ill-considered. And when we want to talk and think, the impulse to assert
ourselves gets in the way. If we learn to apply conscious control
so that the two energies do not frustrate one another, we shall be
able to profit by our natural acumen and academic abilities. Mercury / Jupiter Aspects
Mercury/Jupiter Conjunction The way of talking and communicating (Mercury) is usually rendered jovial, warm and cordial by a conjunction with Jupiter—but / 7-V i Aspects and Personality
often long-winded, too. We pass on information with enthusiasm
and optimism, but make no bones about expressing our own views
on it. By and large we make a favorable impression; so the aspect
helps social life.
In the conjunction, Jupiter as the planet of expansion has every
opportunity to be expansive. In each of its aspects with Mercury
it broadens the thinking and the faculties of assimilation and imagination; in the case of the conjunction this carries the risk that we
shall read into things more than they contain. Our fantasies can
deceive us or, what is more likely, can lead us to exaggerate, and
to paint much too rosy a picture of the future whenever we lay
plans. What is more, we may rather enjoy telling tall tales.
Jupiter also has to do with vision and judgment-forming. When
it is conjunct Mercury this can make thought and speech fairly
opinionated—can make us something of a wiseacre or moralizer.
The need to broaden horizons may express itself literally in
travel or metaphorically in study or mental improvement. Anyway,
interests are usually many-sided. Often, however, we may simply
be satisfied by understanding something; preferably in connection
with other things. Our ideas are broadly based but our thinking is
a bit slap dash.
The placement is a favorable one for learning ability and powers of assimilation. We need to curb the tendency to be opinionated,
but often display great tolerance and friendliniess both in contacts
and in mental approach. Mercury/Jupiter Sextile; Mercury/Jupiter Trine
Jupiter and Mercury in harmonious aspect widen the interests just
as much as they do when conjunct, and make us just as cordial,
jovial and enthusiastic when talking to others. With these aspects,
we often strike others as being very likable. What is more, we have
a very encouraging style of speaking, because we habitually look
on the bright side. With these aspects, we like to be well informed
and to make a synthesis of all the facts and figures we collect.
Arriving at a coherent view of things is very important. But as in
all of Jupiter's aspects there is a measure of self-conceit.
We are naturally rather pedantic, and can become outstanding
teachers who are able to impart knowledge with enthusiasm and Aspects of Mercury / / 7 5
authority; in everyday intercourse this is not always appreciated
however. Through the lack of resistance from the environment
(characteristic of the harmonious aspects) we have less feedback
about when we are going too far and so, not knowing when to hold
ourselves in check, run the risk of appearing unpleasantly cocksure.
On the other hand, we can give way generously if need be. That
is to say, we are prepared to show tolerance and understanding.
Whatever widens the mental horizons is found here in all its
forms: study, travel, multifarious interests—an eye on the future.
But because we assimilate facts so effortlessly and because the
harmonious aspects are not as energy-packed as they might be, we
may be lazy or take things easy because they are going so well.
Therefore the full potential of these aspects is not always realized,
even though they are very promising. Mercury/Jupiter Square
Mercury/Jupiter Opposition
The unbalanced use of hard-aspect energy may make Jupiter too
expansive, and the effect of this on voluble Mercury is to produce
bragging, conceited talk, opinionatedness and inaccuracy. Taking
big risks in Mercurial matters (trade, contacts, traffic) can be another
consequence.
But, even with the tense aspects, there is also a great deal of
warmth in contacts with others. We like them to share our experiences and our thoughts, and we can actively propagate ideas and
become good teachers or advocates. Eager involvement in all sorts
of things is a further possible result of these aspects and, in fact,
varied interests can turn out more successfully in some respects
than they would have done had we had an easier aspect between
the same planets. However, we shall have to overcome a certain
amount of opposition because we try to do things at the wrong
time and in the wrong way. Also thoughts are restless, even hyperactive, and we are always trying to see connections whether they
exist or not.
Quite frequently, we shall find that Mercury, as the objective,
ordering factor in our make-up, causes trouble when we enter
Jupiter's terrain (expansion, religion and the widening of one's horizon). This can create inner uncertainty about what we are doing / "6 / Aspects and Personality
and probably, in order to convince ourselves that we are right, we
try to convince others that we are right—a dubious enterprise. We
need to be careful about how we word our opinions and about how
we offer advice. With these tense aspects, ill-considered or exaggerated reactions run in the blood. Mercury/Jupiter Inconjunct
As soon as we make contact with others (Mercury), the tendency
to be jovial, enthusiastic, and moralistic edges in. For example, we
can try to impress others by introducing some new ethical idea, or
we can make ourselves out to be very well-informed, or can explicitly or implicitly promise more than we can perform, or can
attempt to pass ourselves off as more important than we are. At
the same time we feel vulnerable and insecure, because we are
constantly haunted by a feeling that something is wrong somewhere.
When we are occupied with minor matters, with details (Mercury), we feel uneasy because the need for what is big (Jupiter) is
secretly in conflict with what we are doing. But, on the other hand,
when we are occupied with major matters (Jupiter) and with plans
for the distant future, this troubles us, and the mind (Mercury) has
no rest. The upshot is nerviness and mental tension or, sometimes,
even physical complaints arising from the inability to relax mentally.
With an inconjunct between Jupiter and Mercury the powers
of expression may be somewhat defective. We omit vital steps in
what we are relating, for instance, overemphasizing some things
and omitting others. This can lead to misunderstanding or sheer
incomprehension on the part of our listeners; which does nothing
to help our already shaky self-confidence. However, if only we can
understand the reason behind our tension, we may be able to relax
and develop the good side of the Mercury/Jupiter inconjunct. Mercury/Saturn Aspects Mercury/Saturn Conjunction
The ponderousness of Saturn always makes itself felt in our contacts, speech and analyzing. Therefore we hesitate to take the Aspects of Mercury / 17 j
initiative, but play for safety and wait quietly to see how things will
turn out. In conversation, we usually seem very calm and matterof-fact, and it is not easy to make us change our minds. The aspect
does not encourage optimism and, indeed, we probably strike others as pessimistic. Quite often we suffer from fits of depression
but, every now and then, feel an overcompensating need for entertainment if only to break out of our inner isolation.
Feelings of loneliness are not foreign to people with a Mercury/
Saturn conjunction: they are painfully aware of themselves. Yet
this conjunction has wonderful qualities: it connotes immense powers of concentration and an ability to marshal facts. All research is
meticulous—a plus point, even though the motive is to overcome
a sense of insecurity.
Because they possess clarity and the ability to think things out
straightforwardly and step by step, the natives can make good teachers. They inculcate facts carefully, in easily assimilated installments,
and keep strictly to the subject.
With this aspect we talk like people with a lifetime's experience
behind them: but then, after all, Saturn is known as the planet of
old age. Also, we are inclined to treat things too seriously and to
disapprove of jests. Our thinking is unadventurous and rather conventional. We like to stick to well-known patterns (because this
gives security). Therefore opinions are rather rigid, especially if
Saturn is the leading planet. However, if Mercury has more dignitaries than Saturn, there is greater flexibility.
The Saturn conjunction seldom permits mental repose. Even
in the most relaxed moments, we lie thinking about next day's work
or shopping. Mercury/Saturn Sextile; Mercury/Saturn Trine
Even the harmonious aspects between these two planets make the
native a sober citizen, with a straightforward mode of thought,
reserved speech, a serious attitude and a critical, purposeful style
of analysis. Saturn is an efficient and economical planet, and in
combination with clever Mercury gives organizational talent, administrative skills, perseverance and a self-possessed manner of
speaking—the very qualities required for executive positions in
industry or politics. I 7lS' / Aspects and Personality
With these aspects, we can devote ourselves entirely to something, provided it is practical, concrete and feasible, and, of course,
lying in the near tuture and not in some distant dream-world. When
there is a realistic objective in view, we can work for it very
hard, long and persistently. Saturn is prepared to move mountains
and always encourages ambition—which here has Mercurial overtones. The natives' ambition can show itself in Mercurial matters
such as trade, drawing up reports and writing books, yet without
the usual facile fluency of Mercury; what is written is deeper,
terser and (drily) technical. Mercury in any aspect with Saturn loses
the ability for quick thinking and for quick learning; but anything
that is explained step by step will be understood and never forgotten.
The desire for what is practical and concrete does not rule out
any interest in astrology and similar subjects; such an interest may
certainly exist, only if it does, these natives will want to comprehend
everything to do with it, to penetrate to its core, to give it a structured basis and, above all, to make it clear-cut. The Mercury/Saturn
aspect is not so much a clue to our actual interests as, given those
interests, an indication of the way in which we will approach them
mentally. Mercury/Saturn Square
Mercury/Saturn Opposition
The tense aspects between these two planets give a fairly gloomy
cast to the mind. When we start considering or analyzing anything
(Mercury), we come into conflict with the need to qualify, limit
and define. In the worst case, this can mean narrow-mindedness,
and mistrust of everything we meet. But there are other possibilities. Anxiety, caution, careful verification and even timidity are
almost bound to play a part in ordinary contacts and also in our
thinking. One thing is certain: we are never going to rush things.
We are serious, prudent, calm and collected, and will often reflect
on what others say—not to be guided by it, but in order to work
out what lies behind it. We want to know every detail so that we
do not have to reveal how uncertain we are over relationships and Aspects of Mercury / 179
contacts. Others do not find us easy to get on with. We are not
spontaneous but rather inhibited and, sometimes by way of overcompensation, argumentative and domineering in our talk. Sometimes we seem like an immovable block of concrete and seem
determined to look on the black side of everything.
Although these two planets are at cross purposes here, the
confrontations they cause can be instructive to us. The energy of
the square or opposition helps us to come to terms with them and,
even though the aspects are hard, we can develop many valuable
characteristics associated with the combination of Mercury and
Saturn: willingness to work hard, a serious and studious nature,
practicality, economy and sobriety and good powers of concentration. Mercury/Saturn Inconjunct In our contacts, governed by Mercury, we are plagued by all sorts
of hidden anxieties. Through this unconscious, yet nonetheless
perceptible, fear and uncertainty (Saturn) we are inclined to
put a wrong construction on things that are done, and we may
deliberately ignore them or be suspicious of them. We are not
very good at saying what we mean, and this can cause misunderstandings.
Fear and loneliness invade our thinking, too, and it is not
impossible to be troubled by a phobia at some period of our
lives.
The awkwardness in making contacts comes in various guises.
We may do our level best to ingratiate ourselves with others by
sheer hard work, we may become cynical and develop a sarcastic
brand of humor, or we may creep into a shell to escape anything
on the outside that might hurt us.
Although we can be as hard as nails and very disciplined in
our thinking, we mistrust staying-power and abilities and limit ourselves more than necessary. Say there is the chance of promotion;
we feel we might not be able to cope and therefore opt out. If we
do decide to take a better job, no one is more surprised than we
are if we make a success of it. I Si I I Aspects and Personality
But, once we realize our capacity and lose our diffidence, we
can get down to serious work and become real achievers. We may
find a gift for form and structure in such diverse fields as economic
administration, scientific research, and architecture. Mercury/Uranus
Mercury/Uranus Aspects Conjunction The swift perceptions of Uranus plus Mercury's powers of expression with tongue and pen can combine to produce the most original
ideas and concepts, although they will probably need knocking into
a more viable shape. Mental ingenuity is fantastic, but the native
is extremely restless and fickle. Uranus being capricious, impulsive
and unpredictable may mean that thinking is nervy and tense, so
that one jumps from one idea to another—and from one social
contact to another, too.
This person is fond of novelty, and homes in on whatever is
fresh and unusual. Others can find his or her flow of ideas stimulating, but if they do not keep up with it this individual becomes
very impatient.
The disjointedness of Uranus shows itself in conversation. This
type is liable to omit significant points; also he or she may have a
sharp tongue, and be apt to make clever and sometimes hurtful
remarks. Often he or she says the most unexpected things; the
trouble is, as soon as they occur, he or she blurts them out without
regard to the consequences.
Uranus and Mercury both have to do with the nervous system,
and their conjunction places a heavy strain on it because there is
an inability to relax. The brain is continually active. This can give
creative ideas but can also be exhausting and cause irritability and
snappishness.
Some form of technical interest is quite common with this
aspect, especially where new ground is being broken or the barriers
of distance are being overcome (e. Vênus ., in air travel, radar and electronics). Although this type is quick to grasp the essentials of a
subject, the mind is often too restless for prolonged concentration.
Therefore he or she may be short of academic qualifications—but
definitely not lacking in intelligence! Aspects of Mercury I 1 HI
Mercury/Uranus Sextile; Mercury/Uranus Trine
In the harmonious aspects between Mercury and Uranus thinking
is imaginative and independent but, even here, it is to some extent
erratic. Wherever there is a chance to break fresh ground, this
person works wonders, but it is not so easy to contend with humdrum everyday life. The latter is experienced as dull and irksome
because it offers nothing new and creative or sufficiently original.
In fact, in all Mercury/Uranus aspects—even in the harmonious
ones—there are impractical people who, although very gifted in a
certain field, have little idea how to manage ordinary affairs. Their
fellow citizens regard this type as eccentrics who live in a world of
their own and want to go their own sweet way. Now, when the
aspect is harmonious, these others hardly raise a protest but just
let them get on with it.
Any aspect between Uranus and Mercury will make the native
inventive, so the combination has a lot of useful potential. But in
the harmonious aspects especially this type must learn to persevere
and carry projects to completion, because he or she suffers from
a streak of laziness in spite of all the mental activity. So although
what we have here should be an ideal position for original scientific
research, Saturn will have to be strong in the chart for anything
constructive to be done.
Often there is a keen interest in anything a bit unusual: an
interest in certain fringe activities such as astrology, fortune-telling
or occultism, or in revolutionary creeds or Utopias.
The same sharp tongue and the same liability to overtax the
brain are present as in the conjunction and the hard aspects, but
not to the same degree. Mercury/Uranus Square
Mercury/Uranus Opposition
As soon as this type tries to put thoughts into words or tries to
make contacts, the urge to be independent and separate almost
infallibly interferes. Sharpness, tactlessness and brusqueness make
others shrink away. The person with this aspect is the cause of why
others react in this way. What is more, the person is so restless and
impatient that usually others have no time to listen. This is true of INJ Aspects and Personality all the Mercury/Uranus aspects but especially of the discordant
ones. Other people express themselves far too slowly for this type
so, losing patience with what others are trying to say, this type butts
in with some comment of his or her own. This is a major impediment to good social relations.
Because this type tends to alienate people and yet remains
very active and creative mentally, he or she may start weaving
unrealistic notions about self and others. To be sure, this person
is unable to test the truth of these notions, yet he or she clings to
them fanatically. Uranus always encourages people to do their own
thing; therefore, with Uranian conflicts, natives experience as much
loneliness as with Saturnine conflicts but are less inclined to
brood—given their restless inner world, they have no time to sit
still all day. Of course, the risk of suffering from overwrought
nerves is that much greater, but usually the strain this type is under
goes unnoticed unless he or she actually has a breakdown.
There is likely to be a keen interest in borderline subjects such
as unorthodox scientific theories, astrology, innovative techniques
or social renewal, and this type can invest a good deal of energy in
them. Mercury/Uranus Inconjunct The way in which these people express originality and individuality
(Uranus) differs so sharply from the way in which they express a
need to analyze, make contacts, and communicate (Mercury) that
they feel very ill at ease when meeting others. Whenever they are
thinking, reading or handling information, the impatience and
changeability of Uranus enter in to distract them.
The covert influence of Uranus makes them communicate
quite differently from the way they imagine they are communicating; hence they strike others as unstable and vacillating. And every
time they try to express the personality, the underlying agitation
shows itself in the way they think about things and in their approach
to people.
Sometimes these people are unapproachable and have no room
for any ideas but their own (behaving on such occasions as if they
had one of the hard aspects); at other times they let people dis- Aspects of Mercury / / 83
courage their originality and inventiveness. The alternation between these two attitudes leads to a restless search resulting in
hypertension and nerviness. Since they are most likely to encounter
this problem in everyday life, they are inclined to interest themselves in things that are out of the ordinary in which Uranian qualities can more easily make themselves felt.
Once these people manage to keep uncertainty under control,
they can deploy the Uranian qualities of inventiveness and originality to good advantage; even finding security in following a Uranian avocation. Nevertheless, there is always an air of haste and
unrest about them. Therefore there is no harm in taking time off
every now and then simply to laze around! Mercury IN eptune Aspects Mercury/Neptune Conjunction
These people's manner of communicating and analyzing, of assimilating and arranging facts, is linked with a factor which blurs distinctions and boundaries. Neptune does not give a sharp eye for
detail but does form an entry into the realm of the invisible. In
practical terms this generally means rather chaotic and unsystematic
thinking and data-handling; and, quite often, when this type tries
to assimilate information, they suffer from interference from unconsciously produced change and confusion. Without realizing it,
they can misinterpret information and then garble it. Folk may think
they are telling lies but, generally speaking, lapses are not deliberate. The trouble is compounded by the Neptunian love of fantasy,
which tempts them to embellish or distort the truth.
The unconfined nature of Neptune enables these people to
look behind appearances and to read between the lines. They can
tell by the tone of voice if others are trying to hide anything from
them. Indeed, with a Mercury/Neptune conjunction, people often
know the answer to unspoken questions. Clairvoyance or, at the
very least, powers of intuition are possible if the rest of the chart
concurs.
With this conjunction, these people live in a separate reality
and do not always distinguish between fact and fancy—something I S-t / Aspects and Personality
that in everyday life is often disadvantageous, but for such things
as composing music or writing poetry or prose is very advantageous.
Neptune is not a stable planet; it continually undermines. In
company with others this type can feel very insecure, and mns the
risk of identifying with others too readily. Constant changes of
mind are a regular feature of the conjunction.
This type needs to beware of taking appearance for reality,
and of flattering themselves with false hopes. Mercury/Neptune Sextile
Mercury/Neptune Trine
A subtle sensitivity in contacts and in thought-life is present even
in the harmonious aspects between Neptune and Mercury. These
people hear the unspoken word, as it were, or read between the
lines. Such things give their world an extra dimension, an air of
fantasy. Inner absorption and imagination enable them to depict
feelings and situations—possibly in an artistic way.
Without knowing how, these people often sense what is afoot
and quite often how matters are going to develop. This ability can
be very helpful in evaluating people and situations. Elusive factors
in the unconscious can frequently enable them to make the right
decisions. But, in any case, decisions are likely to be more emotional
than rational.
The hard aspects are often idealistic in their contacts and thinking when Neptune lends a hand; and, although the planet assists
them to sense what lies behind certain situations, it can also make
it easy for them to get carried away. They idealize more than they
should, and may think too highly of those with whom they associate—anyway, they tend to look at everything through rose-colored glasses. And, because they idealize contacts, they also want
them to be harmonious. It is hard to tolerate quarrels or misunderstandings, especially as they can sense the stress in others caused
by them, and this affects them more than they realize. Therefore
they go out of their way to be friendly.
Although the conjunction of Neptune and Mercury is not
noted for promoting clear and logical thought, these people can
do well in science and technology. Feelings guide them. As computer programmers, for instance, these people can get the feel Aspects of Mercury / 185
of the program they are making, because they are unconsciously
part of it and seem to sense any potential errors. But usually
they dislike learning things by rote—to do so just goes against the
grain. Mercury/Neptune Square
Mercury/Neptune Opposition
With the hard aspects between Mercury and Neptune, the danger
is that when these people want to learn or to recount the facts as
objectively as possible (Mercury), they quite unconsciously color,
undermine, blur or change them (Neptune), and do violence to
the truth or make light of it. At worst, they lead others astray or
are led astray themselves. Nevertheless, the tensions in the aspects
show them that something is wrong somewhere, especially as they
often seem to get other people tensed up in a way that gives them
food for thought. The feeling of dissatisfaction given by others'
reactions serves in many cases as a spur to look for fresh data and
other points of view. Indeed, somewhere along the line, they risk
becoming attached to some sect. Another possibility is that, owing
to disappointment with or uncertainty over contacts, they start
living the life of a hermit, dwelling alone in silence in order to
enjoy their own (very rich) world of thought and experience. Formerly these aspects were thought to fit these natives for the peace
and quiet of the cloister with its monastic rule and religious certitude, away from the hustle and bustle of everyday life.
Even with the hard aspects, these people have a lot of emotion
and empathy. There need be nothing wrong with their impressions
or feelings; where they are most likely to go astray is in the interpretation of them.
One important fact to bear in mind is that, when they try to
say something, others will not always catch their meaning. Yet the
tense aspects give superior creativity, and the ease with which Neptune introduces the unseen into mundane affairs should mean
plenty of fruitful ideas. With a vivid imagination there is little they
think impossible. The typical Neptunian failing of being unable to
distinguish between appearance and reality is stronger here than it
is in the harmonious aspects. 786 / Aspects and Personality
Mercury/Neptune Inconjunct
People with the inconjunct between Neptune and Mercury are
usually unsure of their contacts. It is hard to form a true picture
of either their own behavior or that of others, and they have great
difficulty in seeing things for what they are. Therefore, generally
without knowing it, they are much influenced by the emotions
released in the surroundings. It is not easy to tell what they really
feel when they may simply be tuning in to the feelings of those
they are with.
These problems often produce an increasing need to withdraw,
either into the life of a recluse or else into a private dream world
from which others are excluded, a dream world which even they
do not recognize as such.
All the same, with this aspect, these types are quick to see
where the shoe pinches someone else and may be even gifted with
second sight.
When they come to realize that although there is no harm in
having a dream world, it is an entirely separate realm governed by
its own rules, and that hurt feelings are produced mainly by an
unconscious identification with others, they can be more relaxed
and find satisfaction in artistic, religious or social activities. Mercury/Pluto Aspects Mercury/Pluto Conjunction
A need to make contacts, to communicate, to reflect and analyze,
and an ability to give factual descriptions (Mercury) is greatly intensified by Pluto. Not only do these people have a compulsive
need to get in touch with people, but they may be dogmatic when
talking to them. The unconscious power of Pluto builds up such a
charge that they impress others as being forcible, and the effect of
words is often greater than they can foresee and may create problems within the circle of acquaintances.
Thinking is concentrated too. If they want to know something,
they set themselves to research it thoroughly. The same intensity
is seen in the way they regard and analyze facts, although here the Aspects of Mercury I 187
unconscious power of Pluto may have a distorting effect. Once they
make some discovery or form some opinion, they fail to examine
it further in the light of reality. It forms their reality, and any facts
and figures they gather are intended to support it. They present
ideas trenchantly, and can be obstinate and proof against every
argument.
The forcefulness and intensity of this conjunction can lead
to quarrels and differences of opinion. These people hold their
ground against all comers, and actually meet with a great deal of
opposition. A sharp tongue is dreaded: they never shrink from confrontations or their consequences. Because of great powers of
penetration (Pluto) they often put their finger on an opponent's
weak point.
This is an outstanding combination for research work, especially in unexplored fields or in fields which have long been taboo;
all Pluto's aspects have something defiant about them. These natives
cannot tolerate being balked and will not stop until they have bulldozed a road to any matter in which they are interested. With Pluto
aspecting Mercury, they persevere until they completely understand (or completely demolish) some topic. Mercury/Pluto Sextile; Mercury/Pluto Trine
Although incisiveness is not so abrasive as it would be if this person had the conjunction or one of the hard aspects, he or she
still encounters opposition. Talk can be very convincing and he
or she knows how to drive a message home; but he or she is
not always prepared to pay attention to others. The native likes
to gather a group of listeners around in order to have a secure
power base in his or her contacts. Besides, in persuading others
the native persuades himself, and this increases self-confidence.
As a note of caution, it should be added that the harmoniousness
of the aspects by no means guarantees the correctness of his or
her opinions!
The flair for tracking things down is well developed; so this
combination of the planets is ideal for fundamental research, for
psychology and parapsychology. In contacts, this person is continually analyzing others and trying to discover their motivation and ISS i Aspects and Personality
their weak points, and it is not unlikely that the native shall acquire
a good understanding of human nature in the course of life. Because
(to all appearances) the harmonious Mercury/Pluto aspects generally create little open confrontation, there may not be much use
for this knowledge of our fellow men and women; however, when
the native does have to contend with others, he or she soon learns
how to apply it.
With this combination, there is often a desire to do well in
some Mercurial occupation such as communicating, writing or
teaching—but only if the heart is in it. When interest is aroused
by something, this person gives it undivided attention. If it fails to
enthuse, wild horses could not drag this person within a mile of it.
Even the easy aspects go hand in hand with willfulness, obstinacy
and a certain inaccessibility. Mercury/Pluto Square; Mercury/Pluto Opposition
The tension and compulsiveness found in Mercury/Pluto combinations are strongest in the hard aspects and regularly produce
confrontations with others. Quite possibly this individual's naturally
emphatic style of speaking and the aggression often displayed when
expressing an opinion will deter people from sharing his or her
ideas or will provoke them into contradicting the native. Even when
this person thinks he or she is being nice and friendly, he or she
is still much more forcible and sharp than need be. And since this
person never shrinks from exposing faults in people and things
whenever seen, this person gets disliked, even though the motive
is simply that he or she would feel on safer ground if these faults
were corrected.
In fact this person is constantly at war with the self. He or she
is painfully aware of his or her own problems, which Pluto keeps
bringing to light. Only strength and self-control enable him or her
to cope with problems or to nip them in the bud. Projection on
and uncertainty regarding the outside world may put this individual
in a strong position, especially in contacts; but he or she must be
extremely careful not to mistreat people for, with these aspects,
this type can be merciless without realizing it. Pluto is invariably
"all or nothing." Aspects of Mercury I 189
in what this person thinks and says, he or she runs the risk of
becoming too well entrenched in ideas that seem important. An
unwillingness to make concessions stirs up a spirit of fanaticism
that inevitably leads to big conflicts inside (overwrought nerves),
or outside (with neighbors and with society at large). As for taboos,
this person either ignores them or else shouts them down—behavior that is likely to get him or her branded as a revolutionary.
Provided the individual can hold him- or herself in check, the
tense Mercury/Pluto aspects can enable constructive contributions
to the fields of research and psychology. Mercury/Pluto Inconjunct
Whenever we think about facts or discuss them, or make contacts
(Mercury), there is a Plutonian tension within us. The need for
power and a desire to get to the bottom of everything keep affecting
our behavior, and sometimes we act as forcefully as if we had one
of the hard aspects. Therefore contacts are likely to prove difficult
and we meet with opposition. But on other occasions we are cautious and do not speak our minds for (an unconscious) fear of
something terrible happening (confrontation anxiety). As an overcompensation, we can indulge in manipulation and intrigue from
time to time. Also we do not always tell the facts exactly as they
are; a fault due mainly to a deep-rooted lack of understanding of
our power needs.
With the inconjunct, we need to be careful what we say and
do. What we think and say (Mercury) may not correspond to what
we do (Pluto); and because neutral and friendly Mercury is so very
different from dark, unfathomable, burrowing, wary, power-hungry
Pluto, we are liable to sow confusion wherever we go. Folk do not
know what to make of us and may even regard us as dishonest or
manipulative, failing to see our own inability to understand ourselves.
Unperceived, we acquire considerable authority and in our
contacts we try to hold the reins in our own hands. Probably we
are hard workers, making our presence felt in the personal environment and tending to identify with the latter to some extent.
However, the strain in this aspect means that confrontations and I'JO I Aspects and Personality
hypertension will make their presence felt if we do not slow down
in good time. Frequently, with this aspect, we pass through an
intense inner change which improves our perception of reality. Mercury i Ascendant Aspects Mercury/Ascendant Conjunction
Mercury on the Ascendant shows a fondness for contacts with the
outside world; also a need for continual change and give-and-take.
There is great curiosity and often this makes us early-wise. Mercury
is a mobile planet and, when on the Ascendant, gives physical
mobility and unrest, sometimes nerviness too, but also considerable
manual dexterity. This conjunction, which generally indicates a
bright mind, does not necessarily promise great learning capacity,
since we find it hard to concentrate. We are at our best when free
to chop and change and to do several things at the same time
(although the remainder of the chart must be taken into consideration before one can hazard an opinion on the degree of changeability involved). Mercury/Ascendant Sextile
Mercury/Ascendant Trine
We enjoy the give-and-take of daily life. We like joking and good
cheer, and our natural inquisitiveness provides us with a string of
anecdotes. As a rule, we find it easy to get on with people.
With the harmonious aspects we have a ready tongue and our
mental and communicative abilities are good. Our Mercurial nature
certainly desires changes in our external activities, but also changes
of mood and feeling. Usually with these aspects we dislike gushes
of emotion and prefer light-hearted conversation.
Manual dexterity is a feature—as it is in all Mercury/Ascendant
aspects. Aspects of Mercury I 191
Mercury/Ascendant
Mercury/Ascendant Square
Opposition For fear of being taken the wrong way in our day-to-day dealings
with fellow men and women, we hesitate to be too forthcoming.
Our verbal communication (Mercury) is out of step with our Ascendant "doorway" to the outside world. Misunderstandings and
sometimes even disputes are the result.
It is natural to be inquisitive but we need to learn not to go
poking our nose into everybody's business, just as we need to learn
that there is a time to speak and a time to remain silent—a fact
that with the tense aspects we do not always appreciate.
We can be very adroit and can get through a lot of work quite
quickly, although often in a rather slapdash way. By another form
of carelessness we are not always particularly tactful. What is
more, we imperceptibly take on the color of the person to whom
we are talking, so that we say one thing to one person and something else to another. This can make us seem vacillating and unreliable and can interfere with the development of long-term
friendships. Nevertheless, we are energetic and mentally active
and inventive. Mercury/Ascendant Inconjunct The uncertainty of the inconjunct is beyond our control, and it
gnaws at us whenever we make contact with the people around us.
We are not good at expressing ourselves and we tend to say things
at the wrong moment. This causes trouble, and the reactions of
others can make us wonder why we are the way we are. The reason
is that our approach (the Ascendant) is so completely different from
the way in which we natually think about things and would like to
speak of them to others (Mercury) that we become hesitant and
nervous. The stress of the inconjunct is felt in the thought-life, and
we find it hard to relax. Quite often, owing to an inner compulsion
to think and communicate, we become very proficient at thinking
and communicating. But first we have to get down to the root of
our unrest. 792/ Aspects and Personality Mercury / Midheaven Aspects
Mercury/MC Conjunction When the need to communicate, and to isolate and arrange facts,
coincides with the astrological point representing the attitude to
society and the self (MC), the individual shall have an ever-shifting
conception of self and of social position, especially in the sphere
of contacts and intellectual interests. The result can be many different activities, either at the same time or one after the other, or
much change within a single sphere of activity. This is closely connected with a rather unstable self-image.
Often this person is good at putting thoughts into words and
conveying ideas, and would make a good teacher and/or a keen
business person. He or she can easily earn a living in some Mercurial
activity, as anything from a reporter to a librarian, from a representative or merchant to an instructor—but he or she must have
plenty of variety and personal contacts.
With this conjunction, the person is very restless, sometimes
nervy, and is inclined to try and reason things out objectively even
when this is not the best method to pursue in a given situation. Mercury/MC Sextile; Mercury/MC Trine
This person makes a mark in social life; in job applications, for
example, words are well chosen, and the personal discourse creates
a good impression. People soon realize that they can hold a sensible
conversation with the person with this aspect. Therefore this aspect
is very advantageous for professions offering variety and the chance
to talk to people in a factual way. Analyzing, another side of Mercury, is something else this individual will enjoy doing; and this
gives an aptitude for scientific research, provided it is not restricted
and does not call for prolonged concentration on minor details.
This individual will prefer to be engaged in classifying large masses
of data.
As in the conjunction, the emphasis lies more on mental exchanges with others than on emotional relationships (provided, of
course, the water signs are not too prominent). Aspects ofMenun / 191
Mercury/MC Square; Mercury/MC Opposition
Conflicts between Mercury and the MC certainly make thinking
quick and bright, but when this individual shares ideas with others—
especially in a social setting—he or she will notice time and again
that he or she is not understood, or that he or she tends to jump
to premature conclusions, or has not taken into account the position
and opinions of others.
The problem is that how he or she contacts people and exchanges views with them conflicts with the internal picture of the
self; so that the way he or she represents personal thoughts is out
of keeping with the way these thoughts first presented themselves.
Dissatisfaction and confusion are the result. Also, this person may
conveniently overlook anything that does not suit his or her plans.
Therefore, in spite of creativity, he or she can often run into difficulties. The person with Mercury in hard aspect with the MC
tends to chatter and then to regret having divulged more than
intended.
Negligence is something of a feature of these hard aspects.
Usually it is not intentional but the consequence of restlessness
and a dislike of being tied down. He or she is always seeking fresh
stimuli, therefore leaving work half-finished and losing concentration. Until he or she controls inner restlessness there is a tendency
to move from one job to another. Mercury/MC Inconjunct
The changeability inherent in Mercury/Midheaven aspects is here
at its strongest yet most elusive. Usually we feel that we are not
occupying our proper place in society, and by brooding over this
are thrown into a state of conflict. We are not sure what sort of
person we really are, seeing that what goes on in our minds seems
to bear no resemblance to outward behavior. Quite apart from any
nerviness and strain, this is responsible for a constantly changing
self-image, so that we are always looking for a new social position.
Or else we withdraw into a shell. Either way, we do not make things
easy for ourselves initially. Il>-f Aspects and Personality However, the Mercurial talents for communication and analysis are not diminished by the tension. Once we discover that there
is a place for our mental creativity and that our lack of self-confidence is pointless, we can learn to feel at home with others and
with our own thoughts. Admittedly, there are likely to be one or
two confrontations to face in the beginning because of our inept
handling of personal and social relationships, our inability to express
precisely what we mean, and our habit of saying either too much
or too little. These things are caused by basic uncertainty, and they
have to be overcome before we can make progress. 12 Aspects
of
Venus VennslMars Aspects
Venus/Mars Conjunction
The conjunction between Venus and Mars joins together passive
and active instincts for self-preservation: that is to say, the desire for the security of harmonious and agreeable contacts goes
hand in hand with a need to stand up for ourselves and to make
our presence felt. How this will work out in practice depends
on the rest of the chart. When we are deeply attached to someone (Venus) we are prepared to go through fire and water for
them (Mars), but at the same time we make heavy demands because Mars has a selfish streak. We are very emotional and very sensual, too.
Mars conjunct Venus can make us inclined to indulge in all
sorts of amorous adventures and hedonism. But although infidelity
does occur with these aspects, it is no irrefrangible law of the Medes
and Persians. We look for a partner with whom we can share our
emotions and enjoy sexual fulfillment and, if we succeed, our intense union is not easily disturbed. / 96 / Aspects and Personality
The abrasive side ofMars is softened by Venus; but something
of Mars tends to rub off on Venus, too, so that tact is not always
a strong point. We are a trifle inconsiderate, a but too sharptongued, and quicker off the mark than the situation requires.
With a Mars/Venus conjunction, the opposite sex always plays
an important part, and even in childhood this can reveal itself in a
strong attachment to father or mother as the case may be. Venus/Mars Sextile; Venus/Mars Trine
With harmonious Mars/Venus aspects, we are in a position to combine activity and passivity, industry and harmony, and therefore
usually make a good impression. Affection means a lot to us and,
as a rule, we experience little difficulty in displaying affection to
others. These aspects can make contacts pleasant; for although we
often play an active role (Mars), we do know how to rein ourselves
in when this will help things to run more smoothly (Venus).
As in all the Mars/Venus aspects, sexuality is important: so
indeed is every form of sensuous enjoyment. Dancing, theatergoing and the like can be some favorite diversions.
We may well be very creative. Venus always gives a feeling
for form, proportion and color; and this, combined with Martian
drive, is what we need for producing original work. Nevertheless,
the Martian energy may not be strong enough in these harmonious
aspects for creativity to manifest itself.
In love we can be very passionate. The partner means everything and we are prepared to devote ourselves to the loved one.
On the other hand, we expect the partner to be devoted to us. The
easy aspects are traditionally said to be favorable for love: the need
to unite with someone (Venus) is in harmony with a desire to go
and prove ourselves (Mars). Also a measure of independence is
expected within the relationship so that the partners do not take
each other over completely. Venus/Mars Square; Venus/Mars Opposition
The tension between the need for harmony, balance and friendship,
on the one hand, and the urge to make a mark, on the other hand, Aspects of Venus / 197
certainly emphasizes a need for contacts—especially emotional
ones; but, because we are not sure when to hold back and when
to be outgoing, relationships may become strained in both friendships and love life from time to time. What is more, we do not
know quite what we want; sometimes the partner is everything and
we feel intensely drawn to this person, at other times we fear that
our liberty is being threatened and we start reasserting ourselves
(Mars). For this reason, a love-hate relationship with the partner is
thought to be typical of the aspects.
Whenever we are ready to compromise, the conflict of Mars
with Venus spoils everything—we change our mind, for instance,
or find that we cannot bring ourselves to give way after all. And
when we push to the front (Mars), we are ill at ease because the
Venusian part of our nature cannot reconcile itself to this form of
behavior. The consequence is inner disquiet and outer vacillation.
The desire to unite (Venus) and the desire to break (Mars) keep
interfering with one another.
With these hard aspects, we are often extremely creative provided we can settle down—although we shall always be rather impatient. A bonus point is that the Venus indolence is counteracted
both by the active planet Mars and by the tension in the aspects
themselves; so we are able to get through a large amount of work.
And, although we can run into problems in relationships, these can
be sorted out fairly quickly. Through Mars we are quick to take
offense but equally quick to forget why, and Venus hastens to mend
the breach. Venus/Mars Inconjunct
In the inconjunct between Venus and Mars, the desire for harmony
and our urge to be self-assertive have completely different settings and do not mesh with one another. When we go out of
our way to be warm and friendly (Venus) we seem in practice to
strike a wrong note (Mars) and get reactions that puzzle us. We
are fiercer or more emotional than we suppose, and this often
leads to disappointments and misunderstandings with friends and
loved ones.
Conversely, we find that when we start to stand up for ourselves (Mars), the Venus factor interferes and unsettles us. Some- I Lua ' / Aspects and Personality
times, simply out of insecurity, we are even prepared to
compromise when we feel it is against our best interests, or we try
to enlist the support of others before making a move. Anyhow, we
feel terribly dependent on emotional and friendly contacts with
others while all we want is proper recognition.
And so the inconjunct between Venus and Mars gives either
a great reliance on others or else a fierce but unconscious emphasis
on ourselves. Understandably, the emotional life is none too stable,
but we do have some good safety valves for the pressures from
Venus and Mars: creative work, for instance, and activities such as
sport. These help us relax. A stable relationship is also possible
with this aspect, provided (as with all Venus/Mars aspects) the
partner, while giving emotional security, allows us a certain amount
of freedom. Venus/Jupiter Aspects Venus/Jupiter Conjunction
Here expansive, ameliorating Jupiter joins forces with Venus, the
promoter of balance and harmony. It is generally assumed that this
should make us lovable, friendly and jolly, and therefore well-liked
and popular. We appreciate good companionship and certainly
know how to enjoy life.
In love and friendship we can shed a lot of warmth, but the
desire to spread our wings (given by Jupiter) may mean that we do
not stay faithful to one partner.
We are quite prepared to set the ball rolling socially and we
like to immerse ourselves with others in anything that happens to
fascinate us, including philosophical subjects (Jupiter). However,
Venus is a rather lazy planet and, in this conjunction, can make us
rather half-hearted or self-indulgent when it comes to Jovian interests such as study, travel and philosophical reasoning. Enjoyment, comfort and elegant idleness are liable to have the edge on
serious effort. Self-discipline is not the strong point of this conjunction.
Venus also represents the need for material security. Its conjunction with Jupiter inrensifies this need and a fair amount of effort Aspects of Venus / 199
will be expended satisfying it. Generally, we look for a position where
we can prosper and wind up with plenty of money in the bank. Venus/Jupiter Sextile; Venus/Jupiter Trine
When the natal horoscope has Venus and Jupiter in harmony, we
strike people as being very charming and friendly. We mingle social
graces and geniality, and instinctively know how to be popular.
With a kindly word, a friendly gesture or the latest joke, we get
people on our side. No wonder these aspects are reckoned to be
among the most useful to own.
The ease with which we sail through life is based largely on
the way in which we inspire confidence. These are really beautiful
aspects for forming secure relationships and for success in love and
in material things—provided we can rule ourselves. The harmony
of the aspects should keep us relatively free from marital problems.
However, Jupiter increases the demands of Venus and may leave
us continually wanting more emotional satisfaction and more material possessions. Therefore, we do not always find permanently
happy marriages under these aspects. Nevertheless, there will certainly be a high degree of stability in a relationship.
Loyalty, cheerfulness, affability and a fondness for amusements
and luxuries are characteristic. Venus/Jupiter Square; Venus/Jupiter Opposition
With the hard aspects between Venus and Jupiter we do have a
great deal of warmth and cordiality to display, but we tend to be
too pushy. There is no mistaking how much we value good fellowship and the pleasant side of life. It is not often you will find us
gated with the wallflowers; no, we are more likely to come waltzing
in with the gate-crashers.
The craving for friendship and love (Venus) can well become
too expansive under the influence of Jupiter and can incite us to
make conquests on a large scale; especially as Jupiter, literally and
metaphorically, is the planet of voyages of discovery. And although
what we have here is a combination of two very compatible factors, 200 i Aspects and Personality
we suffer from restless activity accompanied by restless feelings.
All the same, this tension brought about both by the nature of the
aspects and by the stirring expansiveness of Jupiter is an optimistic
type of tension. Any Jupiter square will make us eager and challenging. When the square is with Venus, this can be rather attractive
as long as it is not overdone.
We appreciate beauty and nice things, not to mention luxuries,
but the appreciation is not simply passive even though two "easy"
planets are involved. With the restlessness both of the tense aspect
and of Jupiter, we can work wonders in creative and artistic fields
(Venus). Philosophical pursuits are not so well starred, because,
for these, Venus has to stimulate Jupiter, and Venus is not a great
encourager of activity.
As in all Venus/Jupiter aspects, self-discipline is not a strong
point, yet this is just what we need in order to keep our liveliness
within bounds. Venus/Jupiter Inconjunct The elusive tension of the inconjunct does not lead to an open
conflict between the planetary factors involved and does little to
stir things up. Therefore, in the inconjunct between Venus and
Jupiter, we find passivity and a degree of laziness or love of ease.
There is a latent dissatisfaction, a niggling feeling that there must
be something more than what we are getting out of social contacts,
friendships or love affairs—something more, that is to say, in the
expansive sense, not in the transpersonal or spiritual sense typical
of Neptune.
What is more, due to uncertainty in social contacts, we often
try to be as jovial and cordial as possible in order to win affection
and to feel safe with people. On the other hand, we can be so
opinionated and willful (Jupiter) that all at once we leave everyone
in the lurch to do our own thing. In short, we are quite erratic in
our treatment of those around us.
This changeableness poses problems for us, too; for we estrange the very people we need so much to bring us warmth and
reassurance, and are left longing for the very thing we have been
insidiously undermining. Aspects of Venus ! 201
The craving for warmth and for that everlasting "more" is an
incentive to various love affairs. Probably we shall meet with a
number of disappointments but, in the end, we can form a successful
union with someone. Before being able to do so, we have to discover that insecurity stems from the fact that natural optimism
and confidence (Jupiter) are unconsciously out of step with our
methods for ensuring safety in relationships and material things
(Venus). Venus/Saturn Aspects Venus/Saturn Conjunction
The need for warmth and love, for security and harmony, is a weak
and sensitive spot in all Saturnian aspects to Venus (and most of
all in the conjunction). We find it hard to let our warmth show and
are often so prickly that we erect a wall round ourselves and seem
very cool, impassive and formal. Nobody sees that inside we are
crying out for a little friendliness and warmth to give us a sense of
personal worth and that it is through sheer inability to handle relationships that we are shutting them out. Therefore the Venus/
Saturn aspects are regarded as fraught with problems, and classical
astrology promises little joy in life and many emotional upsets to
those who have them.
Nevertheless, with this aspect we can become very fond of a
person and we have the potential to build up a lasting stable relationship; that is the other side of Saturn. There is more faithfulness with these aspects than there is with aspects between Venus
and Jupiter! But before we give ourselves to another, we have to
know that other through and through and completely trust this
person, because Saturn will only bet on certainties. Of course, this
can consume time and effort. In fact, we need to guard against
letting the security factor predominate: we should resist the temptation to look for a fatherly or motherly partner, as they would not
be close enough to be a true companion.
With all this uncertainty and vulnerability, suspicion can creep
in. We are so anxious to keep our loved one that we hedge him
or her in on all sides and make the relationship difficult or even 202 / Aspects and Personality
impossible. At times our attitude can be most subservient: we slave
away to do everything to our partner's liking, but are still very
constrained. If, as is quite likely, they seem to be ungrateful, then
we must realize it is because the partner is put off by our air of
taut worry.
Learning self-confidence and self-acceptance is a must if we
are to settle down. Once we accept that we are not cut out to be
one of the world's revellers, but are solid, reliable citizens in need
of security, and once we bring ourselves to reveal our weak side,
we can enjoy a strong, enduring marriage or friendship. Venus/Saturn Sextile; Venus/Saturn Trine
Although the uncomfortable awareness of vulnerability is less
marked in the soft aspects, it is nevertheless present. We are rather
uncommunicative, standoffish and unenthusiastic in our friendships
and contacts. Saturn here makes us low on self-confidence; though,
seeing the aspects are easy, we are likely to win more support than
we would do if the aspect were hard.
With the easy aspects, we give the impression of being resolute,
reliable, thorough and, to all appearance, we are not people who
are swayed by emotion. Nevertheless, internally, the emotions do
play a substantial part in our lives. Possibly we are inclined to push
our emotions to one side—maybe we try to get rid of them altogether; even so they are still active in the unconscious. A safety
valve is extremely important. Women with these aspects are usually
career-minded and can go far in their chosen profession. Men with
these aspects are equally sensitive emotionally, and this sensitivity
can make an impact on their professional lives, too.
As with the conjunction, there is a need to play safe in emotional contacts. Here again, we look for older or more mature
people with whom to form liaisons. Generally speaking, Venus/
Saturn aspects give few friends: greater store is set by a single deep
friendship than by many passing acquaintances. We take relationships as seriously as we take everything else. For the rest, whatever
has already been said about the conjunction also applies to the
sextile and trine, though to a lesser extent. Aspects of Venus / 203
Venus/Saturn Square; Venus/Saturn Opposition
With tense aspects between Venus and Saturn, we become aware
very early in life of our emotional vulnerability and all its consequences. No wonder traditional astrology treats these aspects as
unpleasant. Their effects are similar to those described under the
conjunction but they are more acute and immediate.
Whenever we are in situations in which it is natural to give
and take love and warmth, we feel uneasy. Inhibited by Saturn, we
find it hard to display much ardor, and even harder to show gratitude. We are therefore inclined to run away from situations of this
sort, and so become isolated and lonely. Here, too, the development of self-confidence and a feeling of personal worth is essential
for overcoming the painful side of these aspects; having done which,
we can build stable relationships with loved ones. Venus/Saturn Inconjunct
The trouble with the inconjunct is that it makes it difficult to pinpoint the source of our sensitivity. Also we are seized with an
indefinable anxiety whenever we want to give warmth and love; we
are aware of being inhibited and of there being a chasm over which
we have to leap to reach the object of our affections. Or else we
have such a sense of responsibility that we hold ourselves in check.
We unconsciously look for a partner on whom we can lavish care
(a disabled person for example): someone for whom we can do
everything, so that there is more of a parent-child than a romantic
relationship. At the same time, we often feel unworthy or are
plagued by an inferiority complex, and slave all the harder to stay
in favor. Yet this is the very thing that alienates us from partners
or friends, leaving us still more isolated.
The negative spiral can continue a long time and, if we do not
take care, we shall develop the sort of behavior which sends out
"I am not worth loving" signals—and that is a barricade that may
prove impassable. Once again, the way can be cleared by selfacceptance and by the realization that others suffer from weaknesses
too, and that our own weaknesses, though different, are also on a 204 / Aspects and Personality
par with theirs. The resultant increase in self-confidence gives
greater balance. Although warmth and security will always be very
important to us, we can become much more settled. Venus/Uranus Aspects Venus/Uranus Conjunction
Venus, representing the need for harmony and warmth, teams up
here with Uranus, the need for individuality, freedom and a life of
our own. As it happens, the two tend to clash; especially as Uranus
causes enough disruption to drive us off the well-beaten track in
order to find ourselves. That is why Venus/Uranus aspects, and
especially the conjunction and the hard aspects, are traditionally
associated with homosexuality, perversity, and so on. However,
these are the extreme, and are by no means the universal rule in
real life.
Nevertheless, it is true to say that with these aspects we take
to people who boldly go their own way or, at least, are somehow
different—maybe eccentric or reformist. In friendships and love
life, we seek the stimulus of change and variety, and are not particularly stable. The restlessness of Uranus affects feelings. Being
highly strung and having an overpowering desire for personal freedom, we experience difficulty in forming firm friendships. Friendships make us tense, nervous, and insecure—because we are doing
our best to stay unfettered while trying to build up harmonious
relationships, and this requires concessions on our part. Sometimes
we prefer being cool, with an emphasis on externals and the avoidance of any deep emotional expression. Only in the extreme case,
when all the rest of the chart points in the same direction, can
perversion or sexual aberration show itself.
With a conjunction between Venus and Uranus, we resist becoming fully domesticated; yet the relationship with our partners
can still be fine as long as we are not hemmed in by conventional
rules, have scope for development, and above all are living with a
partner who is unconventionally stimulating. Aspects of Venus / 205
Venus/Uranus Sextile; Venus/Uranus Trine
The option of remaining free to lead one's own life and of developing within a relationship as one thinks best, is a must even for
those who have harmonious aspects between Uranus and Venus.
As soon as friends or the partner starts tying this person down,
Uranus incites him or her to kick over the traces. He or she is
attracted by anything unusual or capricious in others and is quite
likely to copy this behavior. A woman with one of these aspects is
often very independent and has a mind of her own. A man with
one of these aspects usually looks for a strong-willed woman who
knows how to get what she wants.
People with these aspects are fully alive to the individuality of
themselves and others and, with their taste for the unusual, they
keep an open mind on everything no matter how strange. Nothing
much disturbs them; instead, the unusual may even be found stimulating. Sometimes they even go looking for change (at work, for
example). The chance that the emotional life will be fairly unstable
is therefore present even in the harmonious aspects. Venus/Uranus Square; Venus/Uranus Opposition
By and large, the tense aspects between Venus and Uranus receive
pretty poor press in traditional astrology. And this is perfectly
understandable, given that their inherent strain and unrest compounded by that of Uranus really test the resilience of close relationships with others. What is more, Uranus is always the planet
of the iconoclast, the individualist and the know-it-all—hardly the
ideal person for holding a marriage or a friendship together.
With these aspects we are tense, nervous and generally unsure
in our dealings with others; consequently we quickly get irritated,
or fail to take enough time to build up one relationship before
abandoning it to start another. The idea of change and renewal is
irresistible; what we may not realize is that the source of our restlessness is in our own emotional constitution. Our inconstancy
and fear of firm commitments are projected into a colorful series
of on-off, half-baked relationships which do not give us or the 206 / Aspects and Personality
other(s) a chance. New friendships keep ending as suddenly as they
begin.
On the other hand, nerviness can contribute to an almost Saturnian anxiety, which inhibits us from forming any close ties (cf.
the conjunction). This problem will recur time and time again until
we manage to deal with its root. The creative side of the aspects
can then be expressed in a very stimulating relationship with people
who are just as determined to preserve their own freedom of development as we are to preserve ours; yet as a character they are
sufficiently interesting to us. Such a relationship is not always easy
but, with these aspects, we should become bored if things ran too
smoothly. So tense aspects are by no means inimical to good relationships. Venus/Uranus Inconjunct Whenever we make a play for freedom (Uranus), we start feeling
insecure because of the subtle suggestion emanating from Venus
that we are also in need of warmth and harmony. But as soon as
we try to satisfy the said need for warmth and harmony, a no less
subtle suggestion comes along advocating freedom and individuality. Consequently we can be very capricious in friendships and
partnerships and are liable to attract social grasshoppers or people
who are no good to us. This increases the insecurity so typical of
an inconjunct, and brings to the surface other Uranian qualities
such as separation or fear of emotional contact. Naturally, all this
frequently sets up a vicious spiral. At one instant we desire warmth,
at the next instant we desire freedom. At one instant we want to
have fun, at the next we have completely lost interest in it. For
people to expect anything of us drives us mad, and so we sometimes
seem to behave very irresponsibly. If Venus is much the stronger
of the two planets in the chart, we go to the other extreme and
suppress our own freedom and individuality in the hope of being
able to build up a relationship—but the suppression of such vital
factors does invite difficulties.
As we begin to perceive the cause of inner tension and uncertainty, we can face others more calmly. We shall always feel Aspects of Venus / 207
impelled to express our own individuality, but must learn to see
that people can help us and are not necessarily obstructive. Venus/Neptune Aspects Venus/Neptune Conjunction
The need for emotional and material security and for harmonious
relationships (Venus) gives, when combined with the refining and
idealizing of Neptune and with Neptune's tendency to blur the line
of demarcation between the collective and the individual, a great
deepening of the emotional life. The danger is that this deepening
will take place at the expense of the personal level, and we shall
try to idealize friends and loved ones and drift about wrapped in
a pink haze of romance. Also, by idealizing reality we often court
disappointment. Being very sympathetic, we do whatever we can
to console others. Therefore, with this aspect, love may well spring
from compassion; moreover, we are susceptible to emotional blackmail.
What we have to offer is not very satisfactory. For, because
we pursue universal love, we embrace everyone and appear to be
loving the whole of humanity in any partner chosen. Obviously,
this stands in the way of a true person-to-person love match—the
partner is unable to enter our visionary world.
Quite often, we seek spiritual values in friendship and love,
and often have a penchant for mysticism and the like. Where the
material side of Venus is concerned, the combination with Neptune
gives refined artistry; and, because Neptune is the planet of the
collective, we can reach a wide public with our skill. We have a
fine sense of form, color and proportion, and know how to make
good use of it. But there is a danger of dallying in a tinsel-town
fantasy world (the world of film stars for example) which has nothing
in common with the world in which we live.
When this combination is present, we need to choose our
associates with care. We are not very good at refusing requests, are
easily browbeaten, and are too self-effacing—all because we have
difficulty in seeing relationships in their true light. 208 / Aspects and Personality
Venus/Neptune Sextile; Venus/Neptune Trine
The idealizing and the search for a paragon of a partner are also a
feature of the harmonious Venus/Neptune aspects. We seek perfect
love and heavenly inspiration in a partner, and dream of an elevated
spiritual passion; but, as with the other aspects between these
planets, we are liable to run into the brick wall of hard reality while
chasing the soap bubbles of the imagination.
Owing to the relative inertia of the easy aspects we can remain
a long time in a dream world, and this may distort our sense of
reality. Nevertheless, we can give first-rate artistic expression to
this dream world, because any aspect between Venus and Neptune
produces creativity. Unfortunately, when the aspect is easy, we tend
to neglect talents, unless we are stirred up by influences from elsewhere in the horoscope.
We like to get on well with our friends and acquaintances and
seldom upset them. Our attitude is sympathetic, warm and cordial,
but rather impersonal where deeper feelings are concerned. Here
we encounter difficulties similar to those encountered by people
with the conjunction. Venus/Neptune Square
Venus/Neptune Opposition
The hard aspects between Venus and Neptune have been called
the aspects of the God-seeker. We are under constant strain in
matters of love and friendship, and this produces intense yearning
for an ideal realm of mystic unity. The tense aspects give us a much
more exalted notion of love and comradeship than is warranted by
everyday life. Consequently we are very susceptibile to disappointments of all kinds in the field of relationships. Such aspects crop
up time and again in the charts of great artists, musicians and others
who have bequeathed glorious works to the human race, but have
suffered many trials and tribulations in their personal lives.
Often there is tremendous sensitivity with the hard aspects,
and this can give unstable emotional reactions. There may be an
exaggerated sympathy for others, or complete self-renunciation, Aspects of Venus / 209
because the self is undervalued. We may put partners on a pedestal
and set ourselves to serve them.
However, the disappointments typical of the hard aspects seem
to stimulate us to beat the odds stacked against us, and, although
traumatic, can release considerable creativity. Venus/Neptune Inconjunct
Whenever we want to enter into a harmonious relationship with
someone (Venus) we become very insecure owing to the undermining effect of Neptune. We start wondering about our true feelings towards the other person and/or what he or she really feels
about us. Nevertheless, we have very high expectations of the
relationship. Owing to the uncertainty of the combination, we react
unpredictably in love and friendship, and this also is hampering.
For the inconjunct between Venus and Neptune makes us extremely sensitive to people's feelings and attitudes. We are too
obsequious, too ready to compromise; either we keep slaving for
others or else we become withdrawn and completely unresponsive—retiring to a dream world where we can contemplate a pale
ideal image of the beloved.
Our emotions easily deceive us, and we are quickly swayed.
Also (though the fact may escape our notice), our own behavior is
itself a source of misunderstanding—it does not give others a fair
idea of how we feel. We neglect to show our true colors, and the
resulting confusion merely reinforces sensitiveness and uncertainty.
On coming to terms with this insecurity, we may release an
unsuspected artistic ability to portray our elusive feelings. Venus/Pluto Aspects Venus/Pluto Conjunction
The all-or-nothing attitude ofPluto is united here with the Venusian
search for harmony, a combination that produces a rare blend of
outward charm and a strong, dark power of attraction. Pluto delves
and delves but is never satisfied. Although the native has much to 210! Aspects and Personality
give, the Plutonian influence on Venus means that he or she may
demand everything in love and friendship. The exactingness comes
from the unconscious depths of the psyche, which is always whispering that there is something more; therefore he or she is determined to have more. This person seeks an intense emotional
involvement with a partner, and carries it to extremes. By being
over-eager he or she stands to lose everything.
Pluto's hunger for power manifests itself here quite affably,
because Venus has a refining effect. The native can captivate someone with a sweet smile—and then manipulate that person to make
him or her fall into line. Needless to say, the conjunction (and the
same is true of the other Venus/Pluto aspects) does produce power
struggles within relationships.
The intensity of Pluto can make the native jealous and bitter
in love and friendship; forceful, too. On the other hand, he himself
may attract strong-minded friends, or a dominant partner. Since
Pluto's appetite is endless, there is seldom any satisfaction or fulfillment in a relationship. Excessive demands by either party can
prove destructive, and then Pluto, in keeping with another side of
its nature, confronts the individual with separation and loneliness.
Yet this can offer the chance to examine the fundamental causes
of the break-up and can lay the basis for transformation and regeneration. With a Venus/Pluto conjunction, relationships help the
native sound his or her own depths and to discover weaknesses
and problems. Venus/Pluto Sextile; Venus/Pluto Trine
The harmonious aspects often give as much sexual attraction as the
conjunction does, but the mode of expression is subtler. People
tend to think the native is adorable; they feel he or she exudes a
mysterious fascination. Yet, in spite of friendly charm, he or she
is very demanding emotionally, even with the easy aspects. The
native will probably satisfy a craving for power at the expense of
the partner, and needs to understand the partner thoroughly in
order to achieve inner growth.
This person needs to take care not to be too dominating,
forceful or demanding in friendships and love affairs. Although Aspects of Venus 1211
everything seems plain sailing and he or she meets with little open
resistance, there can be problems. With any Venus/Pluto aspect,
the native is not liable to form easy relationships; certainly those
formed are ones which mean a lot, but they confront his or her
deepest feelings. Pluto is the power that brings to light factors
buried in the unconscious and, when aspecting Venus, indubitably
plays a significant role in all the native's attitudes and emotional
contacts. Therefore problems involving the latter are not ruled out.
With these aspects, the person often takes relationships very
seriously, even though behavior, which is probably unorthodox in
the spheres of friendship and love, may not make that impression.
As long as the other person is able to stir the emotions, there is a
bond, sometimes even a compulsive bond, and this native is prepared to be everything to partner or friend. Venus/Pluto Square; Venus/Pluto Opposition
Very strong emotions are found in hard aspects between Pluto and
Venus. The intensity of the feelings and the need for depth and
keen involvement are strongly developed. Pluto encourages the
otherwise placid Venus to look for more, to develop a relationship
and leave the superficial level. The all-or-nothing attitude is the
same as it is in the conjunction and, in many instances, is expressed
as strongly.
Whenever this person makes friends or falls in love, feelings
are intensified by Pluto and, generally without realizing it, he or
she imposes him/herself on the other person. Simply by an attitude
he or she holds them in a grip, even though this is not the intention.
But the uncertainty typical of tense aspects is aggravated here by
a hunger for more, so that this individual is seldom content with
what he or she has. Pluto's pile of unconscious factors is not the
best foundation on which to build a happy personal relationship.
The person unintentionally toys with others. The relationship becomes a tourney where he or she tests inner strength, and the
partner is set up as a quintain to tilt at.
The individual can do well by moving within a fairly large circle
where he or she attracts attention in one form or another, and
generally finds it easy to lose him- or herself in sexuality. But with 212 Aspects unJ Personality the hard Venus/Pluto aspects, before he or she can function reasonably well in a relationship, he or she needs to pass through a
number of confrontations that will modify behavior. Venus/Pluto Inconjunct
Uncertainty dogs friendship and love; and this person has a strong
desire to prove himself or herself, or to take a firm hold on situations. He or she can appear very forceful. At the same time he
or she conceals personal emotions, because he or she is afraid to
let him- or herself go—which would mean losing a grip on things.
Without knowing it, this person wears an impersonal, forbidding
mask: thinking all the while that he or she is pleasant, friendly and
ready to compromise (Venus), he or she is impersonal and offputting. The tense reactions of others puzzle the native, even
though he or she is the cause.
Also this person is inclined to attract difficult or cantankerous
people with whom he or she can engage in an unconscious power
struggle. He or she is aware that they are trying to get the better of
him/her, but unaware that he or she is actually trying to do the same
to them. With an inconjunct, this person even makes a show of
following the partner's lead and of doing everything the partner wants,
but on the tacit understanding that the native is the center of attention.
Alternatively, this person may fall victim to someone who plays this
trick on him or her. The aspect often goes hand in hand with confused relationships in which unconscious processes play a part.
However, this person can be an outstanding marriage guidance
(or similar) counsellor, once he or she has penetrated to the core
of the personal problem. An insight into what causes this behavior
can make him a good adviser to those with similar problems for he
knows the tensions and difficulties all too well! Venus/Ascendant Aspects Venus/Ascendant Conjunction
We simply ooze Venusian sweet reasonableness, friendliness and
charm, when Venus is on the Ascendant. And this seems to bring Aspects of Venus I 21 f
out the best in those with whom we mix. We are good mediators,
and can usually give or restore harmony to our surroundings simply
by refusing to quarrel.
Due to a generally cheerful and obliging manner we get good
responses from others and, even if they do not see eye to eye with
us, we can often win them over. The drawback to this otherwise
desirable position of Venus is that we are rather self-indulgent,
even lazy or idle, and look at everything very superficially. Venus/Ascendant Sextile; Venus/Ascendant Trine
With the harmonious aspects between Venus and the Ascendant,
people find us well-balanced, and friendly, and we play an important
part in keeping the peace and healing rifts. Social contacts appeal
to us and we like events that are bright and entertaining; so much
so that we tend to ignore the serious side of life. We are adroit at
working on people's emotions.
Although every Venus/Ascendant aspect is potentially creative
and artistic, the harmonious aspects discourage industry, and Venus
tends to produce a a superficial approach. Sloth, self-indulgence
and a liking for luxury are as much a part of the picture with the
harmonious aspects as they are with the conjunction. Venus/Ascendant Square
Venus/Ascendant Opposition
In practice, Venus/Ascendant conflicts do not seem to be too much
of a disadvantage. There is a good chance that their tension will
make us more interesting to others. Therefore, even with these
aspects, we can expect easy social intercourse and a genuine desire
for a peaceful, harmonious environment. Not that we always succeed in obtaining the latter—we tend to overdo things, and may
fail to read some situations properly. Certainly we need to learn
how to direct our energies.
Although, in principle, these aspects can encourage laziness,
not to mention self-indulgence and luxury, their tension guarantees
a fairly energetic approach. Artistic and other esthetic forms of
expression are therefore more likely to find an outlet. Sometimes, 2141 Aspects and Personality
however, the outlet is simply a matter of trying to impose one's
own tastes. Venus/Ascendant Inconjunct Although we do not usually feel at ease with our fellow men and
women, we do have an enormous need of them with this aspect.
Not knowing the best way to find satisfaction and security in human
relationships, we end up feeling uncomfortable and awkward. Others tend to see a childlike charm in us and for the most part treat
us kindly; but we are unsure how we ought to respond, because
we are unable to fathom their motives.
Therefore we are inclined to hold back, and refrain from taking
an active part in what is going on around us because we do not
know the ropes. We make things hard for ourselves by hiding from
others that side of us that would help them to get on with us. As
in all Venusian aspects, there is plenty of creative and artistic potential, but this will not reveal itself until we effectively tackle the
uncertainty that inhibits us. VenuslMidheaven
Venus/MC Aspects Conjunction A need for secure relationships and for beauty and harmony plays
an important part in our striving for social position. Consequently we can do outstandingly well in Venusian occupations involving art, clothing, cosmetics, beauty culture, fashion, etc. With
Venus at the top of the chart we make a friendly, sociable impression; also we shrink from quarreling and prefer to settle disputes
diplomatically. Other things being equal, we can make fine arbitrators or ambassadors.
Nevertheless, with rather easy-going Venus at this place, we
need to avoid the trap of taking things too easily where social
position is concerned or of relying too much on our backers. Laziness and passivity can spoil the promise of easy success. Aspects of Venus 1213
Venus/MC Sextile; Venus/MC Trine
The behavior when we have Venus sextile or trine the MC is very
like that of the native with the conjunction—thatis to say, we seem
friendly, warm, sociable and cordial, and this gives us a flying start
when it comes to asking for favors. Artistic or other work involving
form, color and proportion could well be our metier; nor would
we be out of place in positions demanding a friendly social approach, such as that of receptionist, steward, stewardess, host or
hostess.
The need to preserve the peace at all costs and the wish to
have harmony in society at large are also present in the easy aspects;
so here, too, we have possibilities as justice of the peace or diplomat. Due to an (all too) great willingness to compromise, matters
are not always thrashed out; this can create misunderstandings, and
may leave openings for wolves in sheep's clothing to take advantage
of a situation. We can also tangle with people who drag their feet
over issues. Venus/MC Square; Venus/MC Opposition
Although we need a harmonious relationship with the environment,
especially in social matters, we do not always know how to go about
obtaining it. Whereas, generally speaking, any Venusian aspect to
the MC would make us seem friendly, the tense aspects are not so
straightforward: we do not have our relationships under proper
control, therefore we are sometimes inclined to overcompensate
Venusian characteristics and do our utmost to keep the peace and
to preserve an air of affability. But sometimes we couldn't care
less; we cannot be bothered to be nice, but just concentrate on
enjoying ourselves. This is something that has to be reckoned with
in all Venusian aspects, but in the hard aspects it can be very marked
where there is no other safety valve. For with the hard aspects, we
usually take Venus interests or callings very seriously, and are not
so likely to be easy-going. J / 6 / Aspects and Personality
Venus/MC Inconjunct
Social behavior (the Midheaven) and a need for emotional relationships and for peace and harmony (Venus) are not in keeping
with one another. We do not know how best to conduct ourselves
at work, and have little idea what sort of impression we make on
others. The temptation is to avoid the risk of confrontations by
being very friendly, but also very superficial and neutral. Our role
in the social process is therefore rather unclear and we may maneuver ourselves into a second-rate position because we are shy
about competing. Even the natural creative urge bestowed by Venus
unsettles us because we do not know how to handle it in a balanced
way.
Nevertheless, in general we make an unmistakably friendly
impression on others, and this should help us gain in selfconfidence. For although, with the inconjunct, we feel insecure in
relationships, we can definitely learn to handle them. We can be
tossed to and fro for a considerable time, but after a crisis involving
someone else—possibly a life partner—we usually see that the root
of the problem is a negative expectation pattern grounded in a
sense of uncertainty. 13 Aspects
of
Mars MarslJtipiter Aspects Mars/Jupiter Conjunction
The energy and executiveness of Mars side by side with the expansiveness and jollity of Jupiter give abundant energy and a great
need for activities of all kinds. Usually, with this aspect, we find
an enormous appetite for life, strong vitativeness and the resilience
to rise above difficulties. The optimism of Jupiter is coupled here
with the courage, love of action and enterprise of Mars, which can
give quick and energetic action on the spur of the moment—action
which often strikes lucky. But the drawback is that the planets
concerned carry the word "too" embroidered on their pennons;
they get us working too hard trying to overachieve. That is why
we sometimes find dissatisfaction in this combination; a dissatisfaction that can express itself in rebellious behavior—unnecessary
really, because the get-up-and-go of Mars plus Jupiter holds plenty
of promise of success. Sometimes, with this conjunction, we take
risks—physical, material, mental and other. 218 / Aspects and Personality
We have considerable need for independence and freedom of
action; both Mars and Jupiter encourage us to go our own way.
Mars can enhance the Jovian characteristics, and this can lead to
great opinionatedness and the spirit of Liberty Hall, but also to
proselytizing zeal and to a startlingly outspoken, disarming and
sometimes very naive honesty. If we set our minds on anything,
we do so heart and soul. Then we display courage and readiness
to put up a fight, are energetic and businesslike, and have enthusiasm and great confidence in ultimate success.
However, with this aspect, we must always guard against all
forms of exaggeration. For self-control is not our strongest point. Mars/Jupiter Sextile; Mars/Jupiter Trine
In the harmonious aspects, the excess inherent in all Mars/Jupiter
combinations has free rein. We possess more than enough vitality
and combativeness to face whatever problems come our way and,
in fact, we are inclined to make light of them. Also we prefer to
see everything in a fairly wide context: for example, we may place
our problems in a social, religious or metaphysical setting. But the
setting must be our own, not part of some system imposed from
outside—the latter would restrict our freedom unbearably. In fact,
whether on a large scale or on a small scale, we are likely to work
out our own rules and morals.
We like to air opinions and make good propagandists. Therefore these are not bad aspects for the politician, the publicist, the
clergyman or missionary, or the dedicated social worker. For if one
thing is foreign to our nature, it is repose or idleness. Even the
usual leisureliness of a harmonious aspect is banished by the fiery,
bluff enthusiasm of this planetary combination.
Adventure appeals to us and we long to mike good (Jupiter
heightens the ambition of Mars); we are ready to fight for our ideas
and ideals (Mars strengthens Jupiter). But with a harmonious aspect,
we encounter less resistance than with a discordant one; which
makes it easy to cling to our opinions, even when they need revising.
Hence, however profitable this combination proves to be, it tends
to make us wayward and full of self-will; nevertheless we do seem
to know how to get away with these character defects. Aspects of Mars / 219
Mars/Jupiter Square; Mars/Jupiter Opposition
Although the optimism and enthusiasm, the executive power and
force of the Mars/Jupiter aspects already mentioned are equalled
if not exceeded here, this is not an unqualified blessing. Great care
is needed; for not only are the two planets not noted for self-control,
but the strain set up between them makes it hard to use and manage
our energies properly.
We are never satisfied, but are always looking for more—
though not necessarily in material things; the aspect works even
more strongly on the mental plane. We crave adventure, have an
enormous need to prove ourselves, and want to be completely
unfettered and independent. We ram our opinions home (sometimes we go on about them far too much!) and are extremely pugnacious where ideals are concerned. Fair play is something on which
we insist, and we champion new things or indeed anything we find
absorbing. But the constant danger is that, because we can underestimate the force and application needed to gain our ends, we shall
always be wanting too much and pushing ourselves (and possibly
others) too hard, often to the point of exhaustion. All the same,
we do manage to keep extricating ourselves from self-made difficulties, and our sense of purpose can be tremendously stimulating
to those around. Mars/Jupiter Inconjunct
With an inconjunct between Mars and Jupiter is is very difficult to
see ourselves as we are, especially where executive power and
energy are concerned. Whenever we set to work, the influence of
Jupiter seems to deprive us of a sense of proportion: we get involved
in a bigger task than we had planned or we put in too much effort.
Possibly we fail to get our priorities right; we want to do everything
at once—at the risk of messing everything up. Therefore we need
to be chary over making promises: not guessing what it will cost
us to keep them, we are inclined to bite off more than we can
chew; this, of course, can cause trouble.
When we become involved in Jovian matters such as study,
travel and expansion of the spiritual horizons, things tend to get ?0 / Aspects and Personality
out of hand, because we start doing too much or stress ideas or
experience more forcibly than we think. So clashes are not always
avoidable.
With the inconjunct between Mars and Jupiter, setbacks and
recoveries will teach us that our expenditure of energy (Mars) suffers in an underhanded way from the expansiveness of Jupiter, and
that the watchword must be "look before you leap!" The same
applies to Jupiter, which is secretly fired by Mars, so that we tend
to do things on too large a scale and try to make too much of an
impression. In sports, for example, there is a need to learn that
physical limits are reached sooner than we suppose. But, by and
large, this aspect is also a source of enthusiasm and encouragement. MarslSaturn Aspects Mars/Satum Conjunction
A Mars/Saturn conjunction gives problems with our expenditure
of energy. The enthusiasm, fervor, energy, and executive ability of
Mars are restricted by the tenacity and confining action of Saturn.
At best, this produces well-thought-out activities, but generally
speaking there are difficulties to overcome. Saturn tends to hold
us back whenever we feel the urge to make our presence felt (Mars);
and yet Saturn itself promotes a form of ambition born of the desire
for greater security. So, on the one hand, there is the fear of being
too forward which may express itself in a withdrawn or passive
attitude, and, on the other hand and by way of overcompensation,
there is possibly a determination to prove ourselves or to outshine
everyone else come what may. In the second case the assertiveness
is great, but the motivation is really an enormous vulnerability.
Strange as it may seem, both forms of expression can be found
in one person, and stop-go is characteristic of many with this conjunction. Sometimes they are busy moving mountains, at other
times a fire lit beneath their chairs would hardly rouse them.
Mars has much to do with resilience and, when it is conjunct
Saturn, mental and physical resilience is not always very strong.
Usually, with this conjunction, we pass through one or more
difficult periods during life, when we are hampered by internal or Aspects of Mars I 221
external causes and are tied hand and foot by (for example) too
much responsibility, too heavy a work load or mental pressures of
some kind. But the conjunction of the two planets also supplies
the strength to break these shackles. Saturn can can apply the
energy of Mars to a certain goal or project with great concentration
for a very long time—which is the other, very profitable, side of
the coin with this conjunction. Mars/Saturn Sextile; Mars/Saturn Trine
Since Mars and Saturn are not particularly compatible, even the
harmonious aspects will put people under some degree of pressure,
although not so much as they would get from the discordant aspects
and the conjunction.
With the harmonious aspects between Mars and Saturn we
often make sober citizens and can work really hard, even in trying
times. For Saturn here lends purposiveness, a sense of responsibility
and perseverance to activities—not to mention a goodly helping
of ambition. We can be very disciplined, and are prepared to deny
ourselves a great deal of enjoyment in order to achieve goals. We
have an outstanding capacity for putting up with hard circumstances.
What is more, Saturn channels evergy into practical fields of endeavor: we are interested in concrete plans and are not keen on
rushing into the future at full steam ahead.
In all Mars/Saturn aspects we feel more or less vulnerable or
are troubled by inferiority feelings. It is hard to overcome these
feelings, especially as Saturn tends to repress the self-assertiveness
of Mars. But, once Mars manages to gain the upper hand, the
explosion can be resounding—even with the harmonious aspects. To begin with, natives are likely to keep feelings bottled up.
Nevertheless, it would be unwise for anyone who does us a
bad turn to think it will never be paid back; Saturn can bide its
time!
With these aspects we are very cautious; perhaps so cautious
that we let opportunities slip through our fingers. Flexibility is not
great, and we would rather follow the beaten track than strike into
unfamiliar paths where we might trip up. We make very steady and
reliable workers because of our stickability and because of our 222 I Aspects and Personality
desire to keep ourselves under control in all circumstances. But
we have no enthusiasm for restructuring and reorganization. Mars/Saturn Square; Mars/Saturn Opposition
In the hard aspects between Mars and Saturn, the incompatability
of the planets comes more to the fore. Usually, we are ill at ease
as a result of inferiority feelings which, as in the conjunction, can
make us very reserved and even passive on the one hand, and full
of (overcompensating) ambition on the other; consequently we
strive hard to reach goals, and are not to be deterred by any obstacles in the path. These aspects are often associated with intermittent bursts of energy: either we are taking things easy or we are
being intensely active—there is no thought in our minds of a happy
medium.
Because we feel so vulnerable, bearing is poised and stiff, and
the impression we make on others is of someone hard and even
forbidding. People can find us intimidating, and so a vicious spiral
is set up. They in turn behave coolly toward us, or refrain from
responding to us at all, and so our inward hurt increases and we
become even more withdrawn. Although aloofness may look like
egotism, it is really a form of shyness and sensitivity.
Perseverance comes hard to us; aims (Saturn) and actions
(Mars) are always in conflict. Sometimes we attract circumstances
in which we are unable to get enough of our own work done; as
if, here again, aim and action are out of balance. Generally, our
own attitude is to blame, but we can correct this as we grow older.
For, even with the active tense aspects, we can set our sights on
responsible long-term goals. Mars/Saturn Inconjunct
The inhibiting influence of Saturn on Mars comes out most strongly
in the inconjunct. A secret, ill-defined uncertainty and fear bothers
us as soon as we want to prove ourselves or take an active part in
life. Quite possibly we will stop short, or even fail to make a proper
start, due to a growing feeling of incapacity. Although all Mars/ Aspects of Mars / 22^
Saturn aspects have a stop-go character, initially there is more stop
than go about the inconjunct.
Also we find it hard to express a sense of responsibility; as
soon as we emphasize Saturn, we undermine its influence by our
actions (Mars) but, due to the fact that the aspect is an inconjunct,
are slow to fathom what is wrong. Unintentionally, we can stand
in our own light and suffer from a sense of inadequacy, anxiety and
frustration. Yet in spite of these drawbacks, we are very ambitious
and can become extremely irritated at the slightest reverse. Usually
we vacillate between forcing the issue and creeping away from it;
we have no idea of the whys and wherefores of our behavior.
Nevertheless, when we learn to adjust to the fact that our goalsetting and sense of responsibility (Saturn) seek to express themselves differently from our energy and executive ability (Mars), we
can bring out the positive qualities of this aspect. Mars/Uranus Aspects Mars/Uranus Conjunction
The executive ability and energy of Mars is placed under high
tension by a conjunction with Uranus. With two impatient active
factors in such close contact, we feel the urge, even when very
young, to go our own way as unconventionally as possible. There
is something provocative and defiant about our behavior whenever
we stand up for ourselves.
Our patience is not great: we have too much need of action,
change and renewal. In one way or another, we are very alert to
what is going on around us; and, because we are rather keyed up,
we may suffer from nerves or slight overstrain. We are inclined to
rush into things, but seldom finish them. And we are not good at
coordinating our activities. Impulsiveness and lack of forethought
are increased by Uranus; which can cause us to be brusque, capricious and sudden, not to say liable to the occasional fits of temper.
Therefore this combination increases the risk of broken friendships
and marriages; also of accidents. But the same swiftness of action
makes us extremely adroit at handling difficult situations where
snap decisions have to be taken. 224 / Aspects and Personality
The wayward self-will of Uranus produces a degree of obstinacy in the owners of Mars/Uranus aspects. We can impetuously
follow our own ideas in spite of anything anyone may do to stop
us. We are very dynamic and it is hard to resist our bold handling
of affairs. We can shine brightly if given the chance to be ourselves;
but being warned off or told what not to do arouses the fighting
spirit, and then the destructive side of this combination puts in an
appearance. Forbearance is not our strong point. Mars/Uranus Sextile; Mars/Uranus Trine
The restlessness, impatience, overactivity and self-will of the conjunction are also seen here. Mars and Uranus stimulate one another
whenever they are mutually in aspect, so here, too, we have a need
to live our own life, to interest ourselves in new things and, above
all, to look for excitement. The harmonious aspects offer the advantage that circumstances are more likely to swing our way. Originality and reforming zeal give us the opportunity to become the
independent, pioneering leader of a group.
We are quick to seize fresh opportunities, and expect others
to do the same. On the other hand we lack patience, and have only
a limited capacity for cooperation; but where we have to make a
solo effort we can do outstandingly weli—because it fits in better
with our deep-rooted love of liberty. The changeability and fickleness of Uranus make an impact on energy and executive ability;
therefore we find it hard to remain long at the same task—we do
need varied activities, not to mention a certain amount of challenge
and adventure. With the harmonious aspects, we usually know how
to create or find situations in which we obtain what we seek. The
abruptness of a Mars/Uranus combination always makes itself felt
and even with the harmonious aspects we have to be guarded in
our actions, which can sometimes be disruptive.
Uranian tension is not far to seek in the harmonious aspects,
and from time to time we may suffer from nervous diseases and
overstrain. With this combination, we seldom rest; for although the
harmonious aspects tend to be rather passive, two such active
planets in combination will put this passivity to flight. Provided life
is full of action and variety, and provided we get the opportunity Aspects of Mars / 225
to show what we can do, we can be extremely creative and innovative—quite often in technical/mechanical fields. Mars/Uranus Square; Mars/Uranus Opposition
The tense aspects are the most difficult to live with: we find it
extremely hard to curb energy (Mars) because Uranus keeps it
under constant tension. Strained and restless, we easily become
irritable and quick-tempered. The (often unintentional) disruption
caused by this combination is great; hence its traditional association
with separation and divorce. Reactions are usually too sharp, too
rash, too thoughtless and too energetic in situations which call for
calm. Also, with these aspects, we are inclined to go our own way
at all costs; and this can cause conflicts at school when we are still
young. Whenever possible we do as we please, and being prevented
from doing as we please drives us wild (to an extent that depends
on the rest of the horoscope). In any case we enjoy being provocative.
We are virtually unable to control our energy: Uranus itself
would make energy control difficult, even if it did not throw a hard
aspect. It is impossible to stick at the same thing for long. We
frequently hop from one thing to another without getting anywhere.
This is a shame, because the combination packs enough power to
move mountains.
We are eager to express (Mars) our longing to be free and our
originality (Uranus) but, with tense aspects, are liable to emphasize
them unduly. The consequence can be asocial or even antisocial
behavior; but at epochs when a break has to be made with outworn
values, we come into our own. The destructiveness inherent in the
Mars/Uranus combination can be channelled into fighting sports
(preferably not dangerous) and into occupations such as woodcutting, where we literally break things up: the release of tension helps
us to handle energy better. Mars/Uranus Inconjunct
Where there are two impulsive and active factors, one of which
secretly energizes the other, there is a big risk that we shall behave 226 / Aspects and Personality
thoughtlessly and cause upsets without intending to do so. Whenever we take positive action (Mars), Uranian impatience unconsciously comes into play, and we may be more rude or more
awkward than we suppose. What has been painstakingly built up
can be blown to smithereens in this way. Many times during life
we shall see things crumble around us—due, we think, to circumstances beyond our control, though all the while the reason lies in
our own subliminal field of tension. Even when we want to be
original and to make room for personal development (Uranus), we
are apt to force the issue (Mars) and to put too much energy into
it; encountering, as a result, more resistance than we expected. The
latter irritates us, and we become involved in a vicious circle with
self-will and belligerence alienating us from those around us.
As in the hard aspects, we need to find a safety valve for excess
tension and energy to enable us to function in a more efficient and
balanced way; although we must learn to live with our restlessness. Mars/Neptune Aspects Mars/Neptune Conjunction
When the desire for self-preservation, executive ability and energy
(Mars) conjuncts a need to blur the borders of the everyday world
and thus to refine, to idealize or to make thngs fluid (Neptune),
very divergent and apparently conflicting effects may be expected.
The background of the signs plays an important role in this, however.
If Mars has few or no dignities, Neptune may drain the energy
of Mars, leaving less resilience, less self-assertion, and less pugnacity
than one would normally expect. Even if Mars is well fortified,
Neptune will still undermine, and the Martian influence will be
rather impersonal and idealistic, yet will work in such a way that
we can throw glamor around ourselves and we appeal to others as
very lovable. For film stars and models this aspect is ideal! Incompatible as the rwo factors may seem, they do interact. That is to
say, Neptune transforms the manifestation of Mars: either the energy is reduced, or else the attitude is relatively free from Martian
egotism and so indefinite that others read into it what they will. Aspects of Mars 1227
The conjunction also makes us a trifle woolly-minded but idealistic. We want to help humanity and can work hard for a social
cause. We regard Martian energy as something to be used for the
group rather than for personal ends: the collective within us takes
precedence over the individual. Therefore a Mars/Neptune conjunction can cause a certain amount of trouble with relationships.
Neptune is a planet capable of producing glamorous, shimmering illusions, whereas Mars gives a need for down-to-earth activity. Therefore we can be very romantic, but are liable to
deception by an internal dream world, which we may also project
on the things we see around us. A plus point here is that, for the
professional artist, this is a fine aspect which enhances his or her
powers of expression. Mars/Neptune Sextile; Mars/Neptune Trine
In the harmonious aspects between Mars and Neptune, we are
often very attractive to the opposite sex: the radiation of our sexuality (Mars) is refined, and veiled under a friendly Neptunian
manner, so that we seem gentle and strong at one and the same
time. What people usually fail to see is that this approach is a way
of winning them over without difficult confrontations. Although
self-assertiveness is not strong in any of the Mars/Neptune aspects,
things do tend to go our way with the harmonious ones.
Self-confident behavior is not a marked feature of any Mars/
Neptune aspect, yet amiability wins a lot of cooperation from others, who also applaud our readiness to devote ourselves to some
ideal. It is quite natural for us to share in some charitable or humanitarian cause such as relief work.
We are not particularly good at planning activities, because
Mars is a law unto itself and Neptune is like shifting sand. In the
easy aspects the borderline between outer activities and inner activities such as (day)dreaming, fantasizing and the like is not clearcut, and sometimes behavior is very passive. But, even so, passivity
is an appearance only: inside everything is in full spate, and the
torrent of thought throws out ideas that may later find expression
in deeds—though it would be unwise to assume that the ideas
produced under Mars/Neptune aspects are always practical ones. 228 / Aspects and Personality
Although, in many of its aspects, Neptune is liable to drain
energy even when those aspects are harmonious, the selfsame
planet is (inexplicably) capable of giving us a powerful stimulus
from some deep source and of enabling us to do outstandingly good
work. However, the source dries up when we stop dreaming, since
the harmonious Mars/Neptune aspects are at their best only when
periods of intense activity alternate with periods when we take time
off to stand and stare and catch the threads of vanishing dreams. Mars/Neptune Square; Mars/Neptune Opposition
With a tense aspect between Mars and Neptune, we frequently
suffer from the undermining and debilitating action of Neptune.
We find it very hard to stand up for ourselves; also our mildmannered charm is less effective than it would have been had the
aspect been harmonious. In particular, we are often hindered by a
lack of energy and seem unable to get going. This lack of energy
is most evident when we have to prove ourselves or achieve something—that is to say, when we are engaged in activities ruled by
Mars. We seem to have plenty of creative energy to spare when it
comes to hobbies and personal interests.
Inferiority feelings sometimes result from an inability to summon up the desired energy: we soon become disheartened, and
imagine we are unable to cope with concrete reality and the pitfalls
of everyday life.
The tense aspects can make it possible for us to follow some
vision or some religious or metaphysical ideal, and success here
can boost self-confidence. Even so, we must take care not to be
entangled in illusion; for deception is the name of the game where
Neptune is concerned. Mars/Neptune Inconjunct Whenever we want to take positive action and/or want to prove
and establish ourselves, energy is insidiously dissipated by Neptune. We are unable (or too timid) to strike out, or we fight battles
in dreamland without campaigning in the everyday world. Some- Aspects of Mars / 229
times, living in dreams and fantasies plays such a big part that we
have no sense of reality and think we have solved a problem when
all we have been doing is turning it over in our minds. Also we
need to beware putting words into somebody's mouth, words we
have merely imagined. Unreliability (at work among other things)
has been ascribed to this aspect but, generally, there is no deliberate
dishonesty. Anyway, this unreliability is easily overcome as soon
as we see that the trouble lies in the habit of getting things done
in imagination and not in actuality. In the outside world we are
often too timid to defend ourselves against criticism, but in our
dream-world we are the hero.
An advantage of this aspect is that sometimes we can solve our
problems while we are sleeping: the unconscious sets to work on
them. As a result we may feel overtired for no obvious reason.
For artistic and creative expression this aspect is fine, provided
we free ourselves from our original uncertainty. If we can do so,
we shall observe that we have a fund of energy to bestow on things
for which we feel an unconscious spiritual affinity. Mars/Pluto Aspects
Mars/Pluto Conjunction
When there is a conjunction between two planets that both have
to do with the wish for self-expression, with the wish to prove
oneself and to make one's mark, then there is an almost compulsive
need to show off combined with enormous will-power. Pluto intensifies the executive force of Mars and puts us in possession of
an almost inexhaustible supply of energy and incredible resilience.
The craving for power (Pluto), on the other hand, is activated by
Mars so that we really want to take the reins in our hands and are
fired by boundless ambition.
We can usually look after ourselves; we do not brook the least
opposition but ram opinions down people's throats and go our own
way without fear or favor. The aspect has been termed destructive,
but need not be so provided we have an outlet for our strong drive
and ambition. A splendid way of using energy constructively is in
competitive sport; politics is another option. We do not spare our- 2 / Aspects JHcl Personality selves. Whatever we engage in—politics, science, sport, occultism,
etc.—we throw ourselves into it heart and soul, outstripping many
of our rivals and making a name for ourselves. Life's challenge
attracts us and we get a kick out of playing for high stakes.
The activity of Mars is enhanced by Pluto and we are quick
to push ourselves into precarious situations. In more placid times
we can eagerly mastermind a strategy for pulling off some coup or
other. The person with a Mars/Pluto conjunction has a strong,
extremely inflexible will, and is not to be balked. We will run our
lives without reference to current rules and regulations. If we are
thwarted, we can go to extremes; sometimes gradually cutting ourselves off from everybody. Mars/Pluto Sextile; Mars/Pluto Trine
We have a great need to prove ourselves and to exercise power.
In many instances we manage to engineer circumstances in which—
to a greater or lesser extent—we end up in a position of authority,
even if it is only by doing something others cannot do. We have
an unbelievable fund of energy and, even if physical strength is
limited, mental power and perseverance enable us to fight our way
through.
We are often very self-willed with these aspects, and the fact
that they are harmonious does not save us from confrontations. We
enter into the latter with head held high, determined not to be
done down, and becoming very angry when we are. Our grim
determination can achieve a great deal, but can also isolate us somewhat from those around us. Even the easy aspects do not enable
us to take things easy.
We can go far if we know how to use our energy constructively;
but, but by the same token, can go badly astray if we take a wrong
turning. Easy aspects are actually the worst aspects when it comes
to persisting in the wrong direction until finally being pulled up
short by a dead end. But, as already mentioned, resilience is great;
so that, in principle, we can overcome all our problems. Pluto is
insatiable and will never be satisfied with what Mars can do. We
expect a lot from ourselves with these aspects, and may overtax
our strength, although the danger is not so great as in the hard
aspects. Aspects of Mars / 2J /
Mars/Pluto Square; Mars/Pluto Opposition
Tense aspects between Mars and Pluto are the most forceful and
violent we can have. Everything to do with executive ability, energy,
action and the like is combined and intensified. Therefore the fierceness and pugnacity of these aspects can run to extremes, both in a
positive and in a destructive sense. This is seen in the champion
sportsman (especially in those practicing pugilistic sports like boxing), but also in criminals. With the hard aspects, we are determined
to get the most out of ourselves and out of life by doing something
hair-raising (like stunt work), by pushing ourselves to the limit
(especially in sports that are physically or mentally demanding), or
by pitting ourselves against formidable opposition even without
resorting to physical violence (as seen in that indefatigable exponent
of passive resistance, Mahatma Gandhi). We are fascinated by challenges and fights, physical or mental (or a combination of both),
and can never have enough of them. Too many of them weary us,
but we seem unable to ignore them.
We are always eager to prove ourselves; and this makes us
opponents to reckon with in politics, sport, etc. With the energy
of the tense aspects we fight hard, provoke controversy, and seem
to enjoy throwing ourselves into the fray. The danger with these
aspects is that we can be too hard on ourselves and others, to the
point of cruelty. However, if the rest of the chart indicates gentler
tendencies, we confine ourselves to holding our own. The more
drastic the situation, the grimmer and more purposeful we become.
The ability to work under great strain is outstanding.
Obstinacy, energy, craving for power and desire to succeed
are great, and can make us impervious to what others want and
think. We go our own way in spite of everything. But obduracy
can bring us into risky situations, so we do need to be careful. Mars/Pluto Inconjunct With the inconjunct between Mars and Pluto, we ought to be able
to manage our energy better than we generally do. For whenever
we stand up for ourselves, our efforts are intensified by Pluto; so
that we act more forcibly than intended and with a grim determination that surprises us. The upshot is that others are provoked 232 / Aspects and Personality
and start causing trouble; which means that, in a sense, we are to
blame for our own insecurity. Initially, we find it strange that we
arouse such fierce reactions, but we radiate Plutonian emanations
that others find disturbing whenever we try to influence them,
although we ourselves have no idea of the impression we are
making.
Also, with the inconjunct, we have an enormous desire to
prove ourselves; although we are not so quick to see that this is so
as we would be with one of the other Mars/Pluto aspects. We can
go far, but tend to be overinsistent about our own opinions—even
when we think we are making every allowance for the opinions of
others. Consequently, we force issues that would be better left
alone; and so our career or aim in life absorbs more energy than
necessary. Pluto represents the urge to get to the bottom of everything: in this aspect, the result of such a course of action is a feeling
of uncertainty. Nevertheless, once we realize the reason for discomfort, we shall find that we have an enormous fund of energy
at our disposal, and that even the inconjunct is an asset in its
own way. Mars L Ascendant Aspects
Mars/Ascendant Conjunction
The attitude to the world is strongly colored by the self-assertiveness of Mars. We are not inclined to pay much attention to others.
We seldom look before we leap, and we act before anyone has a
chance to offer advice. The impression we make is one of activity,
courage and daring. Independence and will-power are not always
welcome, however. Every now and then, people will probably treat
us as sharply and aggressively as we treat them. The impression we
make is more abrasive than we may wish, and if we are thwarted
we can become annoyed and take swift action. The rashness of
Mars has an outlet here which can result in divorce or broken
friendships, so we do need to exercise restraint. Aspects of Mars / 233
Mars/Ascendant Sextile; Mars/Ascendant Trine
Generally speaking, we stand up for ourselves, manage our own
affairs, and put in a fair stint of hard work; but the idea is to
concentrate on doing the things we like best.
We know how to encourage others and to keep them busy.
Quite often these aspects give leadership qualities; but more by
setting an example of courage, boldness and enthusiasm than by
good administration.
We are very resilient, and physically we can often achieve a
great deal. Usually we are keen on sport and sporty things, but our
keenness can degenerate into mere rivalry. Competitions and tournaments appeal to us, and we can do well in them. It is not unusual
for us to espouse some cause or ideal; for we are not averse to the
smell of battle, even with the harmonious aspects. Here, too, even
if we are not quite so culpable, we have to learn to leave others
some breathing space. If anything, our quick spontaneity is to blame
when we expect more than our due. Mars/Ascendant Square
Mars/Ascendant Opposition
It is hard to regulate energy with these aspects. At one instant we
are rushing matters, at another we are frittering energy away on
futilities, and generally speaking we are pretty inconsistent.
We flare up easily and are always ready to take a poke at
someone, but soon calm down. Also we sometimes react angrily
to the (often well-meant) advice of others, which we regard as
meddling in our affairs. We are quite capable of managing on our
own, and make a point of doing so. Even when we know we will
be rebuffed, we prefer going our own way to following someone's
lead. As in the Mars/Ascendant aspects already mentioned, there
is energy, daring, courage and enterprise—but we do need to be
careful that impetuousness does not lead to ruptures with others.
And we must not be surprised if we get some rather adverse reactions now and then from those around us. No one could call us
docile, and we never let anything go by default. 234 / Aspects and Personality
Mars/Ascendant Inconjunct
Without knowing precisely why, we often become tensed up if we
have an inconjunct between Mars and the Ascendant in the chart.
Whenever we are dealing with others, the effect of Mars operates
unpredictably: either we push ourselves forward too vigorously or
else we fail to stand up for ourselves when we should. In short,
the role Mars plays—and it certainly does play a role—is a very
uncertain quantity. We can feel insecure because at one time we
are letting ourselves be pushed around while at another we face
criticism for wanting to take the reins into our own hands.
Often we do not know what we want. Our inner drive (Mars)
is so much at variance with our public image (the Ascendant) that
we can be in a state of upheaval. We may feel that nothing turns
out as we wish; so we are always looking for something new to do.
However, the unsettledness is really in ourselves. If we are able to
release tension (in sport or other Mars-type activities), then we can
settle down to do whatever suits us best. As with all aspects of
Mars, we must try to avoid the thoughtless behavior likely to lead
to broken relationships. Maril Midheaven Aspects Mars/MC Conjunction
The urge to engage in social activity is great. We feel a need to
make ourselves felt in the community, and strike others as very
enterprising, not to say militant. We can shift endless mountains
of work—but may have to face the snarls of others due to our lack
of tact. It is important to learn to be more considerate and less
impetuous. We seem enterprising because of the ease with which
we address problems or stand up for ourselves. We prefer to clear
obstacles from the path by exerting ourselves to push them aside.
When an appeal is made to our fighting spirit and resistance, we
are generally at our best. While still young we show signs of willfulness and make it plain that we prefer to follow our own incli- Aspects of Mars / 235
nations. This conjunction definitely has something recalcitrant about it. Mars/MC Sextile; Mars/MC Trine
We are not averse to hard work; and are active and enterprising
when it comes to carving out a place for ourselves in society. With
the harmonious Mars/Mid heaven we are as ambitious as people
with the Mars/Midheaven conjunction, but are not so uptight about
it. Others see us as industrious, and this can be an advantage in job
applications or in anything where first impressions are vital. Mars
in harmonious aspect with the MC gives a degree of self-assertion
and independence which others can find stimulating. We make good
self-starters provided we are able to follow our own bent. We feel
free to speak our mind when anything is amiss, and usually know
how to promote changes in the desired direction. All Mars/MC
aspects enable the native to enter active social life. In the harmonious aspects self-image contributes substantially to success in this
field. Mars/MC Square; Mars/MC Opposition
With Mars in conflict with the MC, problems will regularly arise
owing to an often too bold, sometimes too aggressive and vehement
approach to others. We have a high opinion of ourselves and are
not always tactful enough to hide it. We strike others as domineering, ambitious and belligerent. Socially in particular, that can
spell trouble; because our attitude will come under attack more
than once and this is bad for our ego-image.
Once we learn to govern ourselves, enormous energy should
take us far. To a greater or lesser extent, we shall always have to
struggle to reach our goals; but this is something we are well
equipped to do. Socially, we do best in positions where we can be
very active and enterprising and also very independent. Freedom
of action is something we prize exrremely highly. 236 / Aspects and Personality
With these aspects, we usually have little regard for others,
and often take the wind out of their sails by our speed and competitiveness. Whatever we feel like doing, we do as a matter of
course. Mars/MC Inconjunct With the inconjunct between Mars and the MC we shall be aware
of a vague tension affecting social behavior. We certainly feel the
need to make a mark on society, but always imagine that we are
not being given a fair chance or that we are not able to do what
we want. This leaves us with a gnawing sense of discomfort that is
hard to define. Consequently we are constantly up in arms over
rules and regulations, if only to convince ourselves that we are free
spirits. At the same time, a gnawing sense of discomfort drives us
to seek an important role and, in doing so, to infringe the liberties
of others more than we think. That this will arouse their opposition
goes without saying. But because we do not have much insight into
our behavior, we shall not immediately understand these reactions,
and this can set up a vicious circle: we retaliate fiercely, the other
members in our social group hit back, etc., etc. And because we
are not in full control of our energy, we may also suffer from
physical accidents or mental breakdowns. Nevertheless, with a
safety valve for our energy, say in hard work on our own initiative,
or in games and sports (preferably dangerous ones), we shall enjoy
a greater sense of achievement and feel much more settled. The
heart of the problem invariably lies in the fact that energy (Mars)
and social expectations—or, for that matter, society's expectations
of us—(the Midheaven) are not always in agreement. 14 Aspects
of
Jupiter Jupiter/Saturn Aspects Jupiter/Saturn Conjunction
When enlarging, widening and augmenting Jupiter goes hand in
hand with its opposite, i.e., with restricting, narrowing and inhibiting Saturn, inconsistency is the result. On occasions when we
would like to be cheerful and enthusiastic, would like to widen our
horizons and throw ourselves heart and soul into some project or
other (Jupiter), we fear a loss of security, become inhibited, and
behave with extreme caution (Saturn). This leaves little room for
spontaneity and there is a danger that we shall let slip many good
opportunities, because when we finally get round to saying "yes"
it will usually be too late. The reason we wait so long is that we
want to be fully informed before making a move, or else we need
time to overcome a nervousness of anything new. Of course, this
aspect has the great advantage that it discourages us from rushing
headlong into wild adventures.
However, the limitation, melancholy and general cheerlessness
of Saturn are relieved by the underlying brightness of Jupiter; so 2 i8 / Aspects and Personality
that Saturn/Jupiter combinations do have a certain amount of joy
about them even though this is tempered by seriousness. Also,
whenever we are down in the dumps, the optimism of Jupiter can
lift our spirits again.
With the conjunction, we are capable of toiling hard and long.
We envisage future rewards (Jupiter) for the hard work we must
do (Saturn). So the combination is excellent for tasks requiring
steady application and considerable self-denial. A vision of the future is accompanied by a willingness to move forward stage by
stage; so there is definite organizing ability. However this will show
itself clearly only if the background of the signs concurs and if the
aspect ties in with personal factors in the chart. Jupiter/Saturn Sextile; Jupiter/Saturn Trine
The way in which we seek expansion, improvement, and increase
harmonizes here with perseverance and with the way in which we
discipline ourselves and define our egos. A balance between the
two planets gives us the possibility of being level-headed visionaries
looking for a solidly built future. A structured career pattern is
another possibility and is quite likely to bring success.
We are often filled with a justifiable optimism, a sort of wellbalanced enthusiasm, and this enables us to promote joint efforts
in a thoroughly relaxed way.
We are good organizers, and know how to combine a look
ahead with a sense of current realities; responsibilities seldom overburden us and we have little dread of the future. Nevertheless, the
promising and stimulating side of these aspects will never turn our
heads. We are and remain serious and will retain the necessary selfdiscipline to achieve our ends. For in these aspects Jupiter strengthens the ambition and the diligence of Saturn so that we never rest
until we have attained our goal. Jupiter/Saturn Square; Jupiter/Saturn Opposition
Whenever we feel like setting to work enthusiastically, improving
chances or seizing fresh opportunities (Jupiter), we are aware of Aspects of Jupiter / 239
the dead hand of Saturn. Fearing to make a move, we delay too
long, or else, by an error of judgment, we saddle ourselves with a
pile of unwanted work. Whatever the case may be, our theory and
practice, vision and reality are out of alignment and, to begin with,
we are uncertain how to proceed. This leads to extreme modes of
expression. We can balk at undertakings, but may also bite off more
than we can chew. When, for example, we take a position of responsibility (Saturn), Jupiter can propel us into a situation that is
too taxing for us or into one where we are forced to take too many
risks (financial or mental), and there is an even chance that by
adopting half-baked measures to mend matters we shall only make
them worse.
With conflicts between Saturn and Jupiter, we learn after many
slips and recoveries what we should be aiming for and when to
make an all-out effort; initially we lose a great deal of energy by
misreading the situation. We are likely to be somber and melancholy and subject to disappointment.
Yet, when all is said and done, these are aspects that offer us
great opportunities provided we have a well-defined field of action;
so that we might do well, for example, by taking on responsibilities
under the sort of supervision that allows a fair amount of freedom.
Then we can produce hard and painstaking work and develop selfconfidence. Jupiter/Saturn Inconjunct
Whenever we set out to tackle something with cheerful enthusiasm,
it is not long before we start feeling insecure. Say, for example, we
were thinking of asking for a better job, we might hold back because
"we wouldn't stand much chance of getting it anyway." And yet we
would be hard put to it to give one good reason for such pessimism.
In fact, we can be our own worst enemy when it comes to realizing
potential. This inconjunct often goes with restlessness, inconstancy
and inexpediency.
If we are engaged in responsible work (Saturn), then we experience a covert feeling of dissatisfaction because we want to be
free and unconstrained (Jupiter), but if we throw in our hand we
do not know what to do next because we then feel rudderless. 240 / Aspects and Personality
Therefore responsibility and its opposite, complete irresponsibility,
are both in the cards with this aspect. We are continually looking
for circumstances to suit us, but there is no possibility of finding
them until we understand that we need them to provide both restriction and opportunity, not with either one or the other. Having
gained this understanding, we shall be more balanced in our reaction to rules and regulations and will not try and take unfair
liberties. Until then, we are likely to undergo many changes both
in private and in public life, due to an inability to combine form
and vision. Jupiter/Uranus Aspects Jupiter/Uranus Conjunction
With our need for free expansion accompanied by a desire for
independence and individuality, we often experience tremendous
urges to distance from others, to go our own way without interference. Freedom and uniqueness are very dear to us and we have
no wish to be trammelled by convention.
Uranus pushes a philosophy of life and a need to widen mental
horizons (Jupiter) in the direction of unusual alternative ideas and
theories—especially those having to do with individual freedom
and equal opportunities. We have independent spirits and make up
our own minds on every topic.
The desire to be different comes out in all sorts of ways: in
an unorthodox life-style, in inventiveness, in an intuitive appreciation (generally well developed) of the advantages of new developments, and in a tendency to protest straight away against anything
with which we do not agree. Even physically we can stress our
difference: possibly by the way we dress, or possibly by some unusual physical feature (such as towering height)—as if our bodies
already knew we would want to be distinct.
We are liable to part company with any religious group to
which we belong: the main loyalty is to our own opinions. Therefore
this aspect chiefly favors independent development. We do best if
we have others around us to encourage us, but we must remain
free to be ourselves. Aspects of Jupiter / 24 1
Jupiter/Uranus Sextile; Jupiter/Uranus Trine
These aspects have much in common with the conjunction. Love
of freedom and the need to avoid regimentation are very much in
evidence. But the aspects are harmonious, so these things are usually expressed more placidly than in the discordant aspects. We are
able to fire others with an independent enthusiasm and have decided
leadership qualities, yet we take care to preserve the individual
freedom of others.
With such aspects, we are often very inventive and intuitive.
Owing to the future-orientated attitude of Jupiter and the flashes
of insight given by Uranus, there are times when we suddenly "see"
how matters will develop or why something turned out as it did.
These are fine aspects for people who make predictions, because
they flood their minds with ideas and associations that can put them
on the right track. But then there have to be links with personal
points such as the Sun, Moon and Ascendant, or the effect will be
quite weak. In any case, opportunities to show how resourceful we
are always seem to be presenting themselves, and we can be real
trendsetters.
Uranian quickness and rashness can propel us into fairly hazardous situations (Jupiter). We do not allow ourselves time to reflect, and the result is turmoil. Nevertheless Dame Fortune is
generally on our side—as we generally find out with a sigh of relief
once the dust has settled.
No one can talk us out of our ideas and philosophy of life.
Here, too, we go our own way with great originality and creativity;
unfortunately we do not find it easy to explain ourselves. Uranus
has a tendency to be awkward. Jupiter/Uranus Square; Jupiter/Uranus Opposition
Uranian aspects are full of unrest and tension. Jupiter, the planet
of expansion and increase, often has a stimulating (or overstimulating) effect on restless and irascible Uranus, which makes
these natives very vacillating.
We can suddenly do something tactless, or make a desperate
bid for independence. Public or private friction (arising from the J-zJ / Aspects and Personality
fact that we follow new, unaccepted ways and do not fit in easily
with others) never deters us. We want to be ourselves, are hard to
influence, and do not readily change our minds. With these aspects
we like to adopt an independent line, but need to be careful not
to take it too far.
Because of their impulsiveness, irrational suddenness and restlessness, Jupiter/Uranus aspects can lead to broken relationships.
The breaks can occur in public as well as in private life; perhaps
because we champion social reforms that give more freedom to the
individual. We obstinately stick to our guns, but do not always take
a balanced view. And, although we sense a great deal intuitively,
our interpretation, evaluation, and presentation of what we see
leave something to be desired.
Conflicts between Uranus and Jupiter are quite likely to be
present in the charts of intrepid explorers such as Stanley (famous
for his travels in Africa), and Nansen (renowned for his North
Polar expedition, and for work with the League of Nations). The
new, the undiscovered, and the reconstructive attract us under these
aspects, and we are prepared to devote a great deal of energy to
such things. Jupiter/Uranus Inconjunct With an inconjunct between Uranus and Jupiter, we are restless
and irritable and longing to break free, yet are hardly aware of this.
When being extra serious or making decisions, we provoke people
unintentionally by putting undue emphasis on independence. This
is because of the background influence of Uranus. A natural outspokenness causes considerable offense. It is highly likely that the
philosophy of life (Jupiter) will conflict with the way in which we
demand space for ourselves, and that Uranus, with its penchant for
pushing back boundaries and ignoring conventions, will be a constant source of dissatisfaction and change.
There is a need to avoid reacting impetuously, or doing anything on the sudden; assessments of things are not particularly good
and we are liable to be the cause of quarrels and misunderstandings.
We are intuitive, but only in flashes: sometimes getting the most
unusual, possibly patentable ideas, and at other times seeming not Aspects of Jupiter / 245
to have two thoughts to rub together. We should beware of exaggeration.
Often, because of a love of freedom and a fear of being tied
down, we are inclined to reject opportunities that come our way;
thus we are liable to stand in our own light and are slow to mature.
Also, we can cling to certain ideas through nothing more than sheer
obstinacy, even when we think we have carefully weighed the pros
and cons. In a word, we create a very different impression from
the one intended, and seldom end up doing what we have planned.
The Uranian buildup of tension has to be discharged before we can
get round to using the originality and inventiveness bestowed by
this aspect. Jupiter/Neptune Aspects Jupiter/Neptune Conjunction
The impact of a need for expansion and for widening horizons upon
a basic need to refine and disassociate things (which is felt most
strongly in the areas of religion and philosophy) produces a state
of affairs that is rather hard to define. The combination could lead
to dreamy and impractical idealism.
Fantasy is usually well-developed, and we have a Utopian vision
of the future; perhaps seeing opportunities and improvements (Jupiter) where none exists or, if they do exist, failing to recognize
their drawbacks (Neptune) and nursing vain hopes about them.
Because, with this combination, we do not have a very good grip
on everyday practicalities, we need to proceed with caution. We
take risks we would never accept if we were not wearing rosecolored glasses, and can end up with a fiasco. The conjunction and
the hard aspects (if linked with the personal planets) commonly
indicate inveterate gamblers.
If we have any Neptunian aspect, we are not easily moved to
take positive action. But as soon as the unseen world, or the world
of art or of emotional union with a greater whole, enters in, Neptune offers every imaginable help. And when, as here, Jupiter forms
part of the aspect, we possess an added insight into the religious
or the mystical. Jupiter gives a natural love of spiritual things, and ■244 / Aspects and Personality
the conjunction with Neptune intensifies devotional feelings. Ideals
(Jupiter) are fostered by these feelings and especially by the need
for the sense of oneness given by Neptune. Not only do we have
social sympathies, but we are also keen on social action; for example, by engaging in relief work in deprived inner city areas or
in the Third World and in general by standing up for the underdogs
(including literal underdogs, e. Vênus ., stray animals!). Idealism is great
and it is deeply rooted; which is why we can serve others for a long
time or, alternatively, can devote ourselves to artistic or spiritual
activities. In other areas, where there is no sense of underlying
unity, we find it hard to summon up much enthusiasm but spend
a lot of time dreaming of better things. Jupiter/Neptune Sextile
Jupiter/Neptune Trine
The harmonious aspects between Jupiter and Neptune make us
just as idealistic and dreamy as the conjunction does, but there is
a fair chance that we shall be able to express ourselves more easily
with the former in our charts than with the latter. However this
ease of expression can be accompanied by passivity; we have definite
artistic and musical talents but may fail to develop them.
In general, we display considerable interest in religious and
metaphysical topics and problems, but sometimes have difficulty in
keeping both feet on the ground and tackling problems in a sensible
way. We try to make things out to be more beautiful and ideal than
they are, and can stray for a long time in a world of illusion. All
the same, just like people who have the conjunction in their charts,
we may feel impelled to undertake social work. It is quite likely
that we shall have a great love for people and animals; but we need
to take care not to impoverish ourselves so much in helping others
that we become part of the problem we are trying to solve. Even
with the harmonious Jupiter/Neptune aspects, excessive generosity
and unworkable idealistic schemes for helping others can set us on
a collision course with hard facts. Addictions are another possibility.
In aspects of this kind, particular attention should be paid to the
personal planets; through which the aspects can readily make their
presence felt. Aspects of Jupiter I 245
Usually we are deeply religious: perhaps as traditional churchgoers (never dogmatic in a rigid sense but sometimes extremely
fanatical), perhaps as a follower of some system of metaphysics or
spiritual science. The need for a sense of personal (Jupiter) and
universal (Neptune) integration is very strong but the actual form
in which this need will express itself is not too crucial. Jupiter/Neptune Square
Jupiter/Neptune Opposition
Idealism comes well to the fore in the tense aspects, too. But we
must be careful what we do about it. Whenever we start giving free
rein to our philosophy of life (Jupiter), the urge to blur and refine
(Neptune) starts to undermine efforts and makes everything topsyturvy. Consequently we run the risk of becoming impractical
dreamers, visionaries with no hold on reality, cherishing ideals that
are infeasible, illusionary and chaotic.
Also, whenever we are forming opinions or making a synthesis
of our knowledge (Jupiter), we need to be on guard if Jupiter is
in a discordant aspect with Neptune. For decisions may be based
on fancied facts that are not in agreement with external reality, and
possibly not in agreement with our personal reality; or else they
may be based on transpersonal emotional impulses from Neptune.
The danger of letting things drift is always present.
Religious instincts are strong with the hard aspects between
Jupiter and Neptune. Not that we necessarily attend church, but
we do long for integration (Jupiter) within some group or greater
whole (Neptune): we long for a taste of infinity and cosmic unity.
The search in this area can bring inner reassurance, even though
our equilibrium is easily upset.
Other Jovian/Neptunian matters may also have an irresistible
fascination for us: distant lands and cultures, metaphysics, ethics
and other branches of philosophy, to mention but a few. By pursuing them we may gain a considerable understanding of others
and of their modes of thought, and earn a reputation for tolerance,
cordiality, hospitality and sympathy.
There is always a danger that we will lose sight of stern reality and imagine that everything in the garden is bound to be
lovely. 246 / Aspects and Personality
Jupiter/Neptune Inconjunct
The inconjunct is not very different from the square and the opposition in its effects. However, the lack of understanding is greater.
The conflict between the planets concerned is not open but disguised. Just where and how things go wrong is often hard to detect,
but one thing is certain: we need to beware of making false evaluations. When we launch out full of enthusiasm under the influence
of Jupiter, an emotional element slips in that is hard to pin down
and even harder to exclude. Therefore the eagerness with which
we start can be neutralized by some contrary emotion. Perhaps the
hopes we set out with are too high, or our (idealized) partners let
us down. Whatever the case may be, a nagging uncertainty plagues
us in some form or other. We sense that there is a strange tendency
for matters ruled by Jupiter to go awry; but the fact that we are
dealing with an inconjunct makes it difficult to trace the source of
the trouble. At the same time, the dream and fantasy world (Neptune) is covertly but unmistakably enlarged and strengthened by
Jupiter—to the extent that it may not be easy to tell reality and
fantasy apart.
Nevertheless, the combination is outstanding for those wanting
to enter into the spirit of myths, fairy tales and legends, and into
the still magical world of childhood. If we conquer uncertainty and
manage to keep our feet on the ground, we could do well working
with infants, or in the fields of music, metaphysics, spiritual endeavor or creativity. Jupiter/Pluto Aspects Jupiter/Pluto Conjunction
The conjunction of these two planets—each of which is expansive
in its own way—one through seeking a synthesis of a wide range
of phenomena, the other through spreading its roots in the allembracing unconscious, can have serious and far-reaching consequences. Pluto could carry us unexpectedly out of our depths, and
with Jupiter we must always be on guard not to bite off more than Aspects of Jupiter ! 247
we can chew. The danger of exaggeration and of overreaching ourselves is always present.
Whenever we are engaged in philosophizing, forming opinions,
studying or any other Jovian activity, Pluto intensifies our efforts.
It encourages depth; and in making a synthesis we are never satisfied
that everything has been included. Therefore the combination leads
to intense searching. Where our philosophical outlook is concerned, we do not rest until we are able to penetrate to the core
of life itself; preferably, we want to be in control of our lives. We
do not form opinions until we have thoroughly researched the
background information; the corollary being that, when our minds
are finally made up, nothing and nobody can shake us. Our opinions
become part of us and we promote them with passionate intensity.
So this aspect gives inflexibility, conceit and unreachability, but is
outstanding for study and research.
The expansiveness of Jupiter stimulates Pluto's striving for
power and urge to control and get to the bottom of situations. So
this is a likely aspect to find in the charts of great leaders and
demagogues (provided it is linked with personal points in the horoscope). Its drawback is that charismatic leadership ability may not
be accompanied by responsible insights. And once these natives
are captivated by some ideal (Jupiter), they can pursue it with such
fanaticism that they have no time for non-supporters. Power struggles and differences of opinion are commonplace with this aspect. Jupiter/Pluto Sextile; Jupiter/Pluto Trine
With the harmonious aspects between Jupiter and Pluto, there are
power plays in many areas; the need to be important can make
itself felt both on the physical and on the mental plane. Willpower
is unusually strong and we stand by our points of view. We hammer
opinions home and are not easily dissuaded. When linked with the
personal planets, these aspects give great powers of persuasion.
The obstinacy typical of the conjunction is typical of these aspects,
too; but, because they are easy, it shows itself in a different way
and causes less offense.
Expansive and improving Jupiter, in combination with taboobreaking Pluto, sometimes gives social reformers who try to de- 248 / Aspects and Personality
throne current moralities in order to replace them by others that
seem more tolerant. Certainly freedom is promoted by Jupiter, but
Pluto does not readily release its grip and will encourage the setting
up of fresh power-structures which deny freedom in other areas.
Although these are harmonious aspects, the Jupiter/Pluto combination is intrinsically so powerful that these people, though wellmeaning, seldom give others a fair chance.
The desire to explore and investigate is well-developed in this
combination. In professional life this is excellent for scientific pursuits; in domestic life it signals the housewife who is not taken in
by sales patter but checks carefully before she buys.
We are inclined to moralize because we have a strong sense
of right and wrong, which also encourages us to work actively in
support of progress—whether material, social or religious. We can
do things on a large scale and are good organizers, but we must be
careful not to attempt too much at one time. Jupiter/Pluto Square; Jupiter/Pluto Opposition
The danger of things getting out of hand or piling up on top of us
is greatest in the hard aspects between Jupiter and Pluto. Since
Pluto insists on getting to the bottom of things, and Jupiter wants
fullness and breadth, half-measures never satisfy us for we are always looking for more. If necessary, we work hard to this end, but
we can easily overload ourselves. In the tense aspects, we find it
difficult to control the energies of these two factors, and they tend
to whip one another up. Therefore we can be extremely ambitious;
so that, even when we reach the top of our profession, we remain
dissatisfied.
Willpower and stubbornness are so great that, once we get
hold of an idea, we do not deviate from it by so much as a hair'sbreadth. Obviously, this is bound to arouse opposition, especially
as we are liable to express opinions vigorously. With the hard
aspects, we are not good at measuring the intensity of what we are
saying. We can be fanatical; what is more, others generally perceive
us as fanatical, even though we imagine we are being very accommodating.
With these active aspects, we devote ourselves to social reforms and the like, and want to play an important part in bringing Aspects of Jupiter / 249
them about. The idea of power is extremely attractive to those with
the Jupiter/Pluto combination, whatever the type of the latter may
be. There is, in any case, a desire to pit ourselves against the prevailing mores and, when the aspect is hard, we find an added spirit
of contradiction. Taboo-breaking Pluto is a genuine revolutionary;
although not the same as Uranus. Under the influence of Uranus,
natives may achieve a quick, explosive breakthrough into a new
form offering freedom for individual development to self and others. Under the influence of Pluto, natives require a personally chosen pattern of society into which everyone must fit regardless of
convention, and where the native's will is sovereign. The battle
fought under a Pluto conflict has far-reaching implications. Natives
bide their time, are skilled strategists, unyielding, and are not afraid
to use force if necessary. Often they bring about tremendous transformations.
Because we see and tackle things on such a large scale, we run
the risk of never being satisfied by past achievements. We also run
the risk of spiritual or material failure because we want to do everything at once. A sense of proportion is likely to be lacking with
these aspects. Jupiter/Pluto Inconjunct Wanting everything at once and striving for more power than we
can handle are typical of the inconjunct between Jupiter and Pluto.
The worst of it is that we find it so hard to appreciate this fact. We
may admit that perhaps we do behave a little like this at times
(purely and simply to reassure ourselves), but we fail to realize that
we are less moderate than we think. Reactions from others may
puzzle us for quite a while; and we can become involved in a
peculiarly treacherous vicious circle of misunderstandings.
Opinions (Jupiter) are expressed with great intensity and sometimes with great intolerance. Generally speaking, the contents of
the unconscious, especially repressions and projections, form the
bases of our judgments. Therefore, in a critical situation, the Jupiter/Pluto inconjunct can have a transforming effect: via ethical
and moral concepts, religious experience and philosophy of life,
we can get hold of repressed material. More likely than not, we 250! Aspects and Personality
shall undergo radical changes with the inconjunct (if the latter is
linked to personal planets).
Strength, power-craving and will are much greater than we
realize; below the surface Jupiter is constantly reinforcing Pluto.
Hence we are better able to meet challenges than our uncertainty
permits us to feel. If we are bold enough to cut through knots, we
can go far in various fields and can consciously seize opportunities
that, in order to satisfy a need for power, we have already seized
unconsciously. Jupiter!Ascendant
Jupiter/Ascendant Aspects Conjunction Usually optimism knows no bounds when Jupiter is conjunct the
Ascendant: we like to walk on the sunny side of the street. A
cheerful attitude is displayed to the outside world and most people
find us lovable. We have no difficulty in showing cordiality and
warmth, and our brightness encourages others.
The joviality and generosity of Jupiter can manifest freely
here, but so can the desire for freedom. We need acres of living
space and find restrictions very hard to bear. Inwardly, too, the
spirit of expansion is at work. Even when we are young, we are
interested in everything but should be careful not to turn into knowit-alls. Moralizing and telling others what to do (while we, for our
part, smugly go our own way) are two of the possibilities with this
conjunction; which otherwise has enough optimism and resilience
to be full of promise. Jupiter/Ascendant Sextile
Jupiter/Ascendant Trine
The harmonious aspects between Jupiter and the Ascendant have
much the same effects as the conjunction. We radiate cheerfulness,
optimism and cordiality, and cultivate a wide circle of acquaintances.
When Jupiter, with its gift for improving and remedying, is in easy
relationship with the Ascendant, we like to be helpful to others—
not in a subservient way but out of simple kindness. "People are Aspects of Jupiter! 251
entitled to be themselves" is our motto. Love of freedom and the
need to be able to develop freely are two of our prominent characteristics.
Although, even with the easy aspects, we have a tendency to
lecture and moralize, we generally manage to do it in a manner
that others can accept without being offended. We enjoy propagating ideals and a vision of the future, and like talking about the
things that enthuse us—which with Jupiter well in play are not a
few!—particularly those things that widen our horizons, either literally by travel, or metaphorically by immersion in philosophical
or general human concerns. Jupiter/Ascendant Square
Jupiter/Ascendant Opposition
With the hard aspects, we are strongly attracted by the grandiose,
the jovial and the magnanimous and this shows in our attitude to
others. But we tend to overdo things. We need constant reminders
to hold the energy of the tense aspects in check; sometimes, if we
wish to avoid problems with others, it is wise to be a little more
subdued.
Often we radiate much more self-confidence, not to say selfwill, than we might imagine, and acquaintances may see us as arrogant. Yet, with this same self-confidence, plus a big dose of optimism, we can do much good if we take care to create a genial
impression and not a haughty one.
The love of doing things on a grand scale may deteriorate into
a fondness of luxury and display; equally, we can become preoccupied with immaterial things and can spend time promoting intangible values. In ways like these, the urge to be expansive can
easily get out of control. Jupiter/Ascendant Inconjunct
Whenever we manifest ourselves in the outside world via the Ascendant, the need to spread our wings obtrudes itself upredictably;
at one moment we are being more grandiose, enthusiastic, boastful
and moralizing than intended, and at the next are being extremely ?52 / Aspects and Personality
helpful and friendly and are hoping to be admired for our niceness.
Yet this behavior, too, is temporary, so that (as with any inconjunct)
we appear to be very fickle.
What is more, we have problems expressing our outlook and
opinions. The inconjunct to the Ascendant is inclined to make us
misread situations, to say the wrong thing at the wrong time, and
to suffer from misunderstandings. This in itself can create uncertainty. Nevertheless, we can learn how to combine the astroinfluences after some crisis has helped us to understand their effects;
and then the inconjunct can be extremely stimulating. J upiterl Midheaven Aspects Jupiter/MC Conjunction
In the conjunction with the Midheaven, a need for expansion can
express itself powerfully in the social field. This is why this placement is traditionally regarded as a very profitable position. Due to
an optimistic, forward-looking attitude, and to the ease with which
we present ourselves to the outer world, we have a lot going for
us. We tend to take the long view and are possessed of a social
conscience. Jupiter always represents the spiritual and religious
needs of humanity, and someone with a Jupiter/MC conjunction
often makes an ethical or moral stand in the community.
Smugness is also well-known in this position; the great ease
with which everything is managed tempts us to display an attitude
of superiority. Modesty is not our strong point. Although outgoing
and friendly, we have an air of condescension. This is a fine position
for teaching, healing, religion and other Jovian activities. Jupiter/MC Sextile; Jupiter/MC Trine
With the harmonious aspects between Jupiter and the Midheaven,
we generally know how to make a good impression on the outside
world. We can encourage others by a friendly, cheerful attitude
and, conversely, others are prepared to help us, too. The self-image
is a confident one. We adapt well to the various circumstances of Aspects of Jupiter / 253
life, and luck is usually on our side. Good opportunities seem to
present themselves of their own accord without any notable effort
on our part. But, since everything runs so smoothly, we tend to
become easy-going and self-indulgent.
Freedom to develop is not something we have to fight for with
this aspect; usually it is handed to us on a plate. The position of
Jupiter is excellent for a (big or small) rise in life—a rise often
brought about (in part anyway) by a wide range of interests. Once
again, to issue the statutory warning that ought to accompany all
Jovian aspects, we must try to avoid thinking we always know best.
However, with the harmonious aspects our style is so relaxed it
seldom raises many hackles. Jupiter/MC Square; Jupiter/MC Opposition We must take care not to overdo things when we have tense aspects
between Jupiter and the Midheaven. We throw ourselves enthusiastically and impetuously into all kinds of things, seize fresh opportunities, and like to be active. Given our self-image, we tend
to overestimate our abilities and possibilities and to underestimate
difficulties—hence the repeated deadlocks, from which, with Jupiter's incorrigible enthusiasm (and sometimes ill-founded optimism), we can usually break free either in whole or in part.
With these tense aspects we are not very good listeners (even
though we may think we are), but like to speed things up. Therefore
others see us as difficult and arrogant; and sometimes, when we
sally forth starry-eyed on some perilous adventure, as childishly
naive. "Look before you leap" is a useful motto for people with
this combination.
Because we rely largely on our own judgment, we are liable
not only to think we know best, but also (given the least excuse)
to say so out loud with a wag of a finger. We tend to beat the drum
in and out of season, and this usually brings conflict with others.
Nevertheless, these aspects also give enthusiasm, cordiality, cheerfulness, hospitality, joviality and warmth; and when we learn to
season our optimism with a little caution, we shall have a great deal
in our favor. ' Aspects and Personality
Jupiter/MC Inconjunct
Jupiter increases the effort we put into our social interactions.
Although we are undecided—because ideals (Jupiter) have so little
in common with the way we function socially (MC—we do unconsciously manage to express many of our ideas and ideals. Therefore
we sometimes appear to be very opinionated and overbearing;
though plagued by the uneasy feeling that we may be creating the
wrong impression. And so, one moment we are moralizing. But
the next moment we are adopting the low standards of others!
People find us impossible to understand, and they react accordingly.
Then again, our (usually unconscious) demands for greater freedom
of action in our social environment—demands that may well bring
conflict with superiors—alternate quite quickly with displays of
helpful cooperation. Obviously, this can have an unsettling effect
on career and can lead to changes of employment. We do not know
what we really want, since outlook and ideals (Jupiter) are not in
harmony with the way in which we present ourselves to the outside
world. Some time may elapse before we find our true sphere; generally it takes a crisis to show us where we have been going wrong.
If we find a good safety valve for Jupiter, for example in the form
of a Jupiter-type hobby, it is possible to function socially in a more
balanced way. 15 Aspects
of
Saturn Introduction
What has already been seen to hold good in the case of Jupiter is
the fact that although aspects between the slower planets certainly
exercise an influence, that influence affects a host lof nativities
belonging to a given period. The slow moving planet has no specifically individual character, and has more to do with the spirit of
the times. Therefore care is called for in interpretation.
In spite of what has just been said, however, the mutual aspects
of Saturn, Uranus, Neptune and Pluto do gain an individual color
when they are directiy linked with some very personal factor such
as the Ascendant, Midheaven, Sun, Moon, Mercury or, to a lesser
extent, Venus or Mars. A trine, for example, between Saturn and
Uranus is a phenomenon helping to characterize an era; but when
the Sun conjunct Uranus is trine Saturn, or when the Sun makes
a major aspect with the two aspect partners (a grand trine, say), the
native's personality is involved. It is to such cases that the following
paragraphs apply. 256 / Aspects and Personality Saturn/Uranus
Saturn/Uranus Aspects Conjunction Two very conflicting factors are brought together here: a need to
carve out an identity for ourselves, to define limits and to preserve
form (Saturn), and a need to break structures, to overstep limits
and to develop individuality (Uranus). Clearly this will sometimes
make it difficult to decide whether to preserve or to destroy.
Whenever we are engaged in giving life a certain shape (Saturn), we suffer from the urge to break out of or alter this shape
(Uranus), and so we become tense and restless. Attempts to bring
about change are impeded by a desire to proceed along fixed lines
or according to a set pattern. There is no stagnation with this conjunction, but a restless activity continually generated from within,
which can make the native feel insecure. Nevertheless, the conjunction does have a creative side that can be put to very good use.
We regularly break free from anything that might hamper us (Saturn), and are unlikely to be rigid in our opinions. Tendencies that
are too revolutionary are held in check, as is the temptation to be
provocatively iconoclastic. Generally, one of the results of all this
is a democratic attitude born out of tension and uncertainty.
If we are assailed by fear and doubt (Saturn), the conjunction
with Uranus can really wind us up, so that disruptive tendencies
are increased. The development of personality (Uranus) may be
accompanied by feelings of anxiety and guilt (Saturn); we are always
trying to improve situations and want to stop them getting out of
hand. Therefore this conjunction often produces great self-control.
With this aspect, we are very determined because Saturn and Uranus encourage stubbornness and willfulness. Uranus in full flight
is a poor listener and Saturn dragging its heels is not likely to change
course. When linked with personal factors in the horoscope, this
is not a bad combination for doggedly pursuing personal interests. Saturn/Uranus Sextile; Saturn/Uranus Trine Tensions encountered in the conjunction are less conspicuous in
the harmonious aspects between Saturn and Uranus because the Aspects of Saturn / 257
two factors support one another in the way they express themselves.
Consequently, we can structure our lives well (Saturn) within existing frameworks—social or otherwise—without sacrificing anything of our individuality (Uranus). We function in the community
in a completely personal way without creating tensions in the outer
world or in ourselves.
We can apply ourselves diligently to personal development,
showing great determination and energy. The will is resolute and
we have plenty of staying-power.
Life's sudden ups and downs are taken in stride, and we are
not easily thrown off balance. Athough probably having a high
opinion of ourselves, we are not blind to limitations, are prepared
to give others elbowroom and are likely to have a democratic outlook.
A balance is struck between the preservation of structure (Saturn) and the alteration of structure (Uranus), which interact
smoothly to give a quiet, steady renewal. We are prepared to accept
all kinds of change, and can take a keen interest in the ideas of
others; but we always endeavor to integrate the new with the old
or the old with the new as easily as possible. Therefore this is an
excellent aspect for a legislator; since it encourages the framing of
laws that, without being too rigid or too revolutionary, pay due
regard to both public and private interest.
However the tenacity and obstinacy characteristic of this aspect
can make us unwilling to listen to reason. When locked on target,
we are not easily diverted. Saturn/Uranus Square; Saturn/Uranus Opposition In the tense aspects between Saturn and Uranus, the planets express
themselves much as they do in the conjunct, but with more unrest.
The shaping of our lives is continually disrupted by Uranus, or we
leave most things half-finished. Uranus spoils the patterns we are
so busily weaving. We never settle down: something always crops
up to force a change of plan, something new always has to be
incorporated in the schedule. With a hard aspect between Saturn
and Uranus, we often undergo several (possibly quite radical) transformations, partly of our own volition and partly because we unconsciously attract them. 258 / Aspects and Personality
But when we strive in Uranian fashion for individual development and personal renewal, the strain set up by Saturn produces
a certain amount of anxiety, and we have to overcome all sorts of
inner and/or outer resistance; also it is hard to envisage the most
suitable form for development to take. Though doing our best to
break away, we still seem bound by certain formalities (for example,
by having to give long notice before we can leave a job), and thus
suffer conflicts between personal freedom and development on the
one hand, and rules and regulations on the other hand. However,
the tense aspects supply sufficient energy for coping with these
conflicts.
Because of the inhibiting effect of Saturn, we seldom rush
headlong into new ventures and seldom feel inclined to break links
with the past. Yet, because of the restlessness induced by Uranus,
we have no wish to become ossified. Although this is a tense,
unsettling combination, it provides the chance to look for new ways
of expressing ourselves within existing forms, or of adapting our
life-style to our individuality. And this is something for which we
are prepared to struggle hard. Saturn/Uranus Inconjunct
The tensions here are much the same as they are in the hard aspects,
but are not so readily understood. We have a tremendous feeling
of unrest, but do not know its source. Therefore we are never really
satisfied with fixed forms and are uncertain how to express individuality or win freedom.
If we want to be original and individualistic, ambitions are sure
to be undermined and held in check (Saturn) via the inconjunct.
The resulting tension can make us even more determined to have
room for personal development; yet this will only increase the
counteractivity of Saturn. Hence it is not unusual, with this inconjunct, to suddenly abandon independence and become complete
conformists. But after a little while the urge to be provocative and
changeable reasserts itself and we start chafing under the same dull
routine.
The tension between the retention of form and the breaking
of form is at full stretch in the inconjunct. Therefore we are likely Aspects of Saturn/ 259
not only to be very much on edge mentally, but also to suffer
physically—from nervous diseases, for example.
Life consists of one change after another; probably we create
change unconsciously but may well do so deliberately. This is because we are never entirely at ease. Yet even with the inconjunct,
a crisis can reveal the cause of the underlying tension; and then
the Saturn/Uranus combination can be expressed in a more helpful
way. Saturn/Neptune Aspects Saturn/Neptune Conjunction
In the conjunction between Saturn and Neptune form-building and
form-disintegration go hand in hand, a state of affairs which can
give a wonderful combination of qualities (provided personal
planets are involved)—or it might more often be truer to say a
weird and wonderful combination. Whenever we are engaged in
giving concrete form to ego or are concerned with things with which
ego can identify (Saturn), the form-dissolving processes of Neptune—which tend to blur the edges of the personality—are automatically activated. Therefore we keep making big or little formal
changes and have difficulty in giving the ego a regular shape. On
the other hand, when formulating goals, we get feelings and insights
that increase their depth. There is no knowing at any instant
whether we are going to be changeable or insightful; in fact, we
can switch imperceptibly between the two states of mind. Suppose,
for example, we are writing a report: we may commence in a wellthought-out style that expresses our feelings on the subject; but
then we can introduce paragraphs with no proper structure at all,
paragraphs with the meaning "left hanging in the air" to such an
extent that the reader is utterly perplexed. Or we may wander from
the subject entirely. The danger of this conjunction is that the
formless and spiritual (Neptune) may undermine awareness of the
concrete and everyday (Saturn).
Yet this conjunction could enable us to investigate the invisible
and transpersonal world in a matter-of-fact, methodical manner.
Much depends on the relative strengths of the two planets. 260 / Aspects and Personality
The Neptunian sense of unity and communal service can be
made concrete by a conjunction with Saturn; and then we might
work hard for a better world, a more closely knit human race and
a deeper religious or metaphysical understanding. But, by the same
token, the cautiousness and ambition so characteristic of Saturn
can be subverted by Neptune. We have no control over the latter
planet, and can be so swayed by it that ambitions are imbued with
its spirit of renunciation. Possibly we shall sacrifice ourselves for
some idealistic goal we have painted in glowing colors. Needless
to say, this aspect may feature in the charts of ascetics or of others
who do not ask much from life. Saturn/Neptune Sextile; Saturn/Neptune Trine Building up and breaking down work together harmoniously here,
enabling us to forget fears and inhibitions by taking a lively and
sympathetic interest in others. The goals we set often originate in
deep religious, metaphysical or spiritual insights, which form an
underlying motivation for our activities. Subconsciously we sense
how we ought to plan and manage things, and this helps handling
everyday affairs. A tendency to follow feelings and a quickness to
detect odd undertones may even turn to our social advantage. Being
both visionary (Neptune) and matter-of-fact (Saturn) can endow us
with tactical abilities: instinctively knowing what to aim for is no
small advantage in business. The aspect is also good for devising
military (or other) strategy.
Constructiveness could show itself in the spiritual and intellectual fields. We appreciate the irrational, and find that making
allowance for it helps to straighten our thoughts. This is a good
aspect for people who study religious, metaphysical or esoteric
matters. Saturn introduces orderliness to Neptunian concerns, but
Neptune prevents Saturn from making this too cut-and-dried. In
the easy aspects, idealism and materialism form a well-matched
blend of suppleness and strength which enables us (in spite of the
Neptunian influence) to keep both feet on the ground. With farsighted patience we endeavor to promote ideals and spiritual insights (Neptune). The way in which we express them often reveals
a serious outlook. We are prepared to make great sacrifices for
them; probably with characteristic austerity. Aspects of Saturn / 26/
Saturn/Neptune Square
Saturn/Neptune Opposition
The hard aspects between Saturn and Neptune have very varied
modes of expression. Much depends on which of the two planets
has more dignities. The building up and preservation of form are
in conflict here with formlessness and the undermining of form.
The result is that we tend to go wrong when setting goals and laying
plans: our plans are incomplete or unrealistic, our goals so Utopian
they are unattainable. Dreams are all too easily mistaken for realities. Even things that have begun to look settled seem to come
unstuck through various elusive factors within ourselves; so concrete achievements do not come at all easily.
If we become interested in what lies beyond the range of
normal vision and defies rational explanation, conflicts with Saturn
in this area have an inhibiting effect so that we hesitate to commit
ourselves and our approach is too rigid, or fear enters in to make
us superstitious. Or imagination runs riot with ideas we seem unable
to shake off; as seen in its extreme form in paranoia. Naturally,
before there can be any question of a persecution complex, personal
planets have to be involved and the rest of the horoscope must be
in agreement. The core of the matter, however, is that with the
conflicts between Saturn and Neptune the world of imagination
and of hard reality will put a strain on one another and cause
problems.
Powers of perseverance (Saturn) can be undermined by Neptune, but the tension in these aspects can mean that once we have
been inspired by a certain ideal we can devote ourselves to it for
a long time.
However the inspiration is not always there: it is stifled by
Neptune in such a way that frequently we have difficulty in knowing
just what we want. Therefore we are rather susceptible to the
(subversive) influence of others.
Our need for the transcendent (Neptune) does seek to express
itself; and when these Saturn/Neptune conflicts become too much
for us, we just want to get away from it all. Then we seek the peace
and quiet in which we feel more comfortable than in the turmoil
of daily life. Calm seclusion can inspire us tremendously and help
us to regain our strength. 262 Aspects and Personality Saturn/Neptune Inconjunct
If we take what is said above about the conflict involved in the
hard aspects between Saturn and Neptune and allow for even
greater elusiveness and insecurity, then we shall get a good impression of this inconjunct. In fact there is a double undermining: that
of Neptune and that of the inconjunct aspect itself. So little room
is left for certainties and we tend to retire into a dream-world (since
we find it impossible to come to terms with reality), or into a hard
shell (out of fear of all sorts of unmanageable and unconscious
influences). It is extremely difficult to give form to things.
In matters governed by Neptune, the planet to do with whatever is unconscious and without form, Saturn makes us feel inhibited and unsettled. In practice we could stand in our own light by
losing opportunities, failing to persevere and being unable to decide
on a goal. The temptation will be to allow ourselves to be governed
by outside influences, and we may suffer some form of enslavement
(to drugs, drink, certain religious ideas and so on) instead of stiffening our backbone. Drugs and drink and so on are the "formless
form" in which we hope to find a measure of security.
Sooner or later, as the strain builds up, we reach a crisis and
suddenly see what is wrong. It then becomes possible to make a
better adjustment between these almost incompatible psychic factors by allowing each of them its own freedom of expression. Finally
we start enjoying the advantages of the aspect; being able to switch
attention between form and formlessness in a harmonious way. Saturn/Pluto
Saturn/Pluto Aspects Conjunction Intensity and tenacity are key concepts in the conjunction of Saturn
and Pluto. This is an extremely powerful conjunction if linked with
personal factors. The ability to shape things, to work hard and long,
and to endure stress are enormously intensified by Pluto and we
are able to tap a great reservoir of strength and resilience. At the
same time, a need for power and authority and a desire to leave
no stone unturned (Pluto) assume a set form (Saturn). Striving for Aspects of Saturn / 263
fame and success, tough behavior, and refusal to give way on any
issue, are likely consequences.
Pluto also has to do with repressions, and its conjunction with
Saturn makes us painfully aware of these unconscious impulses.
We can resort to firm action to enable us to overcome problems
and fears. Others may think of us as strong, but do not see the
inner struggle—which nothing would induce us to reveal to them.
Profound inquiry (Saturn) plus penetration (Pluto) give a capacity for all kinds of research and for science in general. When
working on anything that really interests us, we anticipate good
results and are very energetic and ambitious; but nobody must get
in the way, otherwise we strike back mercilessly.
Under the influence of Pluto it can be hard to gauge how
forcefully we express ourselves; and when the planet is in conjunction with vulnerable Saturn we can be more prickly and fierce
than (seen in retrospect) we intended. We have the strategic ability
to outwit rivals. Without realizing it, we choose to confront others
and make a bid for power in the very place where we feel most at
risk; naturally enough, this stirs up a hornet's nest from time to
time. Therefore the present conjunction is said to signify violence—
although our behavior need not sink to that level. Violence is
certainly possible, but only if the rest of the chart points in the
same direction.
What is more, the conjunction of Pluto and Saturn is found
in people who are determined to master important processes at all
costs. These can be socio-political processes, processes that are
personally meaningful to these natives, or even the processes of
parapsychology or magic. Feelings of uncertainty created by unconscious compulsions might prompt us to take the reins of our
life completely into our own hands. Saturn/Pluto Sextile; Saturn/Pluto Trine Like the conjunction, harmonious aspects between Saturn and Pluto
indicate tremendous perseverance, a hefty power drive, and forceful behavior. We can become completely immersed in the things
that fascinate us, and may toil long to achieve personal goals. With
this combination, we cannot be provoked with impunity; but, like 264 / Aspects and Personality
a skilled strategist, wait patiently for the chance to repay with interest whomever has offended us. We can work in a very disciplined
manner, and have an unmistakable hunger for power, but handle
it well: generally speaking, the harmonious aspects arouse little
opposition.
Also, with the harmonious Saturn/Pluto aspects, we could be
capable of very hard work, both physical and mental. Energy and
tenacity are so great that we are able to push ourselves to the limit.
Neither Saturn nor Pluto are propitious, even when the aspect they
make with one another is propitious: they often cause difficulties—
but leave us more than equal to them. We are always trying to
prove ourselves both to ourselves and to others, and function well
in trying circumstances or under (great) pressure; in fact it seems
that it is only then that the full potential of these aspects is realized.
Because perseverance is so great and because we experience
little resistance from outside (at least directly), we are liable—with
the harmonious aspects—to dig our feet in on every issue, making
no concessions to others. Using tight self-control, we express ideas
in a disciplined, impassive, yet very decided way; and this can make
us seem hard and unapproachable. Incidentally, there is a clue here
as to why a Saturn/Pluto combination, much as it favors in-depth
research of all kinds, does not encourage us to probe ourselves too
deeply—even when the aspect is an easy one. Saturn, as we have
seen, has a somewhat inhibiting effect on spiritual growth and transformation. Saturn/Pluto Square; Saturn/Pluto Opposition The presence of ambition, tenacity and the desire to prove oneself
(not to mention an aptitude for getting on in life), are even more
marked here than in the harmonious aspects. Hard aspects
strengthen, and sometimes exaggerate, these characteristics. A need
to define and limit, to mould and preserve form, is intensified more
than usual by Pluto, because the aspect made by Pluto is hard. Thus
a person can seize the objective so fiercely that he or she arouses
negative reactions in others. But, besides intensifying, Pluto transforms; it often leads one to demolish a huge chunk of the past in
one iconoclastic outburst. Therefore, with Saturn/Pluto conflicts Aspects of Saturn 1265
this person shall alter life-style and goals more than once; also, in
the environment, he or she will play a taboo-breaking, formbreaking role. Contests with those in authority are not excluded;
especially as the desire to prove oneself is so strong in the tense
aspects that one is determined to be one's own person. Being insecure, he or she wants to hold the reins in his or her own hands,
to gain overall control, to leave nothing to chance. As far as possible
this person tries to get a grip on everything, and is rather demanding. If the native should lose the grip, however, he or she
falls prey to uncertainty and the search for power becomes tinged
with desperation. It goes without saying that this produces a fair
crop of problems.
The aspect indicates strife, but because of the energy and tenacity it bestows and because it impels the native to get to the
bottom of things, it frequently indicates victory, too, although at
the cost of sweat and tears. Spiritual growth and radical changes
often occur by this means, in spite of Saturn's anxious efforts to
hold Pluto back—efforts that repeatedly come to nothing in the
on-going conflict.
With the tense aspects, too, we can toil hard and long, performing heavy work. Generally speaking, this person likes to push
himself: not for him the path of least resistance. Experiences are
liable to make him harsh and calculating in dealing with his fellow
men and women. Therefore Saturn/Pluto conflicts can have a very
isolating effect—provided, of course, there are links with personal
planets. Nevertheless, through being hard on himself in these conflicts he can go a long way in science, society, or in anything to
which he sets his mind. The aspect cuts this person out to be a
loner, but on his own he functions outstandingly. Saturn/Pluto Inconjunct
Whenever we involve ourselves in confrontations with unconscious
factors (Pluto) we become anxious. Quite probably, we repress
them or try to crowd them out with other interests. They will then
come back in a guise that is more difficult to deal with. And, when
we bring some structure into our lives and start taking on responsibilities, Pluto tends to ruin our efforts by making us overdo things. 266 / Aspects and Personality
The inconjunct creates a field of tension between shaping our lives
and the problems we encounter while doing so. We are inclined
to run round in circles through not being able to integrate what
we have learned with what we have inwardly experienced.
We always seem to be getting into situations where there are
obstacles to be overcome or radical changes to undergo. This aspect
by no means opens up the path of least resistance. Through conflicts
beneath the surface, especially with people in authority, we shall
feel compelled to change our situation (though not necessarily our
job situation) from time to time. The basic cause is inner struggles
with ourselves; outward struggles being simply a reflection of these.
In the end, we may learn that the need for a clearly defined conscious viewpoint (Saturn) and the need to bring repressed material
out into the open (Pluto) both have to be expressed in their own
fashion, and we can use their concentrated energy to track down
whatever is hidden. Therefore this is an aspect that, as we mature,
can help us to gain a deep psychological insight—especially into
the battle people have with themselves and with their environment. Saturn!Ascendant Aspects
Saturn/Ascendant Conjunction
When Saturn colors the way of presenting ourselves to the outside
world, we give the impression of being sober, reserved, secretive
and serious. Probably we are afraid to let go, and view people and
things pessimistically behind a rather cold front.
Saturn is not a planet that leads us to be swayed by enthusiasm.
We test the water carefully before we take the plunge. Safety first
is our motto. The sense of responsibility that weighs us down is
sometimes expressed physically in a stoop, as if we were literally
bent beneath a burden—a burden we have taken on ourselves.
We seldom reveal what is going on inside, and people have
difficulty in getting to know us. Defensiveness is responsible for
the fact that we can be plagued by feelings of loneliness. Yet Saturn
can allow us to lose these feelings in the company of a special individual, a person with whom we feel safe. We would go Aspects of Saturn / 26/
through fire and water for someone like this; although, even so,
it is hard for us to show emotions. Saturn/Ascendant Sextile; Saturn/Ascendant Trine
Reserve and sobriety are characteristic of the harmonious aspects
between Saturn and the Ascendant. Certainly, we are not as dejected as people with the conjunction often are, because we can
keep a reasonable balance. However, the touchiness of Saturn
makes us aloof, solemn and watchful. We would rather be seen
working hard than telling jokes. People often assume we are older
than we are.
Very early on, we learn where our responsibilities lie and that
we ought to plan ahead. Perseverance is usually well developed and
we are reliable. However, we do not make friends easily; so that
even with the harmonious aspects it is possible to suffer from loneliness. To many we are a closed book; and in fact we prefer others
not to read our inmost thoughts. We feel our vulnerability to the
outside world quite keenly, even though we manage to cope with
it well.
As early developers, we have a practical and hard-headed outlook even while young, and we take a dim view of the dreams and
ideals of others—which does not always put us in their good books.
But this attitude keeps us from making wrong moves and, combined
with resoluteness and a great power of endurance, can bring success
in the business world. It need come as no surprise, therefore, that
many people with these aspects seek an outlet in work and service. Saturn/Ascendant Square
Saturn/Ascendant Opposition
Here the reserve and aloofness so typical of all Saturn/Ascendant
aspects are caused chiefly by the degree of vulnerability we feel.
We respond to people in a nervous, even mistrustful way. When
we wish to express ourselves, Saturn interferes and we clam up
instead. Also, with these aspects, we can be heavy-handed; a trait
unlikely to give popularity. The irritation shown by others further 268 / Aspects and Personality
increases uncertainty and vulnerability. We must be careful not to
keep saying "I'm no good," "No one likes me," and so on: statements such as these have a knack of being self-fulfilling and may
stop us finding the warmth we seek.
Due to unfortunate experiences in contacts with others, we
sometimes go into complete seclusion, or hide behind a "wooden
mask" of some sort—that of a careerist, for example—in order to
keep out of range at the personal level.
The tense aspects make us very insecure on this point and,
when we brood over it too much, we are liable to suffer from
listlessness and fatigue. With the unconscious working flat out in
an attempt to solve problems that have arisen or might arise, energy
is used up that would normally be available to the conscious. However, if we learn to confine worries to practical issues (as it is
perfectly possible to do with the tense aspects), we can become
the same responsible, down-to-earth individuals we would be with
one of the easy aspects—although never the life and soul of the
party. Saturn/Ascendant Inconjunct
In the inconjunct, too, we are rather fretful, although not sure why.
For us, to go out into the world is to become insecure, anxious and
defensive; and, however much we might wish to be friendly, our
behavior is cold and reserved. Or we keep carrying on about general
responsibilities; sometimes reasonably enough but often quite out
of turn, so that associates take us for incorrigible pessimists with
no appreciation of the lighter side of life.
If we are taken up with responsibilities, we find them difficult
to discuss. Explanations lack clarity, or we seem to get everything
round the wrong way. In short we fail to show our true feelings.
Consequently we can alternate between prolonged hard work and
prolonged bouts of idleness when we do nothing at all.
Yet, in the end, we can shape our lives successfully and achieve
self-confidence. As with every inconjunct, however, there usually
has to be some crisis first which pinpoints the source of the trouble. Aspects of Saturn / 269 Saturn!Midheaven Aspects Saturn/MC Conjunction
With Saturn at the MC we are often tormented by feelings of
inferiority. Vulnerability is great; in many cases because the support
of one or both parents was missing during childhood. We feel an
urge to do well when still young, either to overcome an inferiority
complex or else to let it be seen that we account for something.
Hence this aspect can indicate tremendous ambition: we can work
hard and long for the goals we have set ourselves, but may also be
harsh and pitiless.
Traditionally Saturn conjunct the Midheaven is supposed to
signify a public fall or disgrace. But this is true only when the
groundwork of success has been prepared too quickly and carelessly, or when what we are building is hollow. If we get down to
work like a real child of Saturn, that is to say slowly and thoroughly,
we can go far later in life.
We need to provide not only ourselves but also our environment with form and structure, so we have a liking for regulations
and for laying down the law to others. Much of this arises from an
inner feeling of ineffectiveness and a diligent search for an individual form in which we shall be valued. If we resist any tendency
this conjunction may have to disturb our equilibrium, we should
be able to display thoroughness, determination and tremendous
consistency. Saturn/MC Sextile; Saturn/MC Trine
Whatever the aspect between the Midheaven and Saturn, a feeling
of vulnerability and inferiority will play a role. In the harmonious
aspects we can come to terms with this fairly well. They give us a
serious outlook on ourselves and on life in general, and our sense
of responsibility is well-developed. We can work hard and long and
we like to finish what we start. Indeed we can be very self-denying
on behalf of work or for some other goal; also there is more than 270 / Aspects and Personality
a hint of wanting to let the world know that we can play our part
in fine style. Ambition is certainly not foreign to the harmonious
aspects.
Saturn is the planet of time. Therefore we seldom see a meteoric rise to fame and fortune; instead there is steady application
giving solid achievement. Given time, this will operate to our advantage.
Even with these relaxed aspects, we seldom choose the path
of least resistance, neither in forming our identity, nor in regard
to social status. In any case, we are eminently suited to heavy,
prolonged and responsible work. We can be a tower of strength to
others, and can help them to shape their lives, too. Saturn/MC Square; Saturn/MC Opposition
In the tense aspects between Saturn and the Midheaven inferiority
feelings are great. We are so sensitive to the outside world, especially in our social contacts, that we are inclined either to hide
behind a cold, impassive mask, or else to tax our energies to further
ambitions. As a rule, we rush at things like a bull at a gate and need
not be surprised when people strengthen their fences (so to speak)
to try and stop us.
Since Saturn represents learning through suffering, we generally maneuver ourselves into difficult situations where, for example, what seems child's play to others is drudgery to us, or where
just when we are expecting promotions, our company closes down;
similar examples could easily be multiplied. Such experiences can
certainly discourage us to the point of pessimism. Nevertheless, in
the tense aspects, we are just as likely to greet reverses with a grim
determination that finally saves the day against all odds. Therefore
these aspects are not, as the old books would have us believe,
indicators of nothing but hopeless failure and misery. They do
demand a great deal, however, and give us a thorough testing before
we reach our goal. It is good if we hurry and scurry less and are
less fretful, since that is counterproductive. To be calm and collected (which, believe it or not, is perfectly possible with these
aspects!) can be very helpful. Aspects of Saturn / 271
Saturn/MC Inconjunct We do not know what sparks off our uncertainty, but uncertainty
nags deep down whenever we strive for personal goals and/or engage in business or social affairs. In general, the way we regard
ourselves (Midheaven) is not in keeping with the way we define
our identity; though we are unaware of this. Our approach to others
is defensive, not to say timid and suspicious, and it provokes them
to behave in the same way toward us. Since an inconjunct of Saturn
with the MC does not boast self-confidence, people's reactions
merely strengthen latent inferiority feelings. The sense of being a
loner whom nobody understands may make us morose and isolate
us still further. It goes without saying that lack of self-confidence
can be very detrimental to the social life.
Yet tucked away inside is perseverance and a sense of responsibility; the problem initially is how to show them in action.
By drawing back or adopting a craven posture, we are only asking
for trouble. In the crisis that is bound to occur sooner or later, we
have a chance to bring out the positive side of the aspect, and to
obtain a sober but structured picture of ourselves. In none of the
Saturn/Midheaven aspects are we bursting with confidence in ourselves, but we are reliable, modest and serious. 16 Aspects
of
Uranus Introduction
The mutual aspects of the extremely slow-moving planets—Uranus,
Neptune and Pluto—influence people worldwide. Some aspects
(for example the sextile between Pluto and Neptune in the 20th
century) can even set the tone of an era. Even greater care over
interpretation is required here than with the aspects of Saturn.
Some combinations will not be found today in the charts of living
persons. Therefore the proposed interpretations are valid only
when these planets are closely and significantly linked with characteristically personal planets, or with the Ascendant, or with the
Midheaven.
Another difficulty is created by the fact that the planetary
influences are rather hard to interpret in certain respects. They
relate to the unconscious and therefore to the collective mind, so
it is not easy to say just how their squares would differ from their
trines for example. The wisest course seems to be to treat all aspects
alike without distinguishing between them^—except in the case of
aspects to the Ascendant and the MC. ■V / Aspects and Personality Uranus/Neptune Aspects Uranus represents the need for independence and originality; it
crashes through forms and restraints, and helps develop individuality on the basis of inwardly desired change. Neptune, on the other
hand, represents the desire to experience what lies beyond individuality itself. Hence it stands for a need to disassociate and blur
things, to idealize and perfect them. But there is a danger of the
individual mind becoming chaotic and losing itself in the collective.
When the two factors come together, as they do here, we get a
highly idealistic personality displaying an impersonal attitude every
now and then.
The aspects of Uranus and Neptune reinforce their mutual
idealism. Perhaps the native sits and dreams of finding what lies
"somewhere over the rainbow," but it is equally possible that he
or she may help to bring about actual social change.
Since both Uranus and Neptune play a big part in spirituality
and methaphysics, and in such things as clairvoyance and telepathy,
any contact between the two planets can lead to fresh ground being
broken in these fields and can stimulate scientific research in the
realm of the invisible. An obvious example of such research is
parapsychology, but an equally valid example is theoretical physics—because the latter has penetrated so far behind the everyday
world we see around us. If there are tie-ups with personal planets
in the chart, we may even encounter the mystical and mysterious
first hand. It is interesting, in this connection, that the English
Society for Psychical Research (the S. Plutão .R.) was founded in 1882
during a trine between Uranus and Neptune. This society applied
itself to systematic study of the unexplained, and in doing so stimulated worldwide research into parapsychology.
The time was ripe for paying more heed to matters hidden
from ordinary view. Shortly after its trine with Uranus, Neptune
was conjunct Pluto and, at the end of the century, Uranus formed
an inconjunct with Neptune conjunct Pluto. Astounding discoveries were then made in the field of parapsychology due to the
fortuitous arrival of numerous exceptionally gifted mediums and
other exponents of the paranormal. Aspects of Uranus / 275
When Uranus/Neptune constellations are linked with personal
factors in a chart, the native is quite likely to be attracted to paranormal studies and to make original contributions to them.
Aspects between Uranus and Neptune can provide a stimulus
for all sorts of mind-expanding experiments, including the study
of hallucinogens on consciousness and behavior, the study of the
physical influence of empathy and imagination (as in stigmata for
example), and so forth.
The search for a completely individual religious experience
(the Uranian influence on Neptune) is as likely as the erosion
and depersonalization of individuality (the Neptunian influence
on Uranus). Yet Neptune's often subtle influence can refine
the individuality and place it in the light of a greater, cosmic
whole; either through religious faith, or else through the insight
that, whereas the conscious has its limitations, the unconscious
soars above space and time to give the human spirit endless possibilities.
Of course, everything will run more smoothly with the easy
aspects. Nevertheless, the ungovernability of these particular
planets can lead to sudden upheavals, and to innovations that are
not always welcome. With the hard aspects, we face an even rougher
ride, impelling us to take action. Uranus/Pluto Aspects Two extremely powerful factors are brought together here. Uranus
emphasizes individuality and also produces sudden breakthroughs
and explosions; Pluto concentrates forcefully on internal and external power struggles, and endeavors to effect transformations by
bringing everything to the surface. People born when there is a
hard aspect between the two planets are typical of times in which
hidden tensions are building up in readiness for all kinds of revolution. And when personal planets in the charts are implicated,
these people feel a need to express their revolutionary fervor personally. In 1965, for example, Uranus and Pluto were conjunct.
Quite a few children of that generation became filled with an uncontrollable spirit that was taboo-breaking (Pluto) and provocative 2^61 Aspects and Personality
(Uranus) in the extreme: as these children reached puberty, many
of them in different countries became punks.
If Pluto and Uranus strengthen each other by aspect, they are
not easy to hold back but tend to push things to the limit. Pluto,
representing force and transformation, aided and abetted by
Uranus, can create sudden explosive acts of violence, or intense
tensions affecting us deeply or welling up from the depths of the
collective psyche. Fresh ideas in psychology and psychoanalysis are
important instances of the renovating influence of Uranus on the
repression and depth of Pluto. A prime example is the publication
in 1912 of Freud's Totem and Taboo,u a work in which he cut
through the conventions of his era and charted new territory in
medicine. He reaped a whirlwind of indignation for daring to
slaughter so many sacred cows. The book came out during an inconjunct between Uranus and Pluto, a naturally disruptive influence
and not, one may add, conducive to success. In the same period
Adler and Jung left Freud to strike out on their own. Also in 1912
Jung's first major work, Wandlungen und Symbole der Libido^ appeared. This also was highly original and broke many of the current
taboos but, at first, was no more successful than Freud's offering.
In fact it was one of the many causes of the rupture between Freud
and Jung.
Anyway, when Pluto and Uranus are in aspect, break-throughs
occur in things to do with the hidden and suppressed, with the
masses (since they also are ruled by Pluto), with power and powerstruggles and with the fierce untamed forces in matter (atomic
energy, atomic fusion, atomic research, etc.). Strain and stress are
inevitable with the aspects, because Pluto, which intensifies everything it touches, is activating the restlessness, tension and impulsiveness of Uranus. Therefore, if we have these aspects linked to
personal factors in our charts, we ought to take care not to be too
uncompromising, and not to try and demolish everything (risking
the destruction of more than we can restore). Impulsiveness and
intensity may need curbing. On the other hand, we could have l3 Sigmund Freud, translated by James Starchey, Totem and Taboo (New York: Norton, 1962).
'"This was translated by R.F. Hull as Structure and Dynamics of the Psyche, Collected
Works of C.G.Jung, No. 8 (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1968). Aspects of Vranust 277
enormous potential for detective and research work, and make
unusual discoveries in our chosen field.
There is always a certain amount of tension in the character
when personal planets are involved; and this shows itself in restless
searching, in delving into matters that have little to do with the
everyday world, and in a refusal to bow to the dictates of superiors.
For Pluto makes us want to take matters into our own hands, and
Uranus makes us want to deal with them in our own way. Therefore,
if there is attempted interference, we refuse to tolerate it (in the
tense aspects or the conjunction) or else manipulate it so as to
change its direction (in the more harmonious aspects). Battles for
power or authority, and sometimes savage bad manners are possible, with, at the same time, a grim determination to build our
own lives and develop our own individuality. When these aspects
are linked with personal factors in the chart, we demand the right
to make mistakes; in fact we need to make mistakes in order to
grow up how we want, regardless of sound parental advice. Uranus / Ascendant Aspects
Uranus/Ascendant Conjunction
With Uranus and the Ascendant we make no bones about showing
how important individuality is to us. We take life into our own
hands at a very early age; and this can easily make us seem unruly
and impertinent. Uranus is capricious and restless, and we radiate
these traits to others. It is impossible to sit still. We are highly
strung and full of ourselves and, to make matters worse, we keep
jumping from one thing to the other. We are always ready with
sudden insights and inventions, but hardly ever seem to finish what
we start.
The Uranian tension quickly winds us up and fills us with
impatience. Therefore we may appear brusque, tactless and crabby.
Uranus conjunct the Ascendant is a difficult aspect to handle. What
is more, we expect others to keep up with our changes and innovations. If they are unable to do so we lose interest, and eagerly
hunt round for something else to stimulate us. S / Aspects and Personality
People with Uranus conjunct the Ascendant prize freedom;
they consult their own advantage in every situation, and expect
others to do the same. So they are very tolerant of anything new
but, because bright ideas lose their shine so quickly for them, they
are not quite as open-minded as they suppose. Uranus/Ascendant Sextile
Uranus/Ascendant Trine
Individualism and independence play a big role in the harmonious
Uranus/Ascendant aspects. But, with a surer instinct than someone
with a conjunction or tense aspect, we know how to integrate these
traits into daily life. However, this does not alter the fact that
nothing will stop us from setting out on our own path; it simply
means that we go about things rather cleverly and avoid conflicts
with existing patterns.
We like variety, newness and renewal, and often react very
quickly and adroitly to what we encounter. The impulsiveness of
Uranus can play us false here, and its restlessness can make us alert,
taut, and occasionally nervous. There is something provocative
about our behavior. This does not necessarily cause trouble for us,
but we make it clear that we are fond of change, that we are our
own person, and that we are going to need plenty of elbow room.
No Uranian aspect excels in adaptability and, even in the harmonious aspects, the emphasis is laid on pursuing personal objectives.
Yet although adaptability as such is not great, we can cope well
with new situations—and what is this but adaptability of another
kind? Apart from that, restlessness makes us very lively.
People with harmonious Uranus/Ascendant aspects are a stimulus to those around them; their activities are like a fresh breeze.
There is no denying that some of them make good pioneers. Uranus/Ascendant Square
Uranus/Ascendant Opposition
With a tense aspect from Uranus to the Ascendant, we give the
impression of being restless, changeable and capricious: a pretty Aspects of Uranui/ 279
good description of our behavior toward everything encountered
in the outside world. We shift from one thing to another and, in
spite of longing to develop along lines compatible with freedom,
we are not clear how to shape desires or know quite what they
involve. We are liable to do the wrong thing, or to be fiercer, more
impulsive, more tactless, and often more provocative and rebellious
than is really justified. There is no doubt that these aspects can
cause ruptures through thoughtlessness, restlessness and a hot
temper.
Ingenuity is a marked feature, but often we are too impatient
to exploit or perfect an invention. We are easily distracted by novelties, and the next thing that comes along may capture our attention
for no better reason than that it is original or quaint (usefulness is
not high on our list of desirable qualities). And then something
even more intriguing catches our eye, and we go running after that.
Real progress is out of the question when this happens, and the
usual restlessness is compounded by nerviness.
With Uranus/Ascendant conflicts we need an outlet for tension. If, for example, the Ascendant has few other aspects, it is
hard to be openly impulsive, and the tension can build up inside.
When we finally let off steam, the effect is startling and possibly
destructive. Uranus/Ascendant Inconjunct
This inconjunct, by virtue ofbeing an inconjunct, and also by virtue
of connecting Uranus and the Ascendant, is a sure sign of tension.
Therefore this aspect is often associated with inexplicable nerviness
and sudden fits of passion. When we are expressing ourselves, the
need for individuality is sure to rear its head, and we can be more
capricious and opinionated than we wish. But whenever we are
spending time on self-development, or are occupied with Uraniantype hobbies, we are unconsciously affected by our surroundings
(which press in on us via the Ascendant) and, feeling insecure, are
inclined to snap at people—not something to be recommended for
establishing stable relationships.
Although with this aspect we can be inventive, we are inclined
to show off cleverness at the wrong moment. In other words, we 280 / Aspects and Personality
do not know when to draw attention to insights and ideas, and when
to take a back seat and listen to others. The irritation we may cause
by mistimed suggestions will probably serve only to increase the
inner turmoil produced by the Uranus/Ascendant inconjunct. This
turmoil can reveal itself in destructive tendencies such as the sudden
impulse to smash things up or to break off relationships. With the
inconjunct, we shall keep on creating or running into highly
charged, unstable situations—until the day we discover how much
we ourselves are contributing to the problem. When that day comes,
we shall be able to reacr in a more balanced fashion to the outside
world; though always possessing a certain nervous watchfulness and
great independence. Uranus / Midheaven Aspects
Uranus/MC Conjunction
With a Midheaven/Uranus conjunction, we are constantly revising
the view we have of ourselves and of our social and professional
prospects. Business relationships change with the changing selfimage. This can imply a run of different jobs, or a flexible work
schedule with room for original ideas. Generally speaking, we cope
well (if not absolutely calmly) with stressful situations.
One desideratum is a place where we can spread ourselves.
Working on our own is what we find most attractive, because it
leaves us reasonably free. It is best for us to have an employer; but
one who gives us responsibility. We know our own mind. People
sometimes see us as uncooperative: and not without good reason,
since we have no time for rules and regulations and seldom go
through the motions of keeping them. But this is part and parcel
of a refusal to recognize limitations, the good side of which is a
creativity that can take us far in technical or other work.
Now Uranus has a certain steeliness; once we have chosen the
path, nothing and no one are allowed to bar the way. Having set
our sights on some target, we are prepared to give it our best shot.
On the other hand, if we lose interest in a thing we are very loath
to waste further time on it. Aspects of U ranus! 281
Uranus/MC Sextile; Uranus/MC Trine
Although there is less fickleness and provocativeness with the harmonious aspects, our behavior makes it quite clear that we mean
to go our own way, that we are are highly individualistic, and are
always ready to fit the new into the old—indeed there is nothing
we like doing more. We are prompt to take part in changes, often
initiate them, and keep alert to what is going on instead of settling
down to the day's work. We like novelty—especially in social and
business affairs: a dull office routine drives us to distraction.
Alternative viewpoints are quite acceptable to us, and we try
to break down rigid forms and barriers in ourselves and in society.
We may advocate processes that lead to the spread of democracy
or that revitalize the community; we may become absorbed in occultism, astrology, crazy inventions and so on. If possible, we turn
these interests into a full-time occupation, and could succeed in
integrating them into both social and business life.
Even with the harmonious aspects, upheaval is not unknown;
often we bring it on ourselves. There is nothing mysterious about
life suddenly propelling us in a new direction, as it does every now
and again: inner transformation is the real cause. Uranus/MC Square; Uranus/MC Opposition
When the planet is in hard aspect to the Midheaven, the changeableness, uncertainty and brusqueness of Uranus are not so easy
to channel productively. Inconstancy, the abandonment of what
looked full of promise, tension, a restless longing for change, and
rashness are the result. With these aspects we need to exercise
caution; as creatures of impulse, we often forget to look before we
leap.
Even when we are very young, we can be rebellious, hard
to manage, and sometimes maladjusted. Given a propensity for
trouble-making and rule-breaking, we can easily become revolutionaries in the literal sense of the word. When Uranus is powerfully
placed in the horoscope there is always a great need to be ourselves;
but, with these hard aspects, being ourselves can get in the way of
social and business aspirations. We may decide to be ourselves at 282 / Aspects and Personality
some unfortunate moment, striking others as unpredictable and
even egotistic. What is more, we show resentment at interference.
Nevertheless, the hard aspects are particularly creative. True,
we suffer from mental tension and restlessness, but we are seldom
short of bright ideas. Making discoveries, large or small, often seems
like child's play; and by following a path where there is room to
try out various unusual options, we could go far. Uranus/MC Inconjunct The way we present ourselves to the outside world, especially in
the social life, is spoiled by an inner feeling of unrest, tension and
irritation. This can sometimes cause us to lash out, to abandon
promising ventures, and so on. In fact it looks as if we are prey to
some hidden impulse that keeps driving us into awkward situations.
Because we do not seem able to control capricious behavior, people
around us become very uneasy. We are unsure what we want. We
vaguely feel that we want to be ourselves, but do not know how.
Nor do we know what else we would do.
Whenever we are in individualistic mood (Uranus), the nagging
thought arises that our behavior may not be in keeping with our
self-image and even less in keeping with what the world expects
of us on the basis of our usual social attitudes. This leads to inner
unrest and outer incomprehension. The inner unrest, coupled with
fickleness and tension, produces a search that is never satisfied; and
this, in turn, gives ceaseless change in social and business status.
Now, the root of the tension is the incongruity between our
self-image and the way we express the need to be ourselves. Once
we get a clear conception of this fact, we can deploy creative energies with great originality in the social field. 17 Aspects
of
Neptune Neptune/Pluto Aspects These two planets travel so slowly that their aspects change little
during a hundred years. In the 40s they began to form a sextile;
an aspect that remains in force throughout the rest of the 20th
century. Since we are not talking of just a few months, an individual
interpretation is impossible. Even a specific collective interpretation
is difficult; especially as the factors represented by these planets
are hard to grasp. But let us see what we can do.
Neptune, as the planet that refines and disassociates, that liquidates what is personal and leads us to an experience of oneness,
is intensified by its contact with Pluto. Therefore, in the period
covered by the sextile of these two heavenly bodies, we are likely
to see a collective need for unification and for a development of
spiritual values. This very thing has manifested itself in the revival
of mysticism and esoteric study, in which Eastern religions advocating detachment (not to mention watered down versions of these
religions) have been popularized in the West. On the other hand,
Neptunian dissoluteness has also become widespread under this 284 Aspens and Personality reputedly benign aspect, and a baffling drug problem bedevils a
large part of the globe. Pluto has to do with power, and there are
close links between drug distributors and powerful forces in lands
where the raw materials are grown.
Conversely, Neptune's effect on Pluto is to make power structures and power blocs more sophisticated and harder to define.
Rival groups of countries now cooperate quietly on a host of important issues; so that, although some of the old power blocs survive, it is hard to say where their ramifications begin and end. What
is more, Neptune tends to undermine and erode established power
structures. Subversive elements are burrowing away all over the
world, and seem to survive the measures taken to eradicate them.
(N.B.: although Neptune and Pluto made mutual aspects in earlier
times, a planet's influence is not so obvious before its discovery.
So Pluto did not really show its hand until the 20th century.)
Pluto also signifies the masses and large-scale events. When it
is joined by Neptune, irrational ideas, religious quirks, strange
delusions and other follies sweep common sense out of the collective mind. And, since Pluto intensifies, the things mentioned build
up into mass hysteria, holy wars and other crowd madness.
Neptune and Pluto both symbolize unconscious factors in the
human being. Their combination gives the impetus to fruitful research into the hidden side of things, into the repressed contents
of the psyche and into the secret properties of matter. Nuclear
physics, depth psychology, parapsychology, the meaning of life and
death, anxiety neurosis, causes of freedom and inhibition in the
unconscious are all openly investigated; with the result that people
are brought closer as a whole. With this combination, collectivization and harmful social pressures are strangely juxtaposed giving
an increased insight into human functioning that eventually helps
people become more balanced and integrated.
This combination is probably often at work (regardless of aspect), guiding the unconscious flow of events whenever far-reaching
cultural and social changes are taking place. But because Neptune
and Pluto are so elusive, it is not easy to recognize the direction
or destination of this flow in our own day and age. Only when
future historians come to write of our times with cool detachment
will it be possible to assess how, during periods when these two
planets are in contact, great forces prepare a new era. Aspects of Neptune / 285 Neptune!Ascendant Aspects
Neptune/Ascendant Conjunction
Neptune is a factor that links us unconsciously with our surroundings. Because it blurs boundaries, we have difficulty protecting
ourselves from external influences and, whether we like it or not,
are continually tuning in to the unseen moods and tensions around
us. This can affect our moods, and (in early life anyway) can leave
us puzzled over how to present ourselves to the outside world.
Thus, when others are at daggers drawn, we feel hostility without
realizing that it has nothing to do with us, and invariably suppose
that we are the cause. Our hypersensitivity makes us vulnerable;
and we may withdraw into a dream-world or adopt a reserved,
defensive attitude to hold others at bay. With this conjunction, it
is very important to know which feelings are our own and which
have slipped in from outside.
We are good at sympathizing with and helping others in a
sensible way. Quite often, this aspect betokens supernatural abilities such as second sight; the rest of the horoscope will show to
what extent. At any rate, we shall find ourselves automatically preparing for events a sixth sense warns us are about to happen. This
can save us from nasty situations, but we must guard against being
too easily influenced. We are liable to let others manipulate us,
especially when they play on our feelings; and we can also fall for
illusions and false hopes. Suggestibility is great, but we can just as
easily persuade others. Because Neptune is so nebulous, we give
people little to go on and the picture they have of us is very sketchy.
What is more, Neptune generalizes: a Neptune/Ascendant conjunction can serve as a screen on which each one flashes his or her
own image of us, with chaotic results.
Musicality, a love of art, and spiritual and metaphysical interests are usually present in Neptune/Ascendant aspects, and certainly in the conjunction. 286 / Aspects and Personality
Neptune/Ascendant
Neptune/Ascendant Sextile
Trine Although there is harmony here between our manifestation in the
outside world and a need to refine and perfect by softening the
strongly individualistic, we suffer even so from (over)sensitivity to
trends and atmospheres in the environment. We easily tune in to
them but, like people with the conjunction, we must leam to distinguish what is going on inside us from what is going on outside.
We soon become wrapped up in another person, identifying with
their emotions, entering into their wishes, and falling under their
sway. In other words, we are very easily influenced.
The idealism that is also a characteristic of Neptune is expressed harmoniously. But, because Neptune has little hold on
reality even in the harmonious aspects, we can be led into difficulties
by unworkable ideals, by looking at life through rose-colored
glasses, and by a tremendous urge to be self-sacrificing.
Here, too, we give others considerable scope to make of us
what they will: none of the Neptune/Ascendant aspects gives people
much to go on. With this Neptunian factor, we can be slothful and
dreamy, and sometimes strike people as rather unstable; but usually
there is something appealing about us. Things people think they
see in us may not really be there; but we display a spirit of general
friendliness, and people of the most diverse kinds can fall in love
with us.
All Neptune/Ascendant aspects favor design and finishing
work, especially in photography and films, in fact wherever skilful
editing is used to create illusion. Neptune/Ascendant Square
Neptune/Ascendant Opposition
The square and opposition between Neptune and the Ascendant
can make us particularly insecure. Sensitivity to environment would
be great whatever the aspect between these two factors, but with
the hard ones we are almost completely at a loss in it. Others have
no idea what is going on inside us; ah they know is that we are
continually reacting to them. Aspects of Neptune ! 287
Owing to this combination of uncertainty and impressionability
our attitude is evasive: we do not tackle problems straightforwardly,
and we tend to sidestep anyone seeking a rapprochement with us.
Sometimes fantasy or a false impression leads us to get hold of the
wrong end of the stick and to reacr badly; not in a direct way, of
course—insecurity prevents us from doing that—but in such a way
as to lay ourselves open to charges of dishonesty, prevarication or
misrepresentation. However, all reactions are expressions of sensitivity and vulnerability. We are quickly moved, even to tears,
although we do not always show it. Others may interpret this as
emotional instability.
The Ascendant also represents the body and, with a Neptune
conflict, we could be physically below par—mostly due to our
uncertainty. When we are going through a difficult patch we may
need to sleep on our problems, and we can suffer from tiredness
without obvious physical cause. Flight into a private fantasy world
is another possibility with the hard aspects but, because the latter
are also energetic, creative talents can be wonderfully stimulated
if we take up artistic or mystical pursuits. Neptune/Ascendant Inconjunct In many ways, the modes of expression of a Neptune/Ascendant
inconjunct are similar to those of a Neptune/Ascendant hard aspect,
but with Neptune's shifts and changes accentuated. We do not
realize the degree to which—because of sensitivity, vulnerability
or dreams and fantasies—our perception of the outside world is
distorted. As a result, we can sometimes react very strangely to
normal, everyday things, and so make difficulties for ourselves in
our contacts with others. On the other hand, we are liable to be
drawn imperceptibly and against our will into situations that are no
good for us.
Since our need to refine, disassociate and blur things interferes
badly with how we present ourselves to the world, we ought to
proceed cautiously; for we stand a big risk of becoming confused
or hurt—with much the same consequences as those described
under the hard aspects. 288 / Aspects and Personality
Considerable empathy, and even psychic gifts, may also be
present with the inconjunct. This aspect has many positive forms
of expression open to it, once the uncertainty created by inner
feelings and reactions has been overcome. NeptunelMiclheaven
Neptune/MC Aspects Conjunction The Midheaven represents social and business behavior based on
self-image. With Neptune on the Midheaven, there is no possibility
that a clear-cut picture will be obtained—the blurring and undermining influence is too great. As likely as not we shall suffer from
identity problems and worry about who we are and about our role
in life. This makes us extremely sensitive to what others think and
say; and at first we shall be prepared to accept their assessment of
us. But their assessment is wildly inaccurate, because between them
and us drifts Neptune's hazy smoke-screen: what they tell us about
ourselves sounds so unbelievable that we are thrown into utter
confusion. Besides all this, we seem to have a sixth sense for detecting undercurrents and changes in the human atmosphere, and
this also affects the formation of our image.
For a long time, these factors can keep us wondering what to
make of ourselves and our prospects and can hinder us from finding
our true sphere in life. Yet we should excel in things governed by
Neptune; that is to say wherever sympathy and understanding are
required, as in social and charity work, also where we can give
expression to feelings and a love of perfection, as in creative and
musical activities. Initially, owing to a lack of confidence, we are
not very enterprising; but once we get started progress is surprising
and we become much more self-reliant. Neptune/MC Sextile; Neptune/MC Trine
Insecurity, sensitiveness and idealism also color the harmonious
aspects between Neptune and the Midheaven. Once again there
are difficulties in forming a satisfactory image of self and society, Aspects of Neptune / 289
because we are too responsive to opinions and trends in the environment. By viewing things in too rosy a light (for the harmonious
aspects deal in optimism), we lay ourself open to disappointment.
Yet we skip as merrily as ever into some new situation. What is
important is the feeling of being at home somewhere. It is this
feeling, not the size of the paycheck, that guides us in choosing
a job.
With a harmonious Neptune/Midheaven aspect we probably
have a keen nose for sniffing out the little, hidden details that are
so important. In business we instinctively follow market trends,
usually without having to work them out. In the medical profession,
the same ability helps us to make a diagnosis, select a therapy, trace
the cause of a disease or problem, and so on. Good careers are also
open in the spiritual and ecclesiastical worlds, and in art and music. Neptune/MC Square; Neptune/MC Opposition
The hard aspects between Neptune and the Midheaven make us
insecure, and we have considerable trouble forming an identity.
For not only are we very sensitive to what the world says of us; we
are inclined to misinterpret what it says. To make matters worse,
the world has a false impression of us anyway. But however that
may be, with these aspects we are liable to run round in circles for
a long time, worried by the difference between thoughts and impulses generated by ourselves and thoughts and impulses that have
slipped unobserved from outside into the unconscious mind—from
where they rise to influence us.
Hence we are extremely suggestible and easily misled; especially when, as often happens, we have not yet found our bearings.
By drawing an inaccurate picture of self and society, we can become
deluded and create confusion. On account of the pretense we know
how to make, people can impute to us things for which we are not
responsible. The other side of the coin is that we can go on to do
extremely well in areas where pretense and illusion are raised to a
fine art: the world of film for example. We need to be on guard
against various forms of addiction; addiction to drink or drugs say,
which may seem to offer a refuge from hard reality but, being
impersonal, impedes personal development. The addiction can also 290 I Aspects and Personality
be to unworkable religious and idealistic concepts that equally help
us to avoid confrontations with everyday problems and push personality into the background. In addition to idealism, we are full
of both empathy and sympathy. If we find ourselves in a stimulating
environment where no unfair advantage is taken of our sensitiveness, pliability and insecurity, we gradually shed uncertainty and
(provided we engage in Neptunian occupations with the active
support of others) can do much to further our ideals. Neptune/MC Inconjunct
The insecurity and oversensitiveness associated with Neptune/Midheaven aspects are greatest in the inconjunct. They appear to express themselves very much as they do in the hard aspects (q.v.);
but it is not easy to trace their origin, seeing that we do not recognize the influence of Neptune on our self-image. The distortion
produced by Neptune, and especially the chaotic conditions that
follow in its wake, are all the stronger for being below the surface;
and, although we are imbued with tremendous benevolence and
idealism, we rarely succeed in making them known. Due to the
aspect being an inconjunct, we put things badly, or cling to longings
and ideas that are too Utopian to be taken seriously. All the fuss
and bother over our well-intentioned deeds we find upsetting; and,
lacking the energy and determination to hold our own, are inclined
to retire disillusioned under the lee of a peaceful inner world. This
could be the world of dreams and fantasies, but is just as likely to
be a cloister or a mountain hermitage. Anyway, we go far from the
everyday hustle and bustle that is so uncongenial.
Nevertheless, with the inconjunct, we ought really to make
an effort to avoid estrangement from the world; for, given the right
support, we can achieve a great deal with the talents Neptune
bestows (creativity, spirituality, musicality and the like). But not
until we realize that our picture of the world is influenced from
within by distorting or idealizing processes shall we be able to
express capabilities in a more balanced way. 18 Aspects
of
Pluto Pluto!Ascendant
Pluto/Ascendant Aspects Conjunction Pluto, the compulsive and powerful urge to achieve power and
recognition, and the mechanism in us that drives us to get to the
bottom of everything, will, when conjunct the Ascendant, impart
an air of fierceness and forcefulness. Pluto is not a relaxed planet,
and we radiate a certain intensity that some of our acquaintances
may even find fascinating. With Pluto on the Ascendant, we have
"something": there is something unfathomably powerful in our look
that can be very intriguing.
Because Pluto gives a longing for power, we are not averse to
being manipulative. With this planet at such a main outlet, we
desperately need to play an important part, to gain control of our
circumstances—and thus of our immediate surroundings. But we
are unable to hold Pluto's influence in check, and can express ourselves much more forcefully than we suppose. If we fail to have
our own way by direct methods, we employ indirect methods, since
we are determined to have it at all costs. Therefore people with 292 / Aspects and Personality
Pluto on the Ascendant are often found to be engaged in a sharp
struggle for superiority with those around them. However, the
hostilities are not necessarily open. Many people are afraid of a
head-on clash with such strength, and have an uneasy feeling that
the person possessing it might go to extremes; therefore they attempt an outflanking maneuver. But someone with Pluto on the
Ascendant is also a master tactician, knowing to perfection how
and when to launch a surreptitious counterattack, and never relenting until the initiative has been regained.
Therefore we are not able to pass through life unnoticed, even
though seldom revealing our inner thoughts. We make stringent
demands of ourselves and others—who have to pass muster before
they are allowed proper access to us. They must be able to match
our strength.
The taboo-breaking character of Pluto means that, with the
planet on the Ascendant, we can try really hard to bring about all
sorts of improvements and changes. However, there is a danger
that we might go to excess, which could be very destructive to
ourselves and to our environment. This danger exists because Pluto
stands for an all-or-nothing attitude. The community will have a
hard fight on its hands if it tries to block our pet schemes.
The characteristics represented by Pluto the transformer are
not easily governed by the conscious will; however, it is possible
to leam to integrate them better. As the personality matures, the
initially unmanageable desire for power can be redirected to control
the factors causing inner uncertainty and outer insecurity. Given
this improved handling of Pluto's influence, we should acquire the
ability to uncover material repressed and buried in the unconscious
minds of ourselves and others. Digging and rooting in other psyches
is one of the many possible forms of expression of this aspect, and
can lead to a great knowledge of people. In holding our own, we
are inclined to use such knowledge of human psychology as leverage. Here is a further illustration of the power needs of this combination, and a warning of its danger in certain respects. Aspects of Pluto / 293
Pluto/Ascendant Sextile; Pluto/Ascendant Trine The easy aspects between Pluto and the Ascendant possess the
same intensity as the conjunction. As in the conjunction, we give
the impression of being purposeful and filled with an unfathomable
sort of strength. We do not open up to others readily, but probe
deeply in their psychological make-up and motivations in order to
discover what is going on.
We have a great craving for power, and give others a taste of
our strong will. Quite often we are able take the reins in our own
hands without having to fight for them. There is something compelling about our personality and, since these aspects are harmonious, we know how to avoid stirring up opposition. In any case,
people with Pluto/Ascendant aspects are often born leaders.
Because outwardly we appear to be so forceful, self-assertive
and independent (although inwardly we may not be feeling any of
these things), but do not show the "real us," others may regard us
as more open and friendly than we are. For this reason we often
attract individuals who look for some advantage from us, or whom
we can mother or father in some way. But this state of affairs is
quite different from that brought when it is the Moon that is on
the Ascendant. The caring of Pluto is more impersonal and allembracing, and is like that of a possessive, heavy-handed mother
from whom one is unable to escape.
So, with these Pluto/Ascendant aspects, we have a hold on
people that is firmer than we may imagine. Others will frequently
pour out their troubles to us, ask advice, seek protection, or just
tag along. In dealing with them, we acquire a fair knowledge of
psychology. Nor are we averse to delving into human relationships
and so on, as long as we ourselves are out of range and untouchable.
This attitude stops us from making ordinary, simple emotional contacts with peers. First, we invite everybody to put us on a pedestal,
and if they hesitate we put ourselves on one; second, we do not
wish to be known intimately; third, we make big emotional demands
on those we allow to come near us. Sooner or later, therefore, even
with harmonious aspects of Pluto and the Ascendant, we shall be
brought face to face with these problems. Once we see where we
have been going wrong, we are quite capable of making a radical
improvement. 294 ! Aspects and Personality
Pluto/Ascendant
Pluto/Ascendant Square
Opposition The hunger for power common to Pluto/Ascendant aspects is
greater still when the aspects happen to be hard. Although we may
feel insecure, we refuse to admit it. We are full of fight, are more
ruthless than we intend, and can frighten people with a look. Our
very presence is intimidating. We may not realize the force being
generated by Pluto, but others feel its intensity and our readiness
to go to extremes. We give the impression, without necessarily
intending to do so, that the slightest opposition could lead to angry
words and possibly to physical violence. For, with hard aspects of
Pluto and the Ascendant, we can crush people with cruel remarks;
and since Pluto encourages an eager interest in human motives and
in anything suppressed or hidden, we have an unerring ability to
find out the weak spots of others and we do not hesitate to make
them the butts of our poisoned verbal barbs. Obviously, with this
ability we are more feared than loved. Yet it is a weapon in the
power struggle that we would not lay aside for any price; and if it
makes us disliked, well, Pluto gives plenty of resilience.
There is something provocative about our behavior, although
not in the impulsive and cross-grained style of Uranus: Pluto causes
us to act with more subtlety and more discretion, but invariably
gives us the need to do our own thing regardless of whether this
is socially acceptable or not. We do our own research, make our
own discoveries, come to our own conclusions and formulate our
own goals, and are not to be deterred from them. Therefore this
is an outstanding position for reforms; although initially we have
to go through a (sometimes) not inconsiderable number of confrontations before being able to use the hard aspect rather more
constructively. Our powers of penetration then enable us to see
through people and their intentions, to build up a great knowledge of men and women, and to expand our view of ourselves and
our surroundings by the addition of much that is new and of much
that was formerly hidden. We unearth a great deal in our restless
search. Pluto, wanting more, refuses to let us rest until we have
got to the bottom of things. This can be very trying, because
we feel compelled to see our own depths mirrored in our sur- Aspects ofPlutu / 295
roundings. But if we make some radical changes in our life, we
should be able to get in touch with these deep values. Pluto/Ascendant Inconjunct
The way we handle everything we encounter in the outside world
and the way we present ourselves in the world keep interfering
with a desire for power and recognition. Whereas we imagine that
we impress others as friendly and helpful, we radiate a good deal
of tension, try to manage things in our own style, and may (often
quite unconsciously) make a bid for power. At the same time, we
are not very confiding; which makes us even harder to understand.
Therefore we can have a very difficult relationship with others
before we come to realize that we ourselves are causing problems
through an unwillingness to be accommodating.
We like prying into other people's business, make no bones
about pestering them with tactless questions, and seize on things
with greater determination than we think (for we are unaware how
demanding we are of ourselves and others). The same conflict occurs here as in the hard aspects but, to begin with, it is much more
difficult to recognize for what it is. We need to see that the way
we express our desire for power, authority and transformation is
at variance with the impression we hope to make on others.
With Pluto inconjunct the Ascendant, we are liable to reach
a crisis in which everything is shown in its true colors. If the crisis
is successfully passed and its lessons are assimilated, then even this
aspect can give many good opportunities, although intensity will
alwavs need to be watched. PlutolMidheaven Aspects Pluto/MC Conjunction
When Pluto, which has to do with power, authority and ambition,
is posited at the Midheaven, we seek advancement in public life.
But the planet's influence on the formation of self-image is such 296/ Aspects and Personality
that we try to walk before we can run. Initially we are not fully
aware of the grim determination with which we strive for our goals;
the fact is that, once we get an idea in our head, nothing and no
one in the world can knock it out again. We are prepared to bring
everything out into the open in order to prove our point: come
what may, we intend to keep a grip on ourselves and our surroundings. Obviously, this leads to power conflicts.
With Pluto on the Midheaven, not only do we look strong and
forceful, we intend to look strong and forceful. We wish to make
an impression, wish to see ourselves as the undisputed authority
in our field, and do not take kindly to superiors or equals. This can
give us a tremendous boost in climbing the social ladder while we
apply ourselves with great concentration to a goal. We go for goals
on a small scale when still very young: as a child, we are headstrong
and domineering. This domineering behavior carries over into adult
life, where it is bound to be challenged.
With Pluto on the MC, we need to be careful not to think of
ourselves as unassailable or infallible. If we fall into that trap, we
shall end up impossibly swollen-headed and filled with the idea that
we have a natural right to rule. This can meet heavy resistance. In
the lives of people with Pluto on the MC, we often see great and
generally very far-reaching changes (whether or not accompanied
by a crisis), sometimes involving a total turnabout.
The investigative ability imparted by Pluto can prove very
useful in social matters. We interest ourselves in what is hidden
and suppressed, and in power and authority; which means we could
be a good researcher, scientist or psychologist. The faculty of penetration can serve us well in everyday life too. Pluto/MC Sextile; Pluto/MC Trine
With one of the easy aspects of Pluto to the Midheaven, we shall
strike others as forceful and even ambitious. It is obvious that we
are not going to let anybody get the better of us if we can help it,
and we try in whatever way possible to acquire a certain amount
of authority. In situations that are important, either we take charge
or else we look for an opportunity to throw our weight about. The
desire for recognition, perseverance and a strong will, not to men- Aspects of Pluto / 297
tion a desire for power, figure largely in social relationships. We
can be very patient in pursuing the goals we set ourselves.
Even in these more mellow aspects, we are liable to suffer
from an inflated self-image—in fact, because the aspects rouse relatively little outside opposition, there is plenty of room for the
self-image to expand. We know how to present claims in such a
way that the world will accept them as quite natural or, at least,
will not openly contest them. And so our aspirations are confirmed,
and there is a risk of gradually becoming so addicted to attention
and applause that we always try to push ourselves to the front and
elbow everybody else out of the way.
Pluto/Midheaven aspects give a deeply penetrating mind,
which does not desist until it has discovered the core of things; a
mind that leaves no stone unturned, and investigates all that is
hidden, suppressed, veiled, mysterious, magical or otherwise
strange and obscure. We are notably fascinated by the human psyche, with all its mechanisms and motivations, and sooner or later
become excellent judges of character. Therefore the aspects are
good for psychiatrists, (para)psychologists and similar specialists.
With these aspects, we often attract individuals who, on seeing
us, think they have found a strong shoulder to cry on—even though
we ourselves may be feeling weak. It is not surprising perhaps that
they should see strength rather than weakness, because weakness
is something the person with a Pluto/Midheaven aspect never admits. We are very good at advising people and at helping anyone
in need. Yet, when we ourselves are in need, nobody knows about
it to help, since we are stupid enough not to tell them. We always
want to control the situation. Therefore, even those with so-called
harmonious aspects between Pluto and the Midheaven can become
involved in confrontations; and sometimes they are assailed by
feelings of loneliness. Pluto/MC Square; Pluto/MC Opposition
The tense aspects between Pluto and the Midheaven are particularly
powerful in their effects. Friendly though we may otherwise be,
there is something about us that warns others off trying to take
advantage of us. Whenever we give vent to irritation, we should 296' / Aspects and Personality
bear in mind that the Plutonian energy we radiate will make us
sound much harder than we suppose, and that we can really upset
people or drive them into such a tight corner that they feel compelled to strike back.
With the disharmonious aspects, we have an enormous need
to prove ourselves and to keep a grip on ourselves and our surroundings come what may. If we are not careful, we shall turn into
slave drivers. Obviously, this will lead to power struggles, especially
over social and business status. The tense aspects make us pugnacious and we are likely, sooner or later, to attack the things that
displease us. Once again, caution is advisable. Pluto always goes
hand in hand with tremendous intensity; and, in the hard aspects,
it is difficult to adjust this intensity to the desired effect. Consequently, it may prove to be destructive rather than constructive.
Inquisitiveness is well developed, but we do not always know
how to control it. Thus we can catch someone on the hop with a
completely tactless question, and surprise him into blurting out the
answer. But, very often, this method leads to confrontations; although, with Pluto/Midheaven conflicts, we generally ferret out
what we want to know. Also, it is quite common for us to use
knowledge indiscreetly or at the wrong moment; and, given certain
other indications in the horoscope, we could divert knowledge to
bad ends by being manipulative.
When we begin any task it is with complete dedication—maybe
too much dedication. We might even undermine our efforts by an
all-or-nothing attitude. Others do not always understand this lack
of give-and-take, even when we are obviously being well intentioned, because they simply cannot see why we should get so het
up about things.
Nevertheless we have great perseverance combined with enormous energy and love of action—all flowing from a need for power
and recognition. If we learned to channel energy a little better, we
could really move mountains. Then it would take an exceptional
opponent to stop us. Pluto/MC Inconjunct At various times we shall be locked in conflict with authorities and
others in social and business life, and may also quarrel with neigh- Aspects of Pluto ! 299
bors on occasion. Why this should be we do not know, but the
reason is that whenever we try to be what we think is ourselves,
our behavior is colored by the need for power and recognition.
Without realizing it, we exaggerate our importance, and then wonder at the reactions of others. The insecurity of the inconjunct can
reinforce the Plutonian desire to hold the reins and to take control,
yet this is not a desire we find easy to fulfill. We always overdo
things, fail to go about them the right way, or else spring into action
at the wrong time. Because we are not aware of the way in which
the Pluto energy is expressing itself, we let it express too fiercely.
The fierceness radiates out from us. In fact, we behave much the
same as people with the tense aspects (q.v.). The main difference
is that our behavior is not so easy to understand. Usually we shall
have to live through a crisis before we realize what we are doing.
It is perfectly feasible to develop successful Pluto/Midheaven
interests, but usually we do so at the cost of a series of major and
minor confrontations. These may not matter, because we are quite
at home in the area of power struggles and cloak-and-dagger work;
where, with our considerable knowledge of human nature, we stand
a good chance of enriching ourselves. Bibliography Addey, J.M. Harmonics in Astrology. Tempe, AZ: American Federation of Astrologers, 1976; and London: Fowler, 1976.
Now out of print.
Arroyo, S. Astrology, Karma and Transformation: The Inner Dimensions of the Birthchart. Sebastopol, CA: CRCS, 1978.
Ashmand, J.M. {ix.) Ptolemy's Tetrabiblos. N. Hollywood, CA: Signs
and Symbols, 1976
Carter, C.E.O. Some Principles of Horoscope Delineation. Seattle, WA:
Hughes Reprint.
Carter, Charles E. The Principles of Astrology. Wheaton, IL: Quest
Books, 1963.
de Yore, N. Encyclopedia of Astrology. Totowa, NJ: Littlefield,
Adams, 1976. Now out of print.
Dean, G. Recent Advances in Natal Astrology: A Critical Review 19001976. Prepared under the aegis of The Astrological Association, Cowes, Isle of Wight, 1977.
Doane, Doris Chase. Astrology: 30 Years Research. Tempe, AZ:
American Federation of Astrologers, 1956.
George, Llewellyn. A-Z Horoscope Maker & Delineator. St. Paul,
MN: Llewellyn, 1973. ^02 Aspects and Personality Greene, Liz. Saturn: A New Look at an Old Devil. York Beach, ME:
Samuel Weiser, 1976.
Hamaker-Zondag, Karen. Elements and Crosses as the Basis of the
Horoscope. York Beach, ME: Samuel Weiser, 1984.
. Planetary Symbolism in the Horoscope. York Beach, ME: Samuel Weiser, 1985.
Hone, M.E. Applied Astrology. London: Fowler, 1970.
. Modem Textbook of Astrology. London: Fowler, 1971.
Jansky, Robert. Interpreting the Aspects. Van Nuys, CA: Astroanalytics, 1974.
Koch, W.A. Aspektlehre nach Johannes Kepler. Hamburg, W. Germany: Kosmobiosophische Gesellschaft, 1952.
. Gesammelte Aufsatz.e. GestaIthoroskopie. Bietigheim, West
Germany: Rohm.
Marks, Tracy. The Art of Chart Synthesis. Arlington, MA: Sagittarius
Rising, 1979.
. How to Handle Your T-square. Arlington, MA: Sagittarius
Rising, 1979.
Mayo, Jeff. Teach Yourself Astrology. New York: David McKay,
1970.
Ram, Th. J.J. Psychologische Astro logic: Systematische Verklaring van
den Geboorte-horoscoop. Den Haag: Couvreur.
Raman, B.V. Hindu Predictive Astrology. India Book House, 1972.
Ring, Thomas. Astrologische Menschenkunde, Band 1: Krafte und
Krafte-beziehungen. Freiburg, W. Germany: Bauer, 1956.
Sakoian, Frances, and Louis Acker. Major and Minor Approaching
and Departing Aspects. Tempe, AZ: American Federation of
Astrologers, 1974.
Symours, E. La Combustion. Nice, France: Edition des Cahiers Astrologiques, 1946. Karen Hamaker-Zondag started her astrological practice in 1975. She
is a tounding member of two schools in Holland: an astrological school,
Stichting Achernar, and a school of Jungian psychology, Stichting
Odrerir, with a current enrollment of over 200 students. She is a graduate of the University of Amsterdam with doctoral degrees in social
geography and environmental engineering. Her post-graduate study of
psychology, astrology and parapsychology inspired a full-time counseling practice. A leading astrologer in Holland, she publishes a quarterly
astrological journal, Symbolon, with her husband Hans. She lectures
extensively throughout the world, traveling to Russia, Japan, Canada,
the USA, and all over Europe, where she has been enthusiastically
received by the astrological communtiy. She has written thirteen books
including Foundations of Personality, Handbook of Horary Astrology, The House
Connection, Planetary Symbolism in the Horoscope, Psychological Astrology, and
The Twelfth House, all published by Samuel Weiser.