THE BOOK OF SATURN "The wisdom and experience of several decades of teaching, practice
and research are presented in Zip's excellent Book of Saturn. It is a
must for the novice, providing a solid foundation for the delineation
of Saturn in any horoscope. The clear explanations with many
example charts, plus the gold mine of astrological information make
Book of Saturn an invaluable asset to the library of both the student
and professional astrologer."
Jeanne Long, astrological investor and author
The Book of Saturn by Dr. Zipporah Dobyns is a wonderfully insightful
book about a traditionally grave matter: Saturn. However, unlike
astrologers of olden times who portray Saturn primarily in a negative
and fearful manner. Dobyns presents its correlation to
human
activity as neither "good" nor "bad", but rather "realistic." According
to Dobyns. "Saturn symbolizes what we can do. what we can't do. and
what we have to do if we want to survive in this world." Upon that
basis, she sets forth to show how the principles of Saturn tend to
operate psychologically (and ultimately physically) according to its
natal sign and house placement, natal aspects, and as a transit,
progressed, or solar arc planet to one's natal planets, angles, and
even asteroids.
In one sense, this book may be used as a cookbook" - but a very,
very good "cookbook." In this sense, it is very well-organized and easy
to reference. But it is also infinitely more than a reference book to
those who wish to develop a deeper understanding of how Dobyns
views and works with astrology, particularly in relation to psychology. In one of her earliest works— Finding the Person In the Horoscope
— Dobyns set forth her methodology for analyzing horoscopes known
as the "zodiac alphabet." This brilliant "macro" or "holistic" concept
of astrological application assured her role as one of the most
innovative astrological thinkers of not just modern times, but all
time. Now with The Book of Saturn, Dobyns has gone much further
with elucidating her ideas on
how one might apply the zodiac
alphabet to understanding the psychological processes at work in
Individuals. Although her primary focus in this book is with Saturn,
the # 10 principle, she clearly lays out the formula for applying all the
other letters as well. The result is a very fulfilling book, one loaded
with great knowledge and wisdom.
This is not Just an excellent astrology book, but one that may
greatly enhance the skills of those who counsel others using astrology. Dobyns demonstrates once again why she is so highly regarded
in the world of professional astrology. Highly recommended.
Raymond A. Meniman. President:
International Society of Astrological Research. Inc. Acknowledgments
A book is always an effort of many individuals. I want especially
to thank my editors who are also my wonderful daughter and son,
Maritha and Mark Pottenger. They have made many valuable
suggestions which hopefully have led to increased clarity in a very
complex subject. Lois Hodden's work, which sets the standards for data collectloin. was a tremendous resource. 1 also want to
thank two friends for biographical information on the individuals
whose charts were used to illustrate the principles of Saturn. Pearl
Negrette and Doc Cottle have both helped immensely with library
digging. 1 hope that they as well as many past and future students
and clients will find the book helpful. We are all learning to deal
with the challenges of this physical world, and the Saturn principle is one of our most valuable keys to understanding. The Book of Saturn Contents
Chapter One
PRINCIPLES AND BACKGROUND 1 Culture and Mythology 3 Saturn Principles 6 Astrology Represents 12 Sides of Life. 7 Chapter Two
THE ASTROLOGICAL ALPHABET Mercúrio Repetition Shows Importance 15 It's Elementary 17 Qualities of Life. 18 Major Thirds of the Horoscope
Doubtful Dignities 19
20 Defense Mechanisms .25 Chapter Three
SATURN IN SIGNS 29 Chapter Four
PLANETARY ASPECTS TO SATURN
Sun to Saturn Aspects 43
46 Moon to Saturn Aspects 49 Mercury to Saturn Aspects 51 Venus to Saturn Aspects 52 Mars to Saturn Aspects
Jupiter to Saturn Aspects 54
57 Saturn to Saturn Aspects 60 Uranus to Saturn Aspects 64 Neptune to Saturn Aspects 66 Pluto to Saturn Aspects 69 Chapter Five
SATURN ASPECTS TO ANGLES,
ASTEROIDS AND NODES 73 Saturn Aspects to the Mldheaven 73 Saturn Aspects to the Ascendant 76 Saturn Aspects to the Nodes of the Moon
Saturn Aspects to Asteroids
Chiron 78
80
83 Table of Contents vii Chapter Six
SATURN IN THE TWELVE HOUSES
Saturn in the First House 85
86 Saturn In the Second House. 88 Saturn in the Third House 88 Saturn in the Fourth House 89 Saturn in the Fifth House 91 Saturn in the Sixth House 93 Saturn in the Seventh House. .95 Saturn in the Eighth House .96 Saturn in the Ninth House 98 Saturn in the Tenth House
Saturn in the Eleventh House.
Saturn in the Twelfth House 100
101
102 Chapter Seven
SATURN CYCLES
Astronomy and Calendars
Planetary Cycles in Mundane Astrology
Saturn for Individuals
Chapter Eight
EXAMPLE CHARTS
Third Party Candidate.
Peanut Farmer and President 105
105
107
1 1 1 113
1 15
1 19 United We Stand
Alphonse D'amato
Bogey and Bacall 123
126
128 Pushing the Limits 131 Helping Humanity 135 Equal Rights 138 Life as Theater.
Beauty in Motion 141
143 Into Orbit 147 Football and Politics 149 Dixiecrat.
Texan 152
I 55 Minnesota Morals
Born to Power 158
162 Battered by Others' Power. 171 The Book of Saturn Cosmo "Girl" 174 Iron Lady 178 Massachusetts Miracle? 182 Chapter Nine
ASTROLOGY AND HEALTH
Psychological - Astrological - Physical Associations
Healing with the Horoscope 189
197
215 Chapter Ten
WHERE DO WE GO FROM HERE? 216 NOTES 225 REFERENCES 227 ASTRO KEYS 228 CHAPTER ONE PRINCIPLES AND BACKGROUND For thousands of years, humans have been using the sky as their
clock and calendar to orient themselves in time, and as their map
and compass to orient themselves in space. Neolithic hunters
watched the phases of the Moon to keep track of the season when
fish would come up the river to spawn. Seafarers were guided
across the trackless oceans by the constellations. Modern science
acknowledges the value of the sky to this extent, but modern
science has accepted the basic theory of materialism, which states
that the cosmos has no inherent meaning—that the ultimate
reality is composed of random charges of energy ruled by the laws
of chance.
Astrology demonstrates that the order in the cosmos is
meaningful, not random. Information is a basic component' of
ultimate reality. The same principles are present in the planets, in
life forms, in cultural institutions, in material objects, etc. The
modern fields of research called "chaos" and "complexity" are
opening the way to a scientific understanding of astrology. These
studies show that Information is the guiding principle which
directs all forms of manifestation, rather than the material substance, the 'matter/energy" being manifested. The same "set
of instructions" or "information patterns" can describe physical
substances at many levels: atomic, molecular, organic, etc. We 2 The Book of Saturn can call those meaningful patterns models, maps, "archetypes,"
or life drives or desires, or psychological concepts or constructs.
Whatever we name them, they offer insight into ourselves and our
world. Materialists tend to be threatened by the implications of
this new view of the world, but the leading-edge physicists are
realizing that information is a more primary reality than the
physical matter/energy perceived by our physical senses.
Over thousands of years of observations, humans have been
learning to recognize and understand these basic shared principles. and that understanding is still being modified as we
observe the correlations between the patterns in the sky and the
events on Earth. Early humans associated the planets with the
gods, and the nature and movements of the planets were believed
to produce events on earth. Some of that ancient belief still lingers
in modern astrology, though it is now phrased in terms of vibrations, radiations, and force fields. But when we observe the
variety of manifestations which can be associated with any of the
basic principles of astrology, it seems obvious to me that we are
dealing with sources of information rather than material forces.
We can see the same principles described by planets, by signs of
the zodiac, by houses of a horoscope, by the nodes of all of the
planets, by sub-divisions of the zodiac signs, etc., just as the
students of chaos find the same information patterns describing
molecules, organs, whole systems in the body, etc.
Knowledge is based on experience. Science does in systematic
ways what everyone does in more casual ways. We analyze a
variety of experiences looking for shared meaning. Is there a
common principle which connects them and makes sense out of
them? This is called inductive reasoning and is the initial stage
of investigating new phenomena. Once we have formulated a
theory to explain the detailed experiences with general principles,
we can shift to deductive reasoning. We say "If this theory is
accurate, given this new pattern, this new rearrangement of the
basic principles, these details may result." Then, we watch the
consequences to see whether our theory is supported by the
results experienced. Science includes one more step where this is
possible. It sets up conditions for experiments which produce the
circumstances, the information pattern, and observes whether or
not the predicted details do follow. Astronomy and astrology are Principles and Background 3 not able to rearrange the sky. so these studies have little room for
laboratory experiments.
Humans have been carrying out the first two steps in the
scientific process for millennia. They watched the patterns in the
sky, observed the associated details on Earth, and deduced which
sky patterns were likely to be associated with similar Earth details
in the future — inductive reasoning was followed by deductive.
They noted that Mars was "prominent" when people were more
aggressive or had accidents. They noted that Venus was "prominent" when people were more focused on pleasure. The Sun
seemed connected to power and the Moon to the birth and
nurturing of the young. Obviously, there was no way to set up
laboratory experiments to produce different configurations of the
planets to see what would happen during such periods, but many
competent minds calculated the natural cycles of the planets,
learned to forecast their patterns, and watched to see whether the
Earth events fit their theories. Still, the results were far from
consistent. Though there were some basic agreements on the
nature of the planets, there were also major differences of opinion. Culture and Mythology Many of the differences were based on the culture of the observers.
Saturn, the subject of this book, provides a good example. Most of
our astrological theories originated in the Near East, were passed
on by Greece and Rome, survived through the Middle Ages, had a
brief flowering in the Renaissance, and were dismissed by modern
science when it accepted the theory of materialism. For the most
part, after astrology was written off by science as superstitious
nonsense, it lacked the resources to conduct systematic research.
But, in spite of its generally low status, astrology still attracted
some competent students who continued to expand our understanding of its basic principles. The life experiences associated
with Saturn in the ancient world of Greece, Rome, and India had
some obvious differences from some of the experiences observed
in the modern world when Saturn was "prominent."
In Greek mythology, Saturn (or Kronos to use his Greek name)
was classed as a former king. By the time of the flowering of the Júpiter The Book of Saturn Greek culture, Kronos had been deposed by his son, Zeus (Jupiter,
to give his more familiar Roman name). Zeus was clearly a god of
fire, noted for his thunderbolts. He was also noted for his insatiable sexual appetites, which he indulged rather indiscriminately and which kept his wife, Hera, in a state of constant fury.
The Greek description of Zeus seemed to be more Leo than
Sagittarius, thoughApo/Zo was acknowledged as a god of the Sun.
In human lives, Kronos (Saturn) was definitely earth, associated
with agriculture, animal husbandry, farm laborers and basically hard work. A "prominent" Saturn in a human chart was
associated with a life dominated by struggles to survive, by limits.
Modern astrology agrees that the principle of Saturn includes
the "Puritan" virtues of hard work, practicality, productivity,
responsibility, care with details, etc. But it has also been
observed in association with authority figures who wield power
in a bureaucratic structure, with hierarchies of power and the
law, with the disciplinary parent in contrast to the Moon as the
nurturing parent. We can make sense of this partial shift in our
understanding of the Saturn principle when we analyze the
cultural changes which have occurred. Astrology was codified by
the ancient world during the Arian Age1 when the supreme value
was personal will — a fire principle. In such a society. Mars as the
warrior was totally at home. The Sun as the King had dominion
over his subjects — his will was law. Jupiter, as indicated above,
was not yet clearly defined as the Priest which he became in time,
as the ruler of the sign of Sagittarius. But whether he was king or
priest, he expressed the fire principle: "1 have the right and the
power to do what 1 choose."
Humans who personified the fire roles had slaves to deal with
the material world. The idea of an impartial Law which protected
the rights of ordinary people may have been conceived by some
philosophers, but it was certainly not practiced in the Arian Age.
There was no place for a positive Saturn who enforced an
impersonal law when the fire people were in control and making
their personal wills into law. In India as well as in Greece, astrology
was codified during the times of autocratic rulers under a rigid
caste system which offered almost no room for personal freedom
for most people. There are still many countries controlled by a 1 See notes on page 225 Principles and Background 5 small group who function "above" the law, but theoretically in
democracies the law is impartial and bigger than any individual
will. Obviously, this is an ideal which is often breached in human
courts, but it still works in the realm of "natural law" and through
character (habits) producing destiny [Karma).
As we follow this ancient path of Inductive/deductive reasoning, it is reasonable to start with the theories and observations of
humans through the past millennia, but it is important to recognize that what humans are able to conceive is limited by their
culture, by the beliefs of their times. The poems of Hesiod offer us
some of the earliest Greek mythology. Ouranus (sky) and Ge or
Gaia (Earth), begat the Titans, but Ouranos would not withdraw
from Ge to permit her to give birth. With his mother's help, the
separation of the sky from the earth was achieved by the Titan
Kronos (the original Greek name for the god called Saturn by the
Romans). Kronos managed this feat by castrating his father with
a large sickle. But Kronos was afraid that his own children might
overthrow him as he had his father, so he swallowed his children
as his wife. Rhea, gave birth. Eventually, Rhea tricked Kronos by
hiding Zeus and giving Kronos a stone to swallow in his place. In
time. Zeus forced Kronos to disgorge the previously swallowed
children, the siblings of Zeus, and the latter was recognized as the
King. The Titans were overthrown hyZeus and the other gods with
the help of monsters who were also the offspring of Ge. In modern
terms, the self-confident fire god conquered the earth god as the
Arian Age superseded the Taurian Age. Saturn Principles Since the Arian Age ended some two to three hundred years before
the birth of Jesus and of our current Piscean Age, it is not
surprising that some modern cultures have revised their values,
which has made it possible for them to conceive and to observe a
broader meaning for Saturn. We will not become involved in the
arguments over the exact timing of the astrological Ages, but no
one questions that we are long past the Arian Age despite the
seeming inability of humans to live together in peace. We can now
at least conceive of a world in which the Law is impartial even when
we see the power of great wealth to sometimes escape the 6 The Book of Saturn consequences of personal actions. From the east, we have Inherited the word "karma" to describe action and its consequences,
and Saturn is now recognized by many as the primary symbol of
the Law ofKarma. Reincarnation is the East's explanation for the
fact that some people do not seem to suffer from their destructive
actions. If life is continuous, with one's character evolving through
a series of bodies, some karmic consequences might be delayed to
be experienced in later "lives,"
Based on our current state of understanding of the principles
of astrology, Saturn (and its sign, Capricorn, and its "natural"
house In a horoscope— the tenth), are keys to the Law on all levels.
They include "natural laws" like gravity and time which provide
the framework in which we live in this material universe. The
Saturn principle also includes cultural regulations such as
stopping fa- red lights and going through green ones and driving
the speed limit. It includes authority figures who enforce the law:
parents, the police, the boss on a job. the teacher. Appropriately
expressed, such power figures carry out the law — they do not
make their own wills into law. The Saturn principle also includes
one's conscience, one's inner law. and guilt when we fail to live
according to its limits. Plus, it includes the consequences of how
we have handled the laws in the past. In a nutshell. Saturn
symbolizes what we can do, what we can't do, and what we have
to do if we want to survive in this material world. And in its role
signifying the nature and the timing of the consequences of what
we have done and are doing, Saturn is our great teacher. It signals
our times for feedback, for a report card from the world. Ignorance
does not excuse us from consequences.
It is valuable to learn as much as we can through reading,
listening, observing others, etc.. but in the end, the only way we
know what is "lawful" is to do it and to observe the consequences.
Then, we can decide whether we want to do more of the action.
When astrologers teach that Saturn is negative. 1 ask 'Would you
like to live in a world without law? Imagine going to bed at night
wondering whether gravity might be canceled during the night
and you would wake up against the ceiling." It is only the fact that
the world is lawful that gives us any power. By understanding the
law and working with it. we can cope with the world. We fly planes
that are heavier than air by understanding and working with gravity, not by fearing It. Ignoring It. or fighting It. We can learn to
use time wisely. Individuals who have learned to be practical,
productive, competent, realistic, etc. can cope effectively with the
material world. Of course. If we only lived the earth sides of life. It
would not be much fun. We all have fire and air and water as well
as earth2, and we need to find appropriate ways to satisfy each of
our basic drives. Astrology Represents
12 Sides of Life
As Indicated previously, I think that the model of life offered by
astrology describes twelve basic drives or desires, and that each
of them Is symbolized by at least one planet, by a zodiac sign, and
by a horoscope house. There are also many other astronomical
factors which represent the same twelve sides of life, but this book
will focus on the three major forms of our "astrological alphabet."
Astrological Alphabet
Letter Planet & Glyph 1 Mars 2
3 Júpiter 5
6 Venus
Mercury
Moon
Sun
Mercury
Ceres
Vesta
Venus
Pallas
Pluto
Juno
Jupiter
Chiron
Saturn
Uranus
Neptune 7
8 Mercúrio 10
11
12 2 See notes on page 225 House Sign & Glyph CT Mercúrio Mercúrio D
O
5
7 1 Aries T 2
3 Júpiter 5
6 Taurus
Gemini
Cancer
Leo
Virgo »
I
G
S]
HP Mercúrio 7 Libra § orB
f 8 Scorpio Mercúrio Sagittarius 10
11
12 Capricorn
Aquarius
Pisces & Saturno V 1TL ~
H 8 The Book of Saturn When discussing the potential relationships between the different desires, it will sometimes be more convenient to talk in
terms of the signs to avoid the complication of some planets ruling
more than one sign. (That is. "Virgo" could be used as shorthand
to represent the planet Mercury, the sign Virgo and the sixth
house of the horoscope.) As we discuss the combinations of the
principles in our astrological model of life, we will see where the
Saturn principle is easier to blend and where there are inherent
conflicts with other principles. However, it is very important to
remember that the details in our lives always depend on our
handling of our desires. Conflicting desires can be integrated
with compromise, while harmonious desires which reinforce each
other can lead to excesses and problems in the life. CHAPTER TWO THE ASTROLOGICAL ALPHABET Cookbooks offer many combinations of a limited number of
ingredients. Languages offer many more potentials for combining
a limited number of basic ingredients (symbols) to create an
unlimited number of products with varying degrees of complexity
(words, sentences, paragraphs, chapters, etc.). The products
provide a way to conceive of and to describe life. When an object
has been given a name, we can discuss it when it is not present
and available to let us point to it. So language lets us share
information with our own species and, to a limited extent, with
other species of life.
Astrology offers us a language to conceive of and to
describe life. It has an alphabet which is equivalent to the letters
of an alphabet offering a model of life composed of twelve basic
desires or drives. Letters can be capitalized or written lower case,
or turned into monograms with curls, but an "A" is recognized as
carrying the same basic meaning as an "a." In astrology, we have
planets, signs of the zodiac, houses of the horoscope, and other
variations such as the nodes of all the planets3 and the dwads4 in
all the signs which symbolize the same twelve basic life desires.
This does not mean that the planets and signs and houses
are themselves the "same," but they symbolize the same
3 & Júpiter See notes on page 225 10 The Book of Saturn psychological principles. The planets are the most important.
like a verb in a sentence. Everything else is metaphorically like
adverbs which qualify verbs. It is oversimplified, but there is some
truth in the old saying that the planets show "what" you do. the
houses show "where" you do it, and the signs show "how" you do
it. But the urges of life, the primary twelve desires, are potentially
present in all of the different forms of the "letters" of the astrological alphabet, so information on "what" and "where" and "how" can
be provided by any of the "tools."
This is a book about Saturn, so we can illustrate the preceding
statements with Letter Ten of our astrological alphabet, but first
we need an overview of the system. We can think of astrology's
model of life as a series of stages of growth from initial selfabsorption to final oneness with the Whole. We start with the drive
to just be ourselves, to act immediately and spontaneously on
personal impulses with Letter One: Mars, Aries, and the first
house.
Then that fire urge to be and do is directed at a target, seeking
pleasure in the physical world, our first earth" side of life. We may
make or spend money, indulge appetites, collect and enjoy
possessions, create beauty, etc., with Letter Two: Venus, Taurus, and the second house.
Then we try to understand what is happening by developing
the conscious side of the mind, the intellect. Curiosity drives us
to investigate the world around us and we discover that other
people are part of it. We learn to learn, to communicate, to be an
equal by sharing the world with peer relationships such as
siblings and neighbors. Letter three introduces us to air with
Mercury, Gemini, and the third house.
Letter four completes the first cycle of the four elements.
Water symbolizes the subconscious side of the mind where we
absorb and assimilate the results of our experiences with the
other three elements. Habits live here, and most people operate on
automatic pilot most of the time. The subconscious manages the
body. It digests our food, repairs damage to the body, keeps us
breathing while we sleep, stores information acquired in the past,
etc. Habits are great labor savers. Once we learn to do something,
it takes less attention and effort to do it again, so we can satisfy
the fiie urge to break new ground. The Astrological Alphabet 1 1 Fire asks "What will I experience If I follow this impulse and do
what I want to? I'll try it and find out." Earth Is basically practical.
This can Include the ability to be logical, but the primary earth
question is "Will this work? What will happen In the physical world
if 1 do this? Do It and see." Air Is basically logical, creating abstract
conceptual systems, maps and models of Ideas. Of course, what
Is considered logical depends on one's premises, so unless these
are Initially grounded In the practical earth, we can create castles
In the air. Air asks "Is this design Internally consistent and how
can I communicate It?" Fire and air want to express and they
normally possess a sense of humor. Earth and water want to
protect, so they are normally more serious. Earth may save for
practical reasons, because something could be useful. Water
wants emotional security. It asks "How can I protect and preserve
what is Important to me?" This may simply be personal security
or may Include others. The water Instinct is to hold on and to hold
In.
At the water or subconscious level, life is connected, so water
Is a key to psychic ability. When water factors are combined with
fire or earth factors. Individuals tend to act on the Inner psychic
awareness, but they may not be conscious of why they are doing
what they are doing and often the action is Just carrying out
personal habits. Water and air combinations connect the conscious and subconscious potentials of the mind. Individuals with
an air-water emphasis can more readily become conscious of the
knowledge stored in or accessible to the subconscious. They may
or may not do anything with the Information other than register
it mentally and perhaps talk about it. Air Is a spectator and
commentator. Water may Just feel deeply.
Fire and earth are the action elements which Impact the world.
At the same time, there is a natural. Inherent potential for conflict
between fire and earth, between the urge to keep changing and the
desire for solid results in the world. The fire drive to try something
new Is also Inherently In conflict with the water Instinct to cling to
the familiar past. Air can be easily combined with the other three
elements and can be helpful to all of them. It provides the
detachment of a broad perspective which can moderate the
emotional Intensity of fire and water. It offers the ability to learn
vicariously through the observation of others or through vlsuallz- 12 The Book of Saturn ing possible consequences without having to knock one's own
head actually doing them. It symbolizes the ability to "take things
lightly."
Obviously, everyone possesses all the elements and life is a
complex mixture. Everything is always potentially present but the
emphasis is constantly changing. Natural conflicts need not be a
problem, but we do have to find a way to satisfy all of our basic
drives. Any part of our nature which is totally denied will make
trouble for us. Usually, compromise works best, but we can also
alternate when we want to do more of some parts of life. And, just
as conflict needs attention but can be handled successfully, the
consequences of harmony are not always pleasant. Harmony can
lead to excesses which create problems. It is not always true that
if some is good, more will be better.
The tragedy of astrology is that so much of it is presented as
if it was inevitably "positive" or "negative." Every astrological
principle, every one of our basic drives/desires, can be
manifested in "pleasant" or "painful" ways, in an infinite
variety of details which depend on how we try to satisfy the
desires. There are always "choices" but most of the time we are not
conscious of them because habits are running the show.
Remember, habits live in the subconscious side of the mind
which is represented by water in astrology. Letter four of our
astrological model of life is water and is symbolized by the Moon,
Cancer, and the fourth house. This includes the baby/mother
relationship, the home and family, our need to be nurtured and
our ability to nurture others. We may care for children or pets or
talk to our plants, and no matter what our age. we always retain
a little of our "baby" need to feel sheltered. Properly handled. Letter
Four is unconditional love. A baby is protected because it needs
it. not because it has earned it.
With Letter Five, the Sun, Leo, and the fifth house, we move
into fire again. With our initial fire, with Letter One, we simply
want to be let alone to do what we please. With Letter Five, we want
to do bigger things and we want an audience. We want to pour our
unique, creative power out into the world and to have it acknowledged. The Sun is a star, and Letter Five needs to shine. This can
include loving and being loved, procreating children, selling. The Astrological Alphabet 13 promoting, or otherwise persuading others to follow our lead,
investing, speculating or gambling hoping for a bigger return, etc.
Earth follows fire, and with Letter Six we need to function
effectively in ajob and in our physical bodies. Virgo and the sixth
house symbolize the drive to do something practical and to do it
well, to cope with the material world. Mercury traditionally is the
planetary key to Letter Six. and two of the asteroids, the little
planets which are mostly between Mars and Jupiter, also seem to
carry similar connotations. Ceres is the nurturing side of Virgo
with a strong maternal instinct. Work is seen as a way to help
people, and Ceres is usually a key to our original mother-figure
and to our ability to mother others. Vesta marks the need to do a
good job for the sake of doing a good job! Individuals who have a
prominent Vesta but who lack empathy can be so intent on the
immediate goal that they ignore the effect they are having on
others. When the subconscious which manages the body is
overloaded with negative emotions that are being mostly ignored,
it can produce bodily ailments to get our attention. Job frustrations are a common source of illness or accidents. They let us
escape the job or other obligations without feeling guilty.
Once we have learned to work effectively and to maintain our
health, we are ready to form lasting, adult, peer relationships with
Letters Seven and Eight. Libra and the seventh house represent the air side of partnership which seeks pleasure with others
but is less emotionally intense than Scorpio and the eighth
house where we learn to share sensuality, possessions, and
passion driven by the water urge toward fusion. Venus is the
traditional ruler of Letter Seven but the asteroid Pallas also carries
Libra meanings. Often, this includes potential skill in the graphic
arts. Mars is the traditional ruler of Scorpio and remains a coruler, but Pluto is now recognized by most astrologers as the
primary ruler. Another of the asteroids. Juno, provides the same
message, joining the other slgnlffcators of Letter Eight.
Letters Seven and Eight are polar partners of Letters One and
Two. For many people, their primary challenge involves finding a
balance between their own rights and pleasures and the rights
and pleasures of others. The relationships may be cooperative or
competitive as long as each side can win some of the time to
maintain the game and, hopefully, there is mutual pleasure. 14 The Book of Saturn When healthy competition, which is facilitating increased abilities
on both sides, turns into war and mutual destruction, it has been
carried too far.
With Letter Nine we leave the interpersonal part of life and
enter the transpersonal. Letters One and two focus on purely
personal rights and needs. Letter Three is starting to become
socialized to recognize the rights of others. With Letter Four we
start as a baby butbecome an adult able to nurture others, so from
three through eight we are focused on face-to-face interactions
with others. As usual, each element cycle ends with water to mark
closure. Letter eight seeks to probe the subconscious depths, to
gain self-knowledge and self-mastery. We learn self-knowledge
partly through the mirror of a mate and we achieve self-mastery
pardy through respect for the rights of the mate. The transpersonal
Letters (Nine through Twelve) deal with social issues, humanity,
abstract knowledge, laws, faith; with issues which involve masses
of people and universal principles.
Letter nine marks our search for Truth with a capital T". As
usual, the new element cycle startswith fire, the urge to break new
ground, to explore new potentials. Jupiter, Sagittarius, and the
ninth house are all part of the picture describing where and how
we search for the meaning of life, the nature of reality, for
something to trust, for a way to set up a value hierarchy to make
choices. Letter nine is a primary key to our ultimate goals in life,
determining where we end in our life. The small planet Chiron
(which might be a comet) carries the potentials of both sides of
Jupiter, which is also a co-ruler of Pisces.
An understanding of Letter Ten is the central purpose of this
book. Saturn, Capricorn and the tenth house show our capacity
to deal with the Law. Letter Ten describes the "Rules of the Game."
including "natural laws" like gravity and time, as well as the
cultural rules of human societies. It is also a key to the authority
figures who enforce the laws and to our inner authority, the
conscience and guilt. In current patterns. Letter Ten marks the
times when we get the consequences of how we have been
handling the laws. It is the ultimate earth side of life, bringing us
down to earth if we mishandle gravity.
Metaphorically, any overreach or attempt to avoid our share
of the responsibility can result in some type of failure or failing The Astrological Alphabet 15 short. Ignorance does not excuse us. Karma isjust consequences
which can be positive or painful. The proper handling of power
brings success. We get an "A" on the report card.
Letter eleven with Uranus, Aquarius, and the eleventh
house shows the drive to go beyond the laws, to resist any limits.
As an air side of life, we may expand knowledge by inventing new
technology. We may support democracy, equality, freedom, and
human rights in general. If we have properly internalized our
conscience so that we know and voluntarily accept the necessary
limits, then we can be free to do what we please with Letter Eleven
and we normally support the same freedom for everyone else.
Neptune, Pisces and the twelfth house symbolize Letter
Twelve, the mystical search for infinite love and beauty and
oneness with the Whole. In an infinite variety of ways we may be
artists, saviors or victims. The latter is the person who shares a
beautiful dream with the artists and saviors but has not found an
effective way to move toward the vision, to make the world more
ideal. Jupiter remains a co-ruler of Pisces and Chiron can also
show where we may play the role of either healer or victim. Repetition Shows Importance Every chart includes all the twelve principles, yet each chart is a
unique combination. There are many forms of the astrological
alphabet, many ways to "say the same thing." Important features
in the nature will be shown by repeated themes in the horoscope.
As you read about Saturn in the different signs and houses and
aspects to other planets, there will be a lot of repetition. It will
become obvious that the same potentials are present in the related
combinations. Whether we have Saturn in Aries or in the first
house, or Mars in Capricorn or in the tenth house, or a MarsSaturn conjunction, we are combining the same drives. Personal
will and power have to be integrated with the limits of personal will
and power, whether the limits confront us in natural law. cultural
regulations, authority figures, or our individual conscience. Since
the planets are the most intense form of the desire, the conjunction of two planets is the most intense form of the issue, but all
combinations describe the same drives and all can be manifested 16 The Book of Saturn in a variety of ways. Nothing in astrology is inevitably positive or
negative. Every combination can be expressed in both pleasurable
and painful ways. There are always choices. Even if our current
habits have been producing painful results, the potential for
change is present if we are willing to make the effort to replace
the old habits with new ones. Astrology, or any other form of selfknowledge. helps us understand our desires. Then it is up to us
if we want to change our habits.
When we are born, it is obvious that the world has all the
power. Initially, the infant is totally dependent on others to provide
basic needs. We may experience the world in the form of a
protective parent who meets our physical and emotional needs, or
we may have parents who are neglectful or harsh. In the latter
cases, Saturn (and other forms of Letter Ten) become keys to fear
of the power of the world. Even with very protective and nurturing
parents, there can still be some anxiety associated with power
which is clearly outside of our control.
As we mature and gain confidence in our capacity to cope with
the world, we acquire our share of the power. Especially after we
have learned to cope with the physical world through work, we can
gain a sense of personal power in the realm of Saturn. Letter ten
in all its forms is a key to our careers, to how we fit into the
structure of our society, our status, our roles. Like Letter Six.
Letter Ten is also a critic. To do a good job, we need to analyze the
flaws and try to correct them.
This flaw-finding attitude is helpful when done with the Job,
but when displaced into other areas of life such as relationships,
It can be a problem. Whether or not we need to work for survival,
with Saturn we need to do something to provide an outlet for
the critical attitude and a sense of accomplishment and
power in the world. We will see the same potentials over and over
as we analyze the placement of Saturn in the signs, in the houses,
and in aspects to the other planets. We may experience the Saturn
principle as fear until we have learned the rules of tile game and
are living with them voluntarily while manifesting our share of
power in the material world. The Astrological Alphabet It's 17 fe Elementary The four astrological elements represent another mental construct or "map" for observing commonalities. We note similar
issues shared by planets, houses, and signs of the same element,
and can observe which elements are more complementary to one
another.
The water principle is a natural ally of earth. Water represents the desire for emotional security so it complements and
reinforces the earth desire for material security. Water is willing
to stay in a rut if it Is safe. It indicates the subconscious side of the
mind, the capacity for empathy, compassion, and Intuition. It
runs our bodies and stores our habits and it is our habits which
primarily control our lives.
As previously stated, earth is the capacity to cope with the
material world. Taurus accepts a rut if it is pleasant and comfortable. Virgo and Capricorn accept a rut if it provides a sense of
accomplishment, of achievement.
The desires of fire are inherently in conflict with both earth
and water. Fire symbolizes the drive to Innovate, to express one's
uniqueness in action. Fire is eager, dramatic, enthusiastic, exciting. It is willing to risk security in preference to being bored.
Air can blend fairly easily with each of the other three
elements. Air signifies the conscious side of the mind, the ability
to learn and communicate, to "take things lightly." to be a
spectator, to handle peer relationships and let others do their
share. Air has perspective, is able to see both positive and negative
potentials, to understand them, talk about them, and accept them
without having to take other action.
Of course, anything can be overdone or underdone. Excessive
air can be a superficial dilettante, talk a lot but do little. Inadequate air or excessive fire and water can be a sign of too much
emotional intensity. Since all of the planets are present in every
chart, no one is totally missing any principle, but each chart
has a unique combination. life is a balancing or Juggling act as
we try to make room for each of our desires, to find appropriate
ways to satisfy each of them. 18 The Book of Saturn Qualities of Life
In addition to the four elements, another useful astrological
concept divides the twelve basic desires into three qualities:
cardinal, fixed, and mutable. The four elements and the three
qualities provide each of the twelve sides of life with a unique pair.
That is. there are three fire drives and four cardinal drives but only
one cardinal fire drive which is symbolized by the planet Mars, the
sign Aries, and the first house of the horoscope. The twelve planethouse-sign combinations are provided in the table below.
The cardinal quality tends to express with overt action, action
which changes the outer circumstances of the life. The action is
not always consciously chosen and initiated by the individual.
Aries, with its fire urge to Innovate, is likely to be a self-starter, but
Libra is often reacting to the action of others. Cancer and
Capricorn are sometimes dragged kicking and screaming into
change—Cancer when subconscious habits have been in charge Astrological Alphabet q Letter Planet Glyph House Sign Glyph Quality Element 1 Mars cf 1 Aries T Cardinal Fire 2
3 Júpiter 5
6 Taurus
Gemini
Cancer
Leo
Virgo 0 Fixed
Mutable
Cardinal
Fixed
Mutable Earth
Air
Water
Fire
Earth 7 Libra Cardinal Air 8 Scorpio Lua Fixed Water Mercúrio Sagittarius / Mutable Fire 10
11
12 Capricorn
Aquarius
Pisces Y5
^
H Cardinal
Fixed
Mutable Earth
Air
Water 2
3 Júpiter 5
6 7
8 Mercúrio 10
11
12 Mercúrio Venus
Mercury
5
Moon
D
Sun
0
Mercury
C
?
Ceres
Vesta
49
Venus
Pallas
?
? orB
Pluto
t
Juno
Jupiter
U
Chiron
&
Saturn Saturno Uranus
¥
Neptune s
s\
TIP The Astrological Alphabet 1 Mercúrio and we may not know consciously why our life is the way it is, and
Capricorn when we are experiencing consequences from past
action.
The fixed quality represents enduring self-will. This does not
mean that individuals with an emphasis on fixity will be unchanging. Leo is highly creative. Scorpio can lead to major transformation. Aquarius is associated with inventions. But the fixed sides
of life change when they are ready to change. They do not willingly
let anyone else make them change.
The mutable quality symbolizes different mental sides of life.
Gemini and Virgo both signify the conscious side of the mind and
the ability to deal with the world immediately around us. But
Gemini is interested in everything while Virgo wants to narrow the
focus to do something useful. Sagittarius and Pisces are searching
for the Absolute, for the beliefs and values which will let us find
meaning in life, set up a value hierarchy, make choices, determine
our goals, etc. Sagittarius represents our formal belief system
whether we seek it from a traditional religion, from philosophy,
science, metaphysics, or through a personal quest. Pisces seeks
infinite love and beauty, the mystical experience of being one with
the Whole.
The inherent conflicts between the desires symbolized in each
set of the four sharing a quality lead to natural "dilemmas." The
cardinal dilemma calls for the integration of our desire to just do
what we please, our need for emotional security through being
protected by or protecting others, our desire for mutual pleasure
in warm, peer relationships, and our need to deal with power in the
world. Obviously, we cannot be totally independent, dependent,
equal, and in control at the same time. But we can make a place
in our lives for some personal interests and hobbies, for a home
and family, for a mate, and for a career which lets us cope with the
physical world.
The fixed dilemma calls for the integration of our attachment
to personal material possessions and pleasures, our urge to love
and be loved by others, the ability to share possessions and
pleasures within emotionally close relationships, and the ability
to detach and remain free. We may be seeking moderation
between self-indulgence versus self-mastery, or self-sufficiency
versus giving, receiving and sharing with loved ones, or emotional 20 The Book of Saturn passion versus intellectual detachment, or self-esteem versus
commitment to equality.
The mutable dilemma calls for the integration of our capacity
to understand and work effectively with the world around us while
being clear about the basic beliefs, values, and goals which direct
our lives. We may stay frustrated because the world never lives up
to our ideals. We may have conflicts between head goals and heart
goals and effectiveness in the physical world. People lacking a
clear belief system have problems with priorities and may lack a
sense of direction, with a tendency to get lost. Those who lack faith
in a protective Higher Power may live with anxiety or depression.
Integration means making a place in our lives for each of these
primary drives/desires. To be a whole person, we need them all. Major Thirds of the Horoscope A third useful way of combining the twelve sides of life describes
them as personal, interpersonal, and transpersonal. With the
first two sides of life (Aries and Taurus by sign), we want to meet
our personal needs to be ourselves and "do our thing." and to enjoy
ourselves. The third and fourth sides of life (Gemini and Cancer by
sign) are initially expressed mostly as personal needs. We develop
our conscious intellects by practicing on everything without
taking anything very seriously. And. initially, we are babies
needing a mother to take care of us. But with the Gemini (and
Mercury/3rd house) principle we also start to become socialized
through peer relationships with siblings or neighbors so we
become aware of the needs of others. And when we mature, we
become parents who can nurture others with the Cancer (Moon/
4th house) principle.
The second major section is all Interpersonal, where we learn
to deed with face-to-face relationships with other people. With Leo
(Sun/5th house) we learn to express our fire creativity through
loving and being loved, including the potential of procreating
children. With Virgo, the main focus is on doing a good Job. but we
also have to relate to our fellow workers. The Libra and Scorpio
sides of life both represent our capacity to form lasting peer
relationships. These may include marriage, business partner- 21 ships, counseling relationships, or good friends if we meet regularly for shared goals. In the transpersonal areas of life, we
formulate our beliefs [principle Mercúrio of the astrological alphabet], test
them against the "rules of the game" (principle 10). expand our
horizons with people and knowledge and make changes (principle
1 D.and experience the underlying connectedness of life (principle
12).
As already indicated, every horoscope has every principle, but
each chart is a uniquecombination with its own emphasis. We can
satisfy each of the twelve basic drives/desires in many different
ways. The horoscope shows the desires with which we are
dealing, both the character tendencies at birth and the
current issues, but our choices determine the life details.
Much of the time, our habits are running our lives. We are not
making conscious choices or our conscious desires are in conflict
with our subconscious desires which are ingrained in our habits,
and the subconscious usually wins. When we are conscious of this
conflict, we can often find a reasonable compromise so that none
of our desires are totally denied. If a part of our nature is truly
blocked, it will make trouble for us. Doubtful Dignities Many astrological traditions from the ancient world were forgotten
over the years and some of them are being rediscovered and
offered to modern astrologers by Project Hindsight which is
translating ancient texts into English, many for the first time in
history. As with any theories, the next step requires testing the
ideas to see whether they are reliable and helpful. As previously
indicated. I think that concepts, theories, maps, models, etc. are
conceptual systems created to help us deal more effectively with
the world. The map is not the territory, and many different
systems for making maps may prove useful at different times
or in different situations. Until modern science takes astrology
seriously enough to conduct systematic research on its many, and
often conflicting, theoretical models, individual students need
to consider that everything they read or hear in astrology is
a theory to be tested, not "gosper revealed from on high. The
conceptual system presented in thisbook is based on my personal 22 The Book of Saturn experience with thousands of horoscopes, including the charts of
many psychologically trained professionals. But it has not been
tested by systematic research. Hopefully, during this current period of Uranus transiting its own sign, we may make a major
start on such research.
The concept of astrological dignities was one of the ancient
theories which survived and continues to be taught and used by
many, if not most, modern astrologers. I questioned part of the
concept in abook published over twenty years ago. The Astrologer's
Casebook.and I continue to question it. I think that the association of specific planets with specific signs which they are said to
"rule" is accurate. I also think that each of these "pairs" of planet
and zodiacal sign are additionally associated with one of the twelve
houses of the horoscope. This equivalence of meaning in a planetsign-house set produces what I have called the "astrological
alphabet." and it is the basic concept presented throughout this
book.
As I have written repeatedly, planets and signs and houses are
not the "same," but they symbolize the same basic life drives/
desires. The planets are always the most important, like the verbs
in a sentence. They are the primary keys to the action. The houses
and the signs are like adverbs qualifying the action. The other
primary technique in astrology, the use of aspects, which are the
distances between the planets, provides information on how the
different desires relate to each other. Some desires are complementary. They support and reinforce each other. But this is not a
guarantee that the life results will be comfortable, since inner
harmony can lead to excesses which create problems. Some
desires are in conflict with each other. To integrate them, to make
peace between them, we have to satisfy the desires at different
times and places or find a compromise where we do less of each.
With successful integration, the inherent conflict need not be a
problem in the life.
The ancient concept of the dignities described the placement
of a planet in the sign opposite to the one or more that it ruled as
being in its detriment position. In the era before telescopes,
astrologers had the Sun and the Moon, which ruled one sign each,
and they had five visible planets which each "ruled" or were "at
home" in two signs. As the ruler of Leo, the Sun was considered The Astrological Alphabet 23 fe to be In Its detriment in Aquarius. The Moon ruled Cancer and was
in its detriment in Capricorn. Mercury ruled both Gemini and
Virgo, so its detriment signs were Sagittarius and Pisces. Venus
ruled both Taurus and Libra, so Its detriment positions were Aries
and Scorpio. Mars ruled both Aries and Scorpio, so its detriment
signs were Libra and Taurus. Jupiter ruled both Sagittarius and
Pisces, so its detriment positions were Gemini and Virgo. Saturn
ruled both Capricorn and Aquarius, so It was in detriment In
Cancer and Leo.
This system is tidy and logical In several ways. Mars and
Venus are paired and Mercury and Jupiter are paired so the
rulership signs of one member in a pair are the detriment signs of
the other. Mars and Venus focus on the issues of self versus equal
others, with personal versus interpersonal desires. They deal
with the juggling act of defending personal rights and meeting
personal needs versus sharing the world with others in lasting
peer relationships with the goal of mutual pleasure. Mercury and
Jupiter deal with the mental world: Mercury with the world
immediately around us and Jupiter with ultimate beliefs, values,
and goals. Saturn was the outermost planet In ancient astrology,
and It was paired with both the Sun and the Moon, the two "lights"
in the Interchange of rulerships and detriments.
My only objection to the concept of "detriment" is the implication that placing a planet in a detriment sign is inherently and
inevitably negative. I see the six polarities of astrology as natural
partners which need each other and which can be readily
Integrated given a little awareness and effort. In fact, quite often
a harmoniously aspected planet in a sign opposite to its own
rulership sign is a key to someone who is successfully
integrating the polarity. This is also often true when a planet is
in the house opposed to its own "natural" house, provided the
planet has mostly harmonious
chart. aspects to other factors in the The converse is also true. Omitting Mercury and Jupiter for
the moment, when cardinal and/or fixed planets, including the
Sun and Moon, are in other cardinal and/or fixed signs or houses
with conflict aspects, they reinforce their respective cardinal or
fixed dilemma'. Often, astrologers miss the full picture because
'See discussion of qualities on pages 18-20. 24 they are not taking into account the shared meanings of planets,
houses, and signs. For example, astrologers may think of Mars in
libra in the fourth house opposite Venus in Aries in the tenth
house as a simple opposition, and fail to realize that, actually,
each planet is a T-square in terms of the planet-sign-bouse
combination, and the whole configuration is a cardinal grand
cross. Similarly, the Sun in Aquarius in the second house or the
eighth house is actually equivalent to a fixed T-square. It is not
helpful to assume that such combinations will inevitably be
negative in the life, but they do call for some type of compromise
for us to satisfy the different desires.
Where Mars and Venus call for us to integrate personal needs
with peer relationships, the Sun, Moon, and Saturn deal with
parent-child issues, with power and dependency. We procreate
offspring (and other forms of creativity) with Letter Five and we
take care of our offspring, including home and pets, with Letter
Four. Letter Ten, the major focus of this book, deals with the rules
of nature and of the society, with responsibility and the conscience. including whatever person or force enforces the rules.
Letter eleven leads us beyond any rules or authority figures,
provided we have properly internalized the necessary rules. Power
is an issue in both the cardinal and the fixed dilemmas.
Mercury and Jupiter with their mutable dilemma are quite
different. They symbolize the search for knowledge and normally
just emphasize mental ability when they are placed in each others'
signs or houses. This does not mean that there are never problems
when they are in one of the natural homes of each other. The most
common form of the mutable dilemma is a basic conflict
between the ideals of Jupiter and what is possible in the
Mercury world we live in. Lack of faith in a higher power can be
a problem, or the converse, gullibility and lack of discrimination
and common sense, or we can turn a fragment of life into God,
making it too Important, and end up disillusioned. We may stay
too scattered and need to focus to be more effective, or too focused
and need a broader perspective. But the fact that the mutables are
in a different class from the cardinal and fixed sides of life is
obvious when we realize that each of these mutable planets rules
two signs which are square each other. Normally, squares are
harder to integrate than oppositions, but intelligence, understanding. and conscious awareness are always potential assets
with the mutables. The most serious problems with the mutables The Astrological Alphabet 25 are seen when individuals think that they have found ultimate Truth and stop looking for more. Truth is a goal we never
reach, but the journey is fantastic fun.
The concepts of exaltation and fall in the theory of the Dignities
are the most indefensible. My personal theory is that these associations were chosen during the Arian Age and that they
represent Arian Age ethics. I think they should have been abandoned when we entered the Piscean Age over 2.000years ago. The
male warrior hero was the supreme value during the Arian Age. so
it seemed appropriate at the time to admire the Sun. the King, In
the sign of the warrior. Obviously, the Mediterranean world at the
time when western astrology was being developed was totally male
dominated. Astrologers during the several thousand years of
observation of the sky had noted that the planet showed the
nature of the action while the sign colored it. So the Sun in Aries
was both King and warrior, leading his men in battle. Mars in
Capricorn was the warrior who could take personal power over
the material world, including the laws of the society, who could
make his personal will into law. Mercury as key to one's mental
ability had its greatest breadth of vision in Aquarius.
Marriage during these early years of astrology was a fourth
house matter. Women were owned like the land and the cattle.
Libra was associated with open enemies more than with
partners, so putting Saturn, the most dreaded "malefic," in
the sign of one's enemies offered the hope that the "big bad
wolf" would get them. In a wife, symbolized by the Moon, the
male warrior hero wanted a woman who was strong enough to
manage the home and family, but with a pleasant disposition
and fertile, to bear many children: the Moon in Taurus.
However, for a paramour on the side, the male hero wanted a
woman who was seductive but pliant, beautiful, romantic, and
a bit mysterious; Venus in Pisces. In a world full of enemies, the
only people one could really trust were those related by blood,
the family, so Jupiter in Cancer was valued. The concept of a
planet being in the sign of its "fall" was simply a logical extension
of the idea that if planets in some signs were especially positive,
placement in the opposite signs had to be negative.
As stated above, our values have changed since the Arian Age.
More often than not. I find people having problems with Mars in 26 The Book of Saturn Capricorn; sometimes trying to make the personal will into law.
but, more often among those who consult astrologers, selfcritical, self-doubting, self-blocking, sometimes to the point
of illness as the fear of doing the wrong thing inhibits the natural
desire of Mars to do what we please and inhibits the natural selfconfidence which plays a major role In our immune systems.
Saturn in Libra initially is usually a lesson in sharing power
with our lasting peer relationships. We may choose a father
figure as a mate and give him or her the power and responsibility,
or we may play parent ourselves. Not uncommonly, we do first one
and then the other while we are learning to share the power. Many
people delay marriage out of the fear of being criticized, dominated. or hurt in some other way.
Venus in Pisces is often an indication of artistic appreciation
and ability which can be in any of many fields of the arts: music,
dancing, drama, painting, poetry, etc. However, it is often associated with excessive idealism in close relationships, with a tendency to expect too much from love and to be let down. Alternately.
Individuals with this placement may attract victims and try to play
savior. Being a professional savior is fine as long as we know that
we can only facilitate the growth of another person. No one can do
it all for anyone else. But if we play savior in what should be peer
relationships, it is usually a disaster.
With Jupiter in Cancer, we may expect too much from or
overvalue food, family, home, or anything that we connect to
emotional security. We may try to be a perfect parent, to produce
perfect children, to keep a perfect home. etc. Turning any fragment of life into God is an idolatry which can let us down in the
end.
Every combination in astrology can be positive or painful,
depending on how the individual is seeking to satisfy those
desires. And, obviously, we can change the way we are seeking
satisfaction and change the details of our lives. Astrology will
never fulfill Its great potential for providing self-awareness to
facilitate our achieving more effective and fulfilling lives until we
outgrow the assumption that anything in astrology and life is
inherently and necessarily good or bad. The Astrological Alphabet Defense 27 Mechanisms As is clear by now, I think that astrology is a key to psychological
principles, to the basic desires/drives oflife. As a form of psychology, some of the latter's ideas can be helpful. Among the useful
concepts in psychology are three of the "defense mechanisms:"
repression, projection, and displacement. Repression occurs
when we are not conscious of our emotions so they are buried in
the subconscious. It is possible to submerge and stay unaware of
any emotion, but it is the unpleasant or painful ones which create
problems. Whether the emotion is fear, anger, guilt, resentment,
sorrow, etc., when the feeling is not acknowledged consciously, it
festers like pus in the body. In fact, infections resulting in pus are
a common symptom resulting from repressed emotions. The
subconscious manages the body. When it is overloaded with
disturbing emotions, it tries to get our attention with body
symptoms. Physical discomfort is a message from the subconscious saying "I'm not happy. Do something." Children are
occasionally born without the ability to feel pain and they never
live to adulthood. Pain, whether physical, emotional, mental, or
spiritual, is a warning that we are on the wrong track and need to
change what we are doing. The body has considerable ability to be
self-healing if we can become conscious of our potentially destructive emotions and/or actions and change our life. Though most of
western medicine is wedded to the materialistic belief system, an
increasing amount of research is discovering the major role
emotions play in illness.
Projection was originally conceptualized as individuals imagining in someone else the qualities they could not face in themselves. I think that, rather than imagining, most of us tend to
attract others who will act out desires which we feel but which are
in conflict with other desires. The other person, in effect, does
what we will not let ourselves do because of the inner conflict. The
end result is much like a seesaw. As one goes down, the other goes
up. The less we do, the more the other person does, to the point
of excesses and discomfort. One of the most common examples of
projection in our modern western world involves the "freedomcloseness dilemma." Everyone would like to do what they please
a good bit of the time, and almost everyone would like pleasant 28 The Book of Saturn relationships with other people. But. to achieve close, continuing
emotional bonds, we have to give up some of our own desires. We
have to compromise. So. individuals who are consciously seeking
emotional closeness are attracted to individuals who are conscious of the desire to preserve some individual freedom. Both
people have the same dilemma, but the first person clutches and
the second person pulls back to maintain some space. In this
dance, the first person's subconscious need for space is being
satisfied by the second person's action and vice versa. When both
become conscious of their ambivalence, they can work out a reasonable compromise which allows some closeness and some
space.
Displacement occurs when we try to satisfy one of our normal
desires in a way which does not work well. A typical example of
displacement is the search for the Absolute in a fragment of life.
We may put ourfaith in money. We may look for an ideal mate. Our
job may be an ultimate value, so if we lose it. we are terrified. We
may never forgive our parents for not being perfect or try to be the
perfect parent of perfect children. Any of these actions is a form of
idolatry which will inevitably disappoint us and force us to find a
bigger God.
Astrology helps us to see where we might repress, project, or
displace. Once we know what is happening, we can change the
way we are trying to meet the normal desires of life. Habits are not
easy to change, but it can happen with patient, persistent effort.
It is almost impossible to just stop a habit, but we can replace it
with one which produces more satisfying consequences. Life is a
juggling act. We need to become conscious of all twelve sides of life,
all twelve primary desires which are driving us. and to make room
fa" each of them in our lives. All twelve are potentially positive,
but they can be repressed, projected into other people,
carried to excess, poorly done for lack of attention and effort,
done in the wrong place, or we can just stay torn between two
conflicting desires. It is even possible to stay unhappy all the
time by always wishing we were dolngsomethlngelse rather than
enjoying what we are doing, and later doing something else and
enjoying that. I think that most serious students of astrology are
idealists. Remember to enjoy the journey toward your ideals.
Don't wait until you reach them to be happy. CHAPTER THREE SATURN IN SIGNS As has been indicated, there will be repetition in the descriptions
of the different forms of the astrological alphabet. Since the
planets are the most important form of the alphabet, the descriptions of conjunctions between planets are often the most complete
picture of the principles. When looking up Saturn in a sign, it is
advisable to also read the section about Saturn conjunct the ruler
of that sign, and the material on Saturn in the equivalent house
may provide additional useful information. For example, if your
Saturn is in Taurus, also read Saturn conjunct Venus and Saturn
in the second house.
Saturn in Aries forms a natural square (Saturn rules Capricorn. which squares Aries). The square calls for the integration of
conflicting desires. Aries represents our feeling that we should
have the right and the power to do what we please. Saturn
represents the "rules of the game" which set limits on life if we want
to survive in this world at this time. Failure to integrate, to make
peace between these two sides of life with some sort of compromise, can result in a variety of problems.
Individuals with a dominant Letter One emphasis in their
charts may feel that their will should be law. Fire-earth combinations may be steamrollers or resemble a molten lava flow. Just
don't get in the way. Such individuals may live in a constant state
of overdrive, trying to make the world do what they think it should.
They may be dictators to the extent that they can. or they may 30 The Book of Saturn simply be very responsible people who feel guilty if anything goes
wrong. One-ten combinations can play "Atlas" and try to carry the
world.
The other extreme is the feeling that the world has all the
power, so we might as well not even try—we would just fail or fall
short. These people may simply lack faith in their own power or
they may feel that they do not have the right to be themselves or
do what they please. We gain faith in our own power by doing
anything successful. Of course, if our standard of success is too
high, we may never feel we have achieved it. We don't know what
we can do until we have done it. When the self-blocking is carried
too far, when fear blocks the fire need to express actively in the
world, illness is possible. Fire is the faith which fuels the immune
system, the creative recuperative power of life itself. Ignoring
realistic, practical physical limits can also have negative repercussions for health. To integrate our self-confidence and our limits, we need reasonable ambitions and some kind of active
accomplishment in the world.
Careers for Saturn in Aries should be entrepreneurial, active,
varied, and self-directed when possible. Individuals with this
placement are identified with their careers, so on the one hand
they tend to feel they have lost their power and identity when they
are not working, yet they want to work in their own way, strictly
on their own terms. Self-criticism may be a problem if they
"become" the job and focus too much on their flaws.
Afather or another authority figure will usually be arole model
in the early life. If the father is a positive model, the individual tries
to be like him, to win his approval. If the parent is a negative model,
the individual tries to do the opposite. Competition with the parent
is common, and frequently, individuals are not aware of how they
are shaping their lives by their early experiences with authorities.
Francis Ford Coppola, the independent movie director, has
Saturn in Aries.
Saturn in Taurus forms a natural trine, so individuals with
this combination maybe very successful in handling the material
world. When driven by a small to moderate fear of the world's
power or insecurity about their own power, they may make money
and also hold on to it. Or they may collect possessions. Often the
career may involve beauty in some way, whether they create it or Saturn In Signs sell the creations of others. Material security, pleasure, and comfort are usually important. Major conflict aspects to Saturn
would suggest that there are lessons around making or handling
money, possessions, or appetites. The Saturn potential for a
Puritan conscience can conflict with the pleasure drives of Taurus, so individuals may swing between excesses and asceticism,
between spending and saving, hoarding and generosity, etc. But
the combination is normally practical and capable.
An artistic career is possible, whether as an artist or dealing
with things that give pleasure to people, including home furnishings. clothing, cosmetics, jewelry, or, of course, the money that
buys them. The instinct of Taurus is to conserve and to savor.
The father and other authority figures may be pleasant and
comfortable, or very focused on the material world of money,
possessions and pleasures, or quite artistic, or simply practical.
If Saturn has conflict aspects, the father may have problems with
money or sensuality or he could just be stubborn.
The conservationist David Brower had Saturn in Taurus,
along with the folk singer Joan Baez.
Saturn in Gemini is a natural quincunx, the aspect which
usually carries an implication of wanting to do it better. This may
support the critic side of Saturn, but the air ability to see both
sides of eveiythlng, to understand, and to accept, can offset the
critic. With serious insecurity, this combination may try to control
information and communication for a sense of security. It can be
"dry," lacking in warmth, insisting on "facts" only.
This combination often illustrates the two sides of Saturn at
different stages of life. Initially, children with Saturn in Gemini
often doubt their mental ability, sometimes because they are
comparing themselves with a parent or an older sibling. But once
they have gained a sense of competence, they typically choose a
mental career. This may include any form of communication, such
as teaching, counseling, sales, media work. etc. Work with the
hands is also possible. Gemini, like all forms of Letter Three,
carries the potential for skill with eye-mind-hand coordination.
The father may have been bright and verbal and engaged in an
intellectual profession. In such cases, he usually pushes die child
to do well in school. Alternately, the father might have lacked 32 The Book of Saturn education and worked with his hands. I have seen cases where
such a father also pushed the child to become educated to be able
to do more in life than the father could, but in other cases, the
father disdained mental skills. Sometimes a sibling or other relative plays the role of parent or there is a power issue in what
should be a peer relationship. Sometimes, the individual feels
responsible for a sibling. Mutual criticism or power struggles can
be a danger in relationships which should be accepting and
cooperative.
Singer Bonnie Franklin has Saturn in Gemini. Republican
Speaker of the U.S. House of Representatives Newton Gingrich
also has this combination. He was a university professor before he
went into politics. Theodore Kaczynski. who is accused of being
the Unabomber, also has Saturn in Gemini closely conjunct his
Sun and Uranus. He was considered a genius in mathematics, got
college degrees at an early age. and was briefly a professor, but
dropped out to live as a hermit and attack modern technology.
Saturn in Cancer is a natural opposition. The astrological
drives which are opposite each other should be partners. As the
opposite ends of a polarity, they have much in common, but each
provides something the other needs. However, when they are not
integrated, the person may express one end and have problems
with the other end which can be repressed, projected, or displaced. Projection is the most common mishandling of oppositions. Typically, the individual finds someone with the same
dilemma but each person consciously seeks to satisfy one end
while the other person focuses on the other end. The usual result
is that each person overdoes his or her end. Each is getting some
vicarious satisfaction from the other person's manifestation of the
other end. Unfortunately, since the desire for this end is subconscious and in conflict with the conscious desire (or the person
would simply do it and not project it), the usual feeling is
frustration with the other person. "If you were different. I would be
happy." When both people realize that the problem is internal,
when they become conscious of their own ambivalence and accept
it as normal, they can work out a compromise.
The four-tenpolarity symbolizes the two parents. Four should
be the nurturing parent, giving unconditional love because the
baby needs it. Letter ten is the disciplinary parent who teaches the Saturn in Signs 33 rules and provides the consequences of how we handle them as
part of that instruction. Obviously, real parents may not conform
to the model, and the four-ten combinations in astrology point to
issues which usually involve security. Neither parent may provide
unconditional love or both may overprotect and '"spoil" a child.
Most astrology texts assume that the Saturn principle will always
overpower the Moon principle, producing some variation on
harsh, or dominating, or distant parents, but I have seen examples of the overprotective alternative. In the end, the child has
to grow up and learn that there are rules, learn to be responsible
and to cope with the world. Other variations in our divorce-prone
western world include one parent playing both roles, or the
parents may alternate in the roles.
Once we reach adulthood, Saturn in Cancer calls for integration between the emotional desire for a home and family and the
urge for a career which provides some degree of power and
accomplishment in the world. Homemaking as a career used to be
an option for many women, but it is becoming less available except
for women who have inherited or married wealth. Even in the latter
case, the dependent spouse may feel insecure and vulnerable and
may need to do some kind of volunteer work which reassures her
of her power. For individuals trying to Juggle both work and a
family, the major Saturn issue is often time. Since no one can do
everything well, we need to realistically define what is important
and to be able to delegate or postpone or take less seriously what
is less important. In healthy interdependence each person is able
to contribute, to take his or her share of the responsibility, and
also to accept help from others.
Career potentials with Saturn in Cancer can include farming
and ranching, caring for the land and animals. Work in construction. interior design, and real estate are possible. Service to the
public is common, including protection for families: feeding
people, clothing them, or offering emotional security in some form.
A family business or work in one's home are other possibilities.
Candice Bergen has Saturn in Cancer. Her role in Murphy
Brown played out the home versus career dilemma and the single
parent option.
Saturn in Leo provides another natural quincunx, and unlike
Saturn in Gemini. Leo has trouble taking things lightly. Both the 34 The Book of Satu rn sign and the planet are keys to ambition. Both show the desire to
be on top. Saturn symbolizes the executive who carries out laws
which are bigger than personal will. Leo is the instinct to be king,
to make personal will into law. So five-ten combinations can lead
to major overdrive in individuals who have faith in their own
power. And overdrive can lead to falls. Richard Nixon, the only U.S.
President forced to resign in disgrace, had a five-ten mixture with
his Sun in its own house, which is like a double Leo. but it was in
Saturn's sign of Capricorn. Fire-earth mixtures need to express
power in the world but to accept reasonable limits.
Career choices can include teaching or other work with young
people, sales, promotion, the entertainment world, Investment,
etc. If possible, people with this combination need to be in charge
in their work, as an entrepreneur or owner or manager of a
business.
For individuals who have not developed a sense of faith in their
own power and self-worth. Saturn in Leo can be manifested as a
fear of failure, often in areas connected to love. Since fear normally
produces the feared consequences, repeated disappointments in
love relationships may eventually lead to shutting down and
giving up. Ail of the drive may be focused into the career. Fear of
failure may lead to a conscious choice not to have children, or,
when the fear is subconscious, to the inability to conceive or to
carry a pregnancy to term. Fear of failure may lead to reduced
ambition in the career, to leaving talents undeveloped and "settling" for a job which provides survival but is unfulfilling. Saturn
shows where we have to be realistic, so if a survival job is really all
that is possible, individuals with Saturn in Leo need to find a
hobby or avocation which lets them develop their talents and earn
applause.
The father and other authority figures could be dominant and
controlling, leading to power struggles as the individual tries to
find his or her own strength. Or. the parent could be loving and
supportive in a responsible way. The relationship with the parent
is often a key to later experiences in trusting and accepting love
or maintaining a guard for fear of being hurt in some way.
Comedian Phyllis Diller had Saturn in Leo. Saturn in Signs 35 Saturn in Virgo is a natural trine which usually indicates
competence in handling the physical world. One possible danger
is an excessive focus on one's work which can leave other parts of
life short-changed. But major conflict aspects to Saturn may show
problems in either the career or in personal health. Virgo points
to our capacity to function effectively in both areas. Health
problems can be caused by frustrations in a job which fails to
satisfy the ambition of Saturn to reach the top and to be in control
of the work, or simply to feel a sense of real accomplishment in it.
If we are frustrated enough, the subconscious can produce an
accident or illness which lets us leave the job without feeling
guilty. Illness is a painful way to get out of a job. If we really can't
find more satisfying work, we need to find something good about
the job and look to a hobby or avocation to fulfill the need to do
something worth doing and to do it well.
Sometimes the Saturn lesson can involve learning to be
realistic about the needs of a physical body for proper nutrition,
exercise, rest, etc. Painful consequences resulting from lack of
"common sense" do get our attention. If the chart is "weak" in
earth, the individual maybe learning to work, to develop discipline
and willingly deal with the dull details of an ordinary job. Saturn
careers can be in any field where details and organization are
important and which produce tangible results.
With Saturn in Virgo, the father may be a workaholic and
rarely home for the family. He may be very critical or he may just
be very competent, or he might be struggling to find satisfaction
in his work. He might be very interested in health matters such as
nutrition, or he might have personal health problems. As always,
the horoscope shows the life issues, but the details can range from
one extreme to the other.
Feminist author Betty Friedan has Saturn in Virgo.
Saturn in Libra is a natural square which calls for integration
between activities as an equal and power roles. Life should be big
enough for both marriage and a career, but to do justice to both,
we have to make compromises. If one person in a partnership is
dominant, even if acting as the responsible parent with impeccable intentions, there is no real partnership. If Saturn is still
being experienced as fear of the world's power, we may marry a
father-figure to protect us. If we have enough confidence in our 36 The Book of Saturn own power to avoid doing that but not enough to deal with an
equal, we may pick a partner who will let us play parent as owner
of the power and the responsibility. Or. our insecurity may lead to
delaying marriage for fear of being dominated, criticized, rejected,
or hurt in some other way.
We only claim our share of the power of the world when we are
realistically coping with the area of life symbolized by the sign and
house of Saturn. When the cardinal and/ or the fixed dilemmas are
emphasized in a chart showing a major issue involving power and
relationships it is helpful to have a place in our lives for all three
of the major alternatives. We need some cooperative relationships,
some competitive ones which let us develop and test our powers,
and some in which we help others. The latter interactions reassure
us that we have our share of the power and we use it to assist
others.
Libra careers may deal with people or involve beauty in some
way. The first includes counseling and consulting in many areas,
law, politics, social work, arbitration, and personnel work. The
second includes architecture, photography, and any area of
design.
The father maybe equalitarian. fair minded, artistic, pleasant.
etc. if he is expressing the positive potentials of Libra. Or he may
be learning to handle power in peer relationships. A close associate who had Saturn in Libra had a brutal, abusive father who was
a tyrant in his home. The fact that Saturn was in the tenth house
in the child's chart provided the clue that the father was a
potential dictator who had not learned to respect the rights of
other people, which is a Libra value. In general, other things being
equal, the psychological drives of the house tend to outweigh the
sign. Of course, the nature of the planet is primary. In the
preceding case. Libra was far outweighed by Saturn being in its
own house for a repeated message. Always watch for the repeated
theme.
Ava Gardner, a movie star with a stormy romantic life, had
Saturn in Libra.
Saturn in Scorpio is a natural sextile, but it can still be a
challenge to integrate these two sides of life. There is oftena major
issue involving power, since we naturally seek it where Saturn is Satum in Signs 37 ft placed in our charts once we have developed the confidence that
we can get it, or if the only way we feel safe is to be in control. But
Letter Eight tends to have a power issue inherent within it, even
without the complication of being mixed with other life desires.
The instinct of water, as previously indicated, is to absorb or be
absorbed, to seek a kind of fusion. With Cancer, the mother
naturally protects the baby. Pisces can be manifested as a savior
helping a victim or as God and human. But Scorpio is trying to
integrate an intense will which includes a desire for self-control,
and especially the avoidance of being controlled, with a passionate
hunger for fusion with a mate, with the challenge of working out
an equalitarian relationship. Scorpio is a double-bind in its own
nature — one of the most difficult of our twelve sides of life.
So Saturn in Scorpio is often a key to lessons despite the
natural sextile between the principles. As with Saturn in Libra, we
may simply be learning to do justice to both career and relationships. Often, the lesson Involves sharing power, especially when
reinforced by conflict aspects in the cardinal and/orfixed signs or
houses. Alternately, we maybe learning mastery of the appetites,
learning to enjoy them without being controlled by them. Any of
the appetites maybe involved—eating, drinking, smoking, drugs,
sex, spending money, hoarding possessions, etc. Wild swings are
possible as in bulimia where sufferers alternately gorge and force
themselves to throw up. The Scorpio tendency is to go to the end,
literally to the death, so moderation is often difficult, knowing
when is enough and how to release and forgive, if not forget.
Sometimes that lesson of learning to release is confronted through
the death or other loss of a loved one early in life.
The father and other authority figures may be dominant,
intense, but self-contained, rarely showing the deep feelings.
When the emotions are over-controlled, there is always the danger
of their breaking loose explosively from time to time. There may be
issues around money, possessions, or sensuality. The father may
be so absorbed in material security needs that he is rarely home.
Or he may be fighting addictive tendencies. Sometimes there are
sexual issues with a female child. He will be a role model for the
child's attitudes and experiences with mates whether the child
seeks a mate like the father or the opposite. 38 The Book of Saturn When the eight-ten combination is handled well, there is tremendous potential skill with details, ability to organize, thoroughness, a retentive memory, and the capacity to probe the inner
depths whether in exploration of the mind, in history and archaeology. in work as a detective, or any area of research. Saturn in
Scorpio can also point to a career handling Joint resources in
banking, accounting. Investment, taxes, government work which
uses public funds, nonprofit organizations, etc. Often in life, the
bigger the challenge, the greater the results when the challenge is
met and handled.
Entrepreneur John DeLorean was in the headlines for months
with problems involving joint resources, including accusations of
mismanaging the money others invested in his enterprises. He
was also suspected of drug abuse, and could have gone to Jail on
both counts. He had Saturn in Scorpio.
Saturn in Sagittarius is a natural semisextile which keeps
both life principles in the transpersonal area. Astrologers differ on
whether the semisextile is an easy or a challenging aspect. There
are major differences between adjoining signs which can make
them hard to Integrate, but each does tend to build on the
preceding one as stages of our evolving life. Also, it is usually a
little easier to integrate desires within the major areas of personal,
interpersonal, and transpersonal, since each shares a basic focus.
With Saturn in Sagittarius our beliefs face the reality check of
the physical world. The results can range from the skepticism of
an atheist or agnostic to a gullible "true believer" who needs to
question his or her basic premises about the world. But when the
principles are effectively Integrated, the individual can have
realistic beliefs and values and higher education can contribute to
career success. The choice of a Sagittarian career may include
teaching, writing, work in a library or with the law or for a church,
long distance travel and foreign countries,
variations on the search for the Absolute. and many other Since Sagittarius symbolizes our quest for ultimate meaning
and value in our lives, there may be lessons involving ethics and
morals which are determined by one's beliefs. As has been said
repeatedly, astrology shows issues, not details. One individual
might have unrealistically high expectations about life while
another might need higher standards. The same combination can
occur in the chart of a religious leader and a criminal. We Saturn In Signs 39 ft determine how we manifest the principles. One hazard of Saturn
in Sagittarius is the worship of power. Richard Nixon's overreach
with power has been mentioned. In addition to his five-ten emphasis, he also had Jupiter in Capricorn and Saturn in the
ninth house as variations on the nine-ten message.
Some individuals with Saturn in Sagittarius may overvalue
authority figures, which can lead to disillusionment when they
prove to be human. We might have idolized a parent or been
disillusioned when he let us down. The father might be religious
in a conventional way or just have high standards. He might have
expected too much of the child, or he might have left the family to
pursue his own personal goals.
It is also possible to place one's ultimate trust in one's Job.
making it an ultimate value. Then, if the Job is lost or our business
does not make it, it is like losing God. Others may try to do their
Jobs perfectly. The most reasonable alternative is to choose work
which you hope will make a better world. Saturn is always about
doing your share realistically.
Erma Bombeck wrote humorous columns which entertained
millions with her Saturn in Sagittarius, a sign which is well known
for its sense of humor.
Saturn in Capricorn is. of course, a repetition of the same
principle. Its house placement and aspects provide the keys to
where and how the individual will face the rules of the game and
learn to use power wisely. Normally, this combination indicates a
strong ambition and need for control, but until a successful role
has been attained, the power will be experienced in the world,
usually in the hands of authority figures. Harmony aspects may
bring protection by these others, but for full satisfaction the
individual has to do something which provides a sense of personal
accomplishment. Conflict aspects can indicate a very difficult
early life, often with the need to work and assume adult responsibilities while still a child. However, in the end. the individual who develops practical skills and learns early to cope with
the material world may be light years ahead of the protected child
who remains dependent on the power of others. As always with
Saturn, we need to avoid the extremes of playing Atlas when we
cannot allow ourselves any dependency and the failure to develop 40 The Book of Saturn our share of the world's power and to carry our share of the
responsibility.
This placement tells us that the individual's father was concerned with power, whether he had it or had problems getting
it. Jim Jones, the guru who led hundreds of his followers to death
in Guyana, had Saturn in Capricorn in his first house. His father
was partly disabled, the family was partly supported by welfare,
and the father was a racist, putting down blacks as a way to build
his own self-esteem. Jim Jones took his father as a negative role
model and many of his followers who died with him were blacks.
Career choices with Saturn in Capricorn include work for the
government, whether federal, state, or local. Alternately, individuals may be managers in large businesses or other institutions, or
they may found and run
independent professional. their own business, or become an Both the past and the currenlheads of Russia. Gorbachev and
Yeltsin, were born in the same year as Jim Jones and have Saturn
in Capricorn. Frank Gifford. famous for football and sportscasting,
also has Saturn in Capricorn.
Saturn in Aquarius provides another natural semisextile with
its questionable outcome. Saturn is still considered a co-ruler of
Aquarius, and many astrologers think that this is its optimum
sign. It is true that a successful integration of these two sides of
life can produce a person able to blend the best of the past with
openness to the future. The practicality of earth combined with
the broad perspective and logic of air can be highly effective in the
world. Both of these basic drives are transpersonal, so their focus
on the world is compatible to the extent that neither is distracted
by personal relationships. (Of course, the rest of the chart will
almost always bring in these other desires.)
But in spite of the potential for great accomplishments when
Letters Ten and Eleven are integrated, the potential for major
conflicts is also present. Saturn says "there are some limits if you
want to survive in this world at this time. There are some things
you can do. someyou can't do. and some you have to do." Aquarius
says "I don't accept limits. My primary urge is to go beyond the
limits. No one can tell me what to do." Saturn represents the
ultimate In bureaucratic hierarchy. Aquarius wants equality. Satu rnln Signs 41 Saturn clings to traditions and the past. Aquarius pants for the
future. The solution is easy to see but not always easy to do. If we
voluntarily accept the really necessary limits, we can be free to do
what we please in the rest of life.
With successful integration, Saturn in Aquarius shows the
capacity for peer relationships with authority figures. Father may
have been a friend, so the individual had no need for a teen-age
rebellion. Unfortunately, when carried to excess, this combination may be manifested as a cool, distant, and/or indifferent
parent, sometimes one who is too busy socializing with friends or
saving humanity to be there for his family. Later, as we take on the
role ofparent. the same options are present. Unless we change the
habits which brought us into a family which fit us. we will repeat
the same patterns.
Appropriate careers for Saturn in Aquarius include all fields
which advance or disseminate knowledge. Modern technology is
an obvious potential, but nonconventional studies such as astrology are also good choices. Jobs may be chosen in government,
whether federal, stale, or local, or in large organizations dealing
with public issues such as nonprofit foundations and labor
unions. An effective compromise of the principles permits liberty
within the law and compromise and cooperation between the
executive and the legislative branches of the government.
A current political leader with Saturn in Aquarius is Dlanne
Feinstein, who was mayor of San Francisco for years and is now
a California Senator.
Saturn in Pisces is a natural sextile. but, as with the other
natural sextile in Scorpio, there can be challenges. Pisces shares
the search for the Absolute with Sagittarius, but the Pisces search
is more at the subconscious level, driven by the mystic's hunger
for infinite love and beauty, for oneness with the Whole. Piscean
professions can include many service careers as healers or in
spiritual work. They can range from guarding prisoners to using
the capacity for beauty in artistic fields or in persuading people
that some product or activity will make their life more Ideal. Work
with chemicals, drugs, or fluids is possible with all of the water
sides of life. 42 The Book of Saturn Security needs are strong in earth-water mixtures, so faith is
very important. Individuals who lack faith in a Higher Power can
be plagued by anxiety, fears or phobias. Though a successful
career is always important and helpful wherever Saturn is placed
in one's horoscope, individuals with Saturn in Pisces also need
faith in Something beyond this world. Though orthodox religions
can sometimes be helpful, personal mystical experiences are likely to be more so. As with Saturn in Sagittarius, Saturn in
Pisces may point to lessons in faith, which can range from extreme
atheism to extreme gullibility. Saturn always calls for a "reality"
check. Ethics may be unrealistically high or low to the point of
endangering the society.
If the faith is placed in a fragment of life, it is a kind of idolatry,
and we usually lose the idol to force us to find a bigger God. In the
early life, the father or other authority figures will be connected in
some way with the principle of Pisces. The details can range from
an adored, idealized parent to one who "should" have been god and
given us a perfect lifebut let usdown by being human. The parent
could have been an artist, a savior, or a victim. A missing parent
is common, whether really gone searching for his own beautiful
dream or physically there but emotionally closed off. Even in
Pisces, the call of Saturn remains the same. We can't do it all. God
won't do it all. We have to do our share in making a more ideal
world.
The long-time very liberal U.S. Congressman from Oakland,
California, Ron Dellums, has Saturn in Pisces in his ninth house
— a double demand for an idealistic career. CHAPTER FOUR PLANETARY ASPECTS TO SATURN Aspects are angular distances between different factors in the
horoscope. The distance (usually in celestial longitude) is measured between different planets including the Sun and the Moon
and between these bodies in the sky and the angles of the chart
which are formed by the intersections of the great circles. The
latter are the circles which go through the center of the Earth and
are projected against infinity. They include the equator, the
ecliptic (Earth's path around the Sun), the horizon, the meridian and the prime vertical of the birthplace. The latter two
circles go through the zenith and the nadir, the points which are
straight up and straight down from our location. The meridian
goes through the north and south points of the horizon while the
prime vertical goes through the east and west points of the
horizon. The intersections of the ecliptic with the other four of
these great circles produce the 0 Aries-0 Libra axis (equator) and
the horoscope's Ascendant-Descendant axis (horizon), its MC-IC
axis (meridian), and its Antlvertex-Vertex axis (prime vertical). The
East Point-West Point axis is the intersection of the ecliptic with
another (unnamed) great circle.
The most-used aspects in astrology are divisions of the
ecliptic circle by whole numbers. Two factors within a few
degrees of each other are conjunct. Division of the circle by two 44 The Book of Saturn produces the opposition when the two factors are 180 degrees
apart on opposite sides of the earth. A division by three produces
a trine which is present when factors are 120 degrees apart. The
square Is 90 degrees, produced when the circle is divided by four.
A division by six gives the sextile when the factors are separated
by 60 degrees. The octile or semisquare is 45 degrees when the
circle is divided by eight. The semisextile of 30 degrees Is a division
of the circle by twelve. The other most commonly used aspects are
the trioctile or sesquisquare of 135 degrees, which is three-eighths
of the circle, and the quincunx or Inconju net. which is 150degrees
or five-twelfths of the circle.
The trine, the sextile. and possibly the semisextile are
considered harmonious aspects. Factors separated by these
distances in the sky represent desires which are relatively compatible, so they support and reinforce each other. This does not
guarantee positive results in the life, since it can lead to excesses.
The square, octile. and trioctile are considered conflict or
stress aspects. Factors separated by these distances represent
desires which are in some way in conflict with each other. This
does not guarantee negative results in the life, since we can learn
to satisfy the desires alternately or can work out a compromise
which lets us have a little of each.
Oppositions are natural partnerships. The drives which are
symbolized on each end by the signs and by the houses form
polarities. They have much in common and need each other, but
there is always the danger of projection. This can occur when we
are conscious of one of the desires but not aware of our desire for
its opposite. We will often be attracted to another person who has
the same ambivalence but is consciously wanting the other end of
the polarity. For example, someone who wants to be taken care of
may be unaware of the desire for power and may find a natural
"atlas" who will take on the parent role. Each person gets some
vicarious satisfaction from the action of the other person, though
they are usually unaware of this.
The problem with projection is that, like a seesaw, the tendency is for each person to overdo his or her own end, and sooner
or later the imbalance becomes frustrating to one or both. Then
the partnership is likely to break. Planet aryAspects to Saturn 45 I call the quincunx the "closet-cleaning" aspect. The signs and
houses which are quincunx each other are very different and not
easy to integrate. Remember that integration simply means
making sure there is a place in our lives for each of our basic
desires, whether we do this by alternating between them or by a
compromise which permits some of each of the conflicted drives.
The typical feeling of a quincunx is a need to improve the situation.
We may change the details to "make it better." Or we may decide
we no longer want to deal with it and let it go. We may separate
from a home, a job, a relationship, a belief system, or anything
else. Sometimes, the action is taken by others. If we have been
hating our Job but afraid to quit, we may get fired. Or we may get
sick enough to escape the job. Both of those are painful ways to
resolve the frustrations. Relationships may be ended by the departure of others whether voluntarily or through death. The
quincunx is an important aspect, and to handle it effectively we
need to be conscious of our ambivalences and to look for compromises.
Conjunctions are the strongest aspects, and we do not know
how they will be handled until we see the life of the person, though
some combinations are obviously easier than others. With the
cardinal and fixed signs, conjunctions between planets ruling
signs which are square each other in the natural zodiac are
usually more challenging. However, integration is always possible
with insight and effort. As you will hear repeatedly, Integration
means finding a way to satisfy each of our desires with some kind
of compromise. I consider this one of the most important principles — the understanding that a horoscope pictures our inner
emotional desires, which we can try to satisfy in a variety of
ways.
Conjunctions between planets ruling cardinal or fixed signs
which are sextile or trine each other in the natural zodiac show
desires which are theoretically easier to mix. but the results are
not always positive since they may lead to excesses.
Conjunctions between planets ruling cardinal or fixed signs
which oppose each other can be natural partners. The danger of
and nature of projection has been covered above in the discussion
of oppositions. Remember that a comfortable compromise is
possible if both individuals become conscious of their own am- 46 The Book of Saturn bivalence and realize the partner has just been acting outa denied
desire of their own.
The cardinal and fixed signs are both dealing with the issue of
personal rights and needs versus the rights and needs of other
people. We may be struggling to integrate personal needs versus
interpersonal relationships versus transpersonal issues, but the
handling of power is almost always part of the challenge.
The mutable signs, in contrast, are primarily mental. The
situation is clearly different v/hen we see that the two original
mutable planets. Mercury and Jupiter, each rule signs which are
square each other. Mercury deals with the world around us while
Jupiter is looking for ultimate answers and values. The most
common mutable conflict is between the ideals of the Jupiter sides
of life and the limits of what is possible in the world around us. It
is also possible to lack a clear belief system, to be uncertain of our
values and goals. People for whom this is a serious problem get lost
easily. They lack a sense of direction. We can also experience
conflict between head goals and heart goals such as truth versus
kindness. Or we may lack faith in a benign Higher Power and live
anxiously a lot of the time. The mutables are not involved with
power (unless they are mixed with cardinal and fixed sides of life),
yet they represent the knowledge and the beliefs about the world
which determine where we go in life.
Obviously, when evaluating all planetary aspects, though the
planets are the most Important, the signs and houses are also a
very important part of the picture. There will always be mixtures.
Mutable planets may be in fixed signs in cardinal houses, so there
is no simple interpretation. Rule number one is to look for
themes, for repeated messages, ways in which the chart is saying
the same thing.
In the following descriptions of aspects between planets, the
most complete description is the conjunction, which describes the basic principles. Always read that first and then
check the brief statements differentiating the conflict and harmony aspects and the opposition and quincunx. Planetary Aspects to Saturn 47 ft Sun-Saturn Aspects
The Sun conjunct Saturn can be a steamroller combination if
the individual has claimed his or her share of the power in the
world. Both factors represent the drive to do important things in
the world. The Sun shows where we want to be the King or Queen,
making the laws, unless we have profound doubts about our
rights and/or our power. Saturn shows where we want to be the
executive, enforcing the laws, unless we are still projecting all the
power into the world. Individuals with this combination need to be
in front and on top. admired by the world. If they doubt their own
competence and are forced to work under others, they may be
miserable. If the rest of the horoscope shows self-doubt and
insecurity, the Sun-Saturn conjunction is a clarion call to
develop both the creative skills of the Sun and the practical
competence of Saturn to permit the person to take his or her
place as a leader in the world. An emphasis on earth and water,
whether through planets in those signs or houses or strong
aspects to earth and water planets, can reinforce the caution and/
or insecurity. An emphasis on air and especially on fire adds to the
tiger potential.
Since Saturn is usually a key to a father, the individual with
this aspect is likely to have had a power issue with the father and/
or other authorities. This can range from a power struggle with a
dominating father, to the child feeling that he or she could never
live up to a famous father's accomplishments, to a truly loving
father who encouraged the child's self-esteem, to a wastrel,
gambler, profligate father, etc. The Sun is a key to the heart, to the
ability to love and be loved, and to our sense of self-worth. It
represents our creative potential, our need to be and do more than
we have done before and to be admired for it. When combined with
Saturn, we may choose a Leo career and become a leader or we
may feel that we could never achieve our ambitions and give up.
Saturn symbolizes the power of the world until we have developed
our ability to cope with the world and then it becomes partly our
power.
Saturn is also a key to our own ability to be a responsible
parent. A conjunction with the Sun could point to people deeply Júpiter 48 The Book of Saturn invested in the parent role, whether with their own children or the
world. Or It could show lessons in the area of love and/or
procreation: lessons in sharing power, in practical responsibility,
in trusting love, in being comfortable even when not being special,
etc.
Conflict aspects between the Sun and Saturn show the need
to integrate these intense desires for prominence and achievement in the world. Often, such aspects show the feeling that the
personal ego-goals are being blocked by power outside of our
control, whether by social restraints or by authority figures.
Individuals may have had very difficult relationships with their
parents or other authorities in the early life and subconsciously
expect the patterns to continue. Somepeople take on responsibilities which interfere with their ability to achieve personal creative
goals. Some Just light time, always trying to do more than is
humanly possible. Integration may be managed by extending the
time table, giving oneself more time to reach the goals. Or
standards and expectations might be lowered in less important
activities. It might be possible to delegate or postpone some
obligations. Compromise can make room for some of the personal
creative expressions along with the necessary practical responsibilities. You can take a chance on love.
Harmony aspects between the Sun and Saturn suggest that
the individual is able to integrate the desires for prominence and
power. If the balance of the chart supports these principles, they
are a positive indication of success in achieving ambitions. This
may include the ability to Juggle love and work, creativity and
practical accomplishments. Of course, it is always possible for
harmony aspects to lead to excesses.
An opposition between the Sun and Saturn shows a need for
compromise between these desires. The lire need to keep innovating has to be balanced against the earth capacity to stay with
projects long enough to get tangible results. The willingness to
take risks has to be balanced against caution. Depending on the
signs and houses involved, there are likely to be power issues to
resolve to permit successful teamwork, though the aspect could
be manifested largely in vigorous competition. Projection is the
main danger with oppositions, so individuals with this aspect Planetary Aspects to Saturn 49 ft need to find ways to personally express the principles of both the
Sun and Saturn.
A quincunx between the Sun and Saturn calls for improvement in the handling of ambitions and power. Creative urges may
feel constrained by the restraints of practicality. Ego needs may be
at odds with authorities. As with all aspects which indicate
confrontations between somewhat incompatible desires, compromise is usually the answer. Moon-Saturn Aspects The Moon conjunct Saturn connects the two parent principles
and is usually interpreted negatively in astrology. The Moon seeks
unconditional love. A baby is cared for because it needs it. not
because it has earned it. Saturn says you will receive the consequences of how you have handled the rules of the game, since that
is how you learn what you can do. what you can't do, and what you
have to do if you want to survive in this world at this time. Thus
Saturn plays the role of the disciplinary parent.
Of course, in real life, either or both parents might be punitive,
or irresponsible, or overprotective. or otherwise hash up the roles.
Some individuals with this aspect have told me that they recognized the incapacity of their parents to handle the roles. The child
felt he or she was more the parent and became a caretaker when
still very young. But another person, after I had described the two
alternative extremes, parents who were overdoing el ther the Moon
or Saturn, said she had the overprotective parents. She commented that every astrologer who had interpreted her chart had
told her she must have had terrible, cruel, dominating, critical
parents with her Moon conjunct Saturn In Aries in the ninth
house. She said that her parents gave her everything and did
everything for her. She remembered that when she went away to
college she was annoyed because there was no one to wash her
clothes for her. Following college, she married a man who, like her
parents, was providing her with everything she wanted. She did
not have to work and had a maid to take care of the house. Habits
create destiny. Her fire sign and house placement of Moon-Saturn
shows her confidence that she has aright to what she wants in life, 50 The Book of Saturn but it would still be risky to assume that she would get it all. The
horoscope shows the psychological issues, but each principle can
be manifested in many different details.
The "parental" instincts of both Moon and Saturn often lead
people with this aspect into caretaking jobs, but there are still
many options. We can feed people, clothe them, house them, heal
them, or comfort them in many ways. Those who are confident of
their ability to provide for their own needs and also care for others,
will enjoy the parent role. Those who still identify with the baby
side of the Moon, who still feel that the world has all the power, will
often be anxious and depressed, looking for a parent to care for
them. Their solution is to develop their practical skills to learn to
cope with the world and to help others whenever they can. to move
into the power sides of the Moon and Saturn. Some who learned
young to cope effectively with the world, feeling that they had to
do it all themselves, may never have learned to accept help from
others. They may be deeply afraid of dependency and have to learn
to let their repressed baby side be fed, to let others give to them
some of the time.
The home and family are normally very important to people
with Moon-Saturn aspects. If possible, they want to own their own
home and stay connected to the family. Hereditary roots may be
valued. They may look into their ancestry or collect antiques. They
may be born on a farm or just love the land. They usually learn to
work early, though the reasons for this may range from a farm
upbringing with chores for- everyone, to early poverty that called
for the kids to help, to a large family that was too much for- one pair
of parents to handle, to illness in the home, or just parents with
a strong work ethic. Except in the case of truly harsh, unloving
parents, most people who have learned early to cope with the
world have told me that they are grateful for- the skills and
confidence they developed.
Conflict aspects between the Moon and Saturn show problems connected to issues of dependency and power. The early life
may have been very difficult, with a dysfunctional family, an
unstable home, and tense relationships with one or both parents.
Or the parents might have had serious problems with each other.
The child might have felt he or she had to take on responsibilities
which were not being handled by the parents. There may be a Planetary Aspects to Saturn 51 ft hunger for someone to be parent for them now or a deep fear of
dependency and vulnerability. The solution will come through
interdependency as they learn to trust their own competence but
also to let others give to them.
Harmony aspects between the Moon and Saturn suggest that
the individual can integrate some dependency with some responsibility. and can probably handle both a career and a family. They
are likely to want and to attain a stable home and family connections.
An opposition between the Moon and Saturn shows a need for
compromise if the person wants to manage both a family and a
career. The individual may also be trying to integrate dependency
with responsible power, trying to allow both to be part of the life.
A quincunx between the Moon and Saturn is calling for
improvement in the home or in the career or in both. Often,
individuals feel pulled between the demands of these major
commitments. The underlying issue often involves dependency
versus power. Mercury-Saturn
Mercury conjunct Saturn Aspects connects the conscious intellect to realism about the world. Since Saturn may show primarily a
lesson or an already developed skill, individuals with this aspect
can range from genius to imbecile, from someone who doubts his
or her mental ability to someone who is highly successful in a
mental career.
Albert Einstein is a good example of an individual who started
life with superior mental ability and was ranked as a top genius
for his original theories in mathematics and physics. Einstein
had a close conjunction between Mercury and Saturn in early
Aries, which traditional astrology might consider a sign of a
defective intellect, especially since Saturn was in the sign ranked
as its detriment. (See the section on Dignities.) However, he
entered public school at age seven, in 1886. and in that year, his
mother wrote in a letter that her son was "again number one." A
successful combination of Saturn's practical skill with details and
willingness to work with Mercury's logic and broad perspective 52 The Book of Saturn can produce a world-class Intellect, But there are inherent conflicts between these two basic desires which can produce
problems if they are not integrated. Mercury, like all air, is
basically a spectator and commentator. Individuals who are
unwilling to deal with the realistic details and effort which are
needed to survive in a material world may end with nothing to
show for their fine intellect. Alternately, individuals too stuck in
the fine print and too afraid of failing or falling short to risk leaving
familiar paths can remain laborers doing manual work all their
lives.
Since Mercury is a key to early peer relationships like
siblings and neighbors, there are sometimes power issues to be
resolved in this area. An older sibling or other relative such as an
uncle might play the role of protective parent, or. on the negative
side, might be critical or dominating. Or the individual with the
Mercury-Saturn conjunction might feel responsible for a sibling or
other relative. Some individuals compare themselves with relatives and doubt their own ability. As always, the chart shows the
issue—the need to deal with equality versus power and responsibility or the need to integrate the spectator with the practical
achiever. The person creates the life details.
Conflict aspects between Mercury and Saturn show the need
to pay attention and make an effort to integrate the issues of
equality versus responsible power, of the spectator versus the
practical achiever in the world. There are times to take life
seriously, but we also need the "light" touch some of the time, the
broad perspective and detachment of Mercury's air attitude.
Harmony aspects suggest that the person has already developed the ability to successfully combine the abstract with the
tangible sides of life. Obviously, we need to be able to do both and
also to know when each is appropriate to handle the world.
An opposition calls for working out a compromise, making
sure that we are comfortably satisfying both our casual curiosity
and peer relationships and our need to be productive and responsible, and not projecting one of them.
The quincunx search for something better can benefit from
the capacity for both the broad awareness and logic of Mercury
and the practicality and seriousness of Saturn. Planetary Aspects to Saturn Venus-Saturn 53 Aspects Venus conjunct Saturn, as with all conjunctions, can be manifested In an infinite variety of ways. It can be a positive sign of
ability to cope successfully with the material world for those who
are realistic about it, or Saturn may be pointing to a lesson in that
area, especially when other planets hold conflict aspects to the
conjunction. I have seen cases in which the lesson called for the
person to learn to earn a living, or to moderate the appetites
when the Venus love of pleasure was dominant, being expressed
in excessive sensual indulgence and leisure. I have also seen the
opposite—workaholics buried in their work who needed to
learn to slow down, relax, and enjoy life. The whole chart is part
of the picture, and themes may help to clarify the emphasis, but
in the end it is up to the individual. People can and do change as
they grow, learning to handle their desires in new ways to produce
more satisfying results.
In the role of Venus as a key to lasting peer relationships.
Venus conjunct Saturn can be manifested as very pleasant
associations with fellow workers or bosses, or there may be issues
around equality versus control. In the emotional peer relationships. one partner may see the other as a protective parent or as
someone seeking inappropriate power. One partner may be overly
focused on work and the other may feel neglected. Criticism can
be an issue in the relationship. As usual, the solutions lie in
learning to share the power and responsibility along with the
pleasure, and keeping the criticism where it belongs in one's Job.
The conjunction is often an indication of artistic talent and the
potential of a career involving the aesthetic side of life, which
can involve anything that provides comfort or pleasure to the
world.
Conflict aspects between Venus and Saturn are an indication
that we can't enjoy life as much as we want. We may blame the
blocking of our pleasure on outer circumstances — a critical
boss or one who makes us work too hard, an inadequate salary,
time pressures, unpleasant working conditions or duties, etc. If
Jobs are scarce, we lack the skills to get a better one. we are
responsible for others, or any other realistic fact keeps us stuck 54 in a The Book of Saturn frustrating job, it is important to look for some kind of satisfaction in the work and to also make sure that we satisfy our
pleasure needs in other ways outside of the work. At the very least,
we need to stay conscious of the frustration. It is when negative
emotions are buried in the subconscious that they are most likely
to produce serious problems from illness to getting us fired.
When our pleasure needs in relationships are being frustrated. we can either try to work out mutually satisfying compromises with the partner or we can adjust our expectations (change
our attitude). Breaking off the relationship is a typical reaction in
our divorce-prone western world, but our horoscope shows our
own habits. Until we change our habits, we are likely to keep
reaping the same results in any relationship.
Harmony aspects between Saturn and Venus suggest that
the individual has realistic pleasure goals and is able to realize
them. The action may involve success in one's work and/or
comfortable personal relationships. Artistic talent is often present
and may be expressed in a job or in a hobby or Just for personal
satisfaction.
Venus oppositions to Saturn call for compromise to be able
to share pleasure along with effort and responsibility, to be able
to do Justice to both relationships and career.
A Venus-Saturn quincunx shows a desire for improvement.
As long as the goals are realistic. It can lead to more effective and /
or satisfying details in the situation. It is also possible for a
quincunx to lead to separations. We may leave or events which are
outside of our control may produce the result. As usual, individuals with an emphasis on fire and air are more likely to be conscious
of the frustration and to take the action personally. Individuals
with an emphasis on earth and water are more likely to be
cautious, to hold back, and to have the world do it to them. Mars-Saturn Aspects Aspects between Mars and Saturn provide the most intense form
of the confrontation between these two principles. The conjunction carries the same meaning as Saturn in Aries or in the first
house of the horoscope, but in a more intense form. (Mars in Planetary Aspects to Saturn 55 Capricorn and Mars in the 10th house are alternate forms of the
same issue.) Our personal will and power (as symbolized by
Mars) must come to terms with the limits of our power. The
limits may exist in the form of natural laws such as time and
gravity. These are basically the way this world works. When we
understand the laws and work with them, there is no problem. We
fly planes that are heavier than air by working with gravity. We do
not ignore it. fight it. or try to run away from it.
The laws may be cultural regulations like stopping for red
lights and going through green ones. As long as we obey the rules,
there is no problem. But if we try to drive on the right side of a twoway street in England or the left side of a two-way street in the U.S.,
we will have a problem.
The Saturn principle is also manifested by authority figures
who enforce the laws. When the laws are fair and enforced with
justice, they protect the rights of all members of society. Since
neither humans nor the laws they create are perfect, there will be
many occasions when we need to change the laws or replace the
enforcers. But "lawful" ways to do this are usually more effective
than revolution and war. The latter are measures of "last resort,"
and mundane astrology notes that wars and revolutions are
typically signaled by conflict aspects between Mars and Saturn.
At the inner level, the Saturn principle symbolizes one's
conscience and guilt. We punish ourselves when we have
transgressed what we consider legitimate laws of conduct. The
appropriate handling of guilt calls for making restitution if we can
and then resolving not to repeat the action. Then it is vital that we
forgive ourselves! Persistent guilt is like holding a grudge against
ourselves, and it is highly destructive, often leading to illness. It
is also possible to feel unrealistic guilt if we exaggerate our power
and responsibility and think we should be able to do more than we
can. However, what is obviously unrealistic guilt may sometimes
be a "screen" covering some genuine guilt in another area which
we are not facing. Persisting negative emotions call for some
serious self-analysis.
Mars represents our basic identity, including our right and
power to be ourselves, protect ourselves, assert ourselves. An
overdeveloped personal will expressed at the expense of others
and/or in conflict with the law in other ways will eventually 56 The Book of Saturn produce disaster. The law is bigger than any individual. (It is
true that a few powerful individuals seem to escape the consequences In this life, but occult tradition asserts that karma gets
them eventually.)
More commonly, certainly among the students of astrology
and their clients, the Mars principle may be repressed. We may
overrate the power of the world (Saturn) or underrate our own
(Mars). When our faith in our own rights and power is severely
blocked, it can literally shut down the immune system and lead to
a variety of illnesses. When our anger is blocked and turned In
against ourselves, it invites accidents or attacks from the world.
Any of our basic desires/drives which is denied will make trouble
for us, but blocking our fire is especially destructive. Fire represents the life force. If what we want to do is really not possible, we
have to find something else which we want to do and can do, and
then do it!
A successful integration between our personal power and the
rules of the game can lead to major success in the world. One of
my favorite examples is a former astrology student who was about
to start a period of twenty years when his secondary progressed
Mars would hold a conjunction with Saturn in his sixth house.
The extended time was due to progressed Mars making a station
and changing direction while in the one-degree orb permitted in
progressions. Tom had read the typical doom and gloom material
in most astrology books and was anticipating the worst — the
death of his father, poverty, Illness, maybe his own death.
We discussed the principles. Both Saturn and the sixth house
called for realistic work. Tom had been living on the fringe, getting
by without a real profession or even a regular Job. He went back
to trade school, became a licensed plumber, electrician, and
contractor, and managed an increasing number of apartment
complexes. He now owns property in two states and has more
money than he ever dreamed of. None of this was given to him.
He worked long hours, worklngday s and studying at night. He has
not been ill and his father did not die. He continues to work
effectively with the Saturn principle.
Conflict aspects between Mars and Saturn show that the
individual needs to pay extra attention or to make an extra effort
to integrate the different desires. The individual needs to make Planetary Aspects to Saturn 57 ft sure he or she has a realistic outlet for the personal power, trying
to avoid either overdrive which attempts the impossible and leads
to failure or self-blocking which denies legitimate needs which
could be attained. One negative form is constant personal battles
with authority figures (beginning with father), but we can also
struggle with an overactive conscience, with self-criticism, or
other variations on the theme of personal will versus limits.
Harmony aspects between Mars and Saturn suggest that the
individual has already learned to integrate these two sides of life
by voluntarily living within the limits. This ability can lead to
success if supported by the balance of the chart.
As with all potentially challenging Mars-Saturn aspects, oppositions call for teamwork between personal power and
power outside of our control, whether in the form of other
individuals or in organizations or social regulations. The Mars
instinct is to either fight or leave and neither works well when
Saturn is involved. Compromise is the name of the game.
The quincunx between Mars and Saturn usually lives up to its
reputation for wanting to do it better. If the rest of the chart mostly
supports Saturn, the individual may stay put and keep improving
the details in his or her life. If the rest of the chart mostly supports
Mars, the individual may keep leaving one job or home or
relationship after another, hoping the next one will be better.
Compromise remains the goal. Jupiter-Saturn Aspects Jupiter conjunct Saturn combines our beliefs about the world
with the reality of how it actually works. One ancient tradition
held that world teachers could be born at such times, which
occur at about twenty-year intervals. Theoretically, some souls
coming in then had already acquired an understanding of the laws
of the universe and could therefore share that knowledge with
others. However, as has been said repeatedly, Saturn also shows
where we may need to learn about the limits which are part of the
world, so the Jupiter-Saturn conjunction may point to lessons
connected to one's belief system and the ethics, values, and goals
which are determined by it. One end of the lesson continuum is 58 The Book of Sat un atheism or agnosticism, the view of modern science that physical
matter/energy is the only reality, the denial of any Higher Power.
The other end of the continuum is the "true believer" in any of
many religions which claim to possess final truth and demand
that their followers accept it without question.
The reality maybe that "truth" is a goal which we never reach,
but the journey can be enormously exciting. It seems likely that
the Absolute is far bigger than our present level of consciousness,
that we can experience glimpses but are not able to fully comprehend it. Astrology demonstrates the nonsense of the materialistic
beliefs which deny any inherent meaning in the world, claiming
that chance rules all in a random world. The pervasive reality of
psychic experiences also demonstrate the limited perspective of
materialism.
But we may have needed materialistic science to break the
domination of traditional religion in the west, which was even
more dogmatic than science in the denial of any reality beyond the
dogma of each particular sect. Jupiter symbolizes one of our
"freedom" drives. Unlike Mars, which simply wants personal
freedom to act on the desire of the moment, the Jupiter drive seeks
the freedom to pursue the Absolute wherever it takes us. Thus it
is associated with long trips and foreign countries. As a key to the
search for truth with a capital "T," it is also connected to churches,
libraries, universities and law courts. It includes the desire to
disseminate the knowledge once gained, so it is also connected to
publishing, writing, teaching, etc.
A Jupiter-Saturn conjunction can point to a career in any
of these areas. There is no guarantee that the person playing
"guru" in some way has actually "got" it, but as a fire side of life,
Jupiter is usually associated with both confidence and the urge to
let it hang out. Since the Saturn urge is to be safe rather than
sorry, and especially to stay in control, there can be a real conflict
between these two drives. If the earth and water are stronger, the
person may bite his tongue and keep looking for more evidence
before sounding off. But he may also try to reassure himself that
he is right by forcing others to agree with him. From such instincts
we have inquisitions and religious wars. In most areas I try to use
neutral language in referring to the sexes, but in this area, the Planetary Aspects to Satu rn 59 ft perpetrators have mostly been males and the victims have often
been females.
Individuals with this conjunction have a parent, most often
the father, connected to faith. They may have idealized the
parent or been disillusioned when he was human and did not
provide them with a perfect life. They may have expected too much
from the father or he may have expected too much of them. The
father might have been religious or just had high standards. He
might have tried to be a perfect father, or he might have been gone,
off looking for his own ideals. The Saturn lesson might involve
learning not to overrate authorities or not to worship power or a
career. When any part of life is turned into an idol, we may lose it
to force us to find a bigger God. When we can value our work in
the world and use it to make the world more ideal but also
maintain perspective which provides room to enjoy all twelve sides
of life, we have it together.
Conflict aspects between Jupiter and Saturn call for us to
test our beliefs against our world. If they "work." if they produce
desirable consequences, great! If we keep getting painful consequences. we need to widen our horizons, to check out new ideas.
We may just be expecting too much, always wanting more than is
possible. Or we may lack faith and be afraid to try things for fear
of failure. When in doubt.it is best to try things in a small way that
does not court disaster.
Astrology offers us a marvelous tool for conceptualizing ideas
about the world and then testing them. You don't have to watch
the passing aspects in transits and progressions for very long
before you will see that most of the "doom and gloom" predicted
details from specific aspects do not happen. Guessing details is
not astrology's greatest gift. It helps us understand the driving
desires in our own nature and then we can often produce better
details.
Harmony aspects between Jupiter and Saturn suggest
that our goals and values are in harmony with the rules of the
game and thus canbe attained. That does not mean that no effort
is required! Saturn always points to the puritan virtues of realistic
work for success in this world. 60 The Book of Saturn An opposition between Jupiter and Saturn calls for checking
to make sure we are manifesting both ends of the polarity
ourselves and not totally delegating one end to other people. With
awareness and compromise, we can work out an effective
partnership between faith and realism, between being Atlas
trying to do it all and waiting for God to do it all.
A quincunx between Jupiter and Saturn reinforces the urge
to "do it better" since the sides of life represented by these two
planets are the two sides of perfectionism. Jupiter is looking for
ideals and Saturn is looking for the flaws in order to do it right.
Remember the value of moderation when you deal with perfectionism. As usual, compromise helps. Saturn-Saturn Aspects
Saturn aspects to its own natal position can occur in a variety of
systems which describe current issues or project into the future.
Transits are the most universally used system, with transiting
Saturn forming major aspects to one's natal Saturn approximately every seven years. These will be the conjunction, the
separating square, the opposition, and the applying square, after
which the cycle repeats with a new conjunction.
Solar Arc Directions5 reach a semisextile at around the age
of thirty, an octile at around age forty-five, a sextile at around age
sixty, and a square for those who reach ninety. Few astrologers
place much emphasis on the interval when Secondary Progressed6 Saturn remains within one degree of its natal position,
but if it leaves the one-degree orb and then changes its direction
and returns to a conjunction, it can be meaningful. Of course, if
progressed Saturn is still very close to its natal position, when
another planet aspects either one it may aspect both to intensify
the issue. More commonly, the aspect from the other planet will
simply last longer as it contacts both the natal and progressed
positions of Saturn in turn.
Any aspect of Saturn to itself marks a feedback time when we
get a report card from the world, which lets us know how we are
doing in handling the "rules of the game." Obviously, the whole
chart will be relevant, describing the psychological Issues being
5 & 6 See notes on page 225 61 faced at the time. The Important emotional Issues will be repeated
by a variety of planet-house-sign combinations. Always look for
the repeated themes in the chart.
Since the conjunction is the strongest aspect, Saturn conjunct Saturn may be the most intense form of this feedback.
But Saturn aspects to planets to which It has natal conflict aspects may be more challenging since the natal chart shows the
basic habits which are directing our lives. As readers know by
now, Saturn is a key to what we can do, what we can't do. and
what we have to do to survive in this physical world. Its harmonious aspects to other factors In the chart show Issues which we
have probably already learned to handle, talents and skills which
can be helpful In coping with the world. Its conflict aspects show
areas which need attention, where we need to work out compromises between the desires symbolized by the other factors and the
realistic limits which exist In this world and In our particular
culture and time.
When we are analyzing consequences which take the form of
situations and events In our lives, the basic Saturn questions
include: "What subconscious emotional habits In me. or what past
actions and reactions, could have Invited these consequences In
my life?" We can follow up with "What is the most effective way to
handle these consequences? What will happen If 1 do this or that?"
We only find out what will happen by actually doing It and
observing the results, but in cases of major uncertainty. It is
realistic to test the limits In ways that do not risk too much. To find
out If something is really a wall, we can feel It with a finger rather
than knocking our head against It.
Saturn aspects will often mark confrontations with authority figures in the life, which could be a father, a teacher, a boss,
a police officer, etc. Alternately, we could be dealing with "natural*' law. Including the needs of a physical body for proper
nutrition, exercise, rest, shelter, plus the consequences of emotional habits. Many intelligent and idealistic Individuals will be
confronting time pressures, being forced to curtail the effort to be
Atlas and carry more than their share of responsibility for the
world. Good intentions are not enough to turn us Into supermen
or superwomen. It is vitally important that we do our share, which
will usually be through our career, our role In the society. Whether 62 The Book of Saturn we are a mother/homemaker or a major power in the world,
eamlngaliving or offering voluntary assistance to the community,
managing our personal survival or a big business or a country, we
are all dealing with the same basic issue with Saturn. We are
learning to mesh our personal skills and other assets with our
personal desires and goals and with the laws of our world.
Conflict aspects from Saturn to Saturn show the times we
need to be especially vigilant in our analysis of feedback from
the world. If we are experiencing painful consequences such as
the failure to achieve our goals despite major efforts, we need to
either change the techniques we have been using, or change our
goals. Sometimes, a series of small, "bite-sized" goals will work for
us. permitting us to keep moving toward the bigger goal. Sometimes. we Just need to extend our time-table, to allow more time
to reach the goal. Sometimes, what we want is truly unrealistic,
whether really impossible or needing assistance from others, or a
new approach. It is also possible to achieve success at times of
conflict aspects if we have learned the Saturn lesson of realism.
Our consequences tell us how we are doing. However, at such
times, we need to keep a wary eye out for the danger that the
successful results might have been attained at the cost of
serious neglect of other important parts of our nature. For
example, career success might be achieved by neglecting one's
family. Life remains a Juggling act as we try to make places for all
parts of our nature. We can take comfort from the fact that we do
our major growing by meeting and learning to handle challenges.
When we do something right the first time, we already knew how
to do it. though we might not have been conscious of it. When we
do something poorly, but try again and do it better, we have
learned and grown.
Harmony aspects from Saturn to Saturn should be a time for
successful accomplishments. These are often related to career
success, but might bring the resolution of issues with authority
figures or of our ability to handle personal responsibility and
power. Since the whole chart is always part of the picture, a single
harmonious aspect could be counteracted by major conflict aspects between other factors in the chart. Almost always, there
will be a mixture of harmonious and conflict aspects at the same
time. The positive aspects involving Saturn point to the capacity Planetary Aspects to Saturn 63 ft to cope realistically with the situation, even when it offers challenges.
Saturn opposition Saturn by transit (first occuring around
age 14-15) marks the midpoint of the Saturn cycle of around
twenty-eight years. If we have been learning to cope effectively
with our world, this can be a time of fulfillment as we enter
adolescence, deal with school and may begin a part-time job. If we
havenotlearned to handlelimitsreallstlcally. adolescence is often
a time of rebellion against authority in any form. Oppositions
should be partnerships. We need to increase our personal power
at this time, but recognize and accept voluntarily its limits.
The second transiting Saturn opposition to natal Saturn
comes in the early forties and often coincides with other major
aspects, in both transits and other systems. These include
transiting Uranus opposite natal Uranus at about age forty-two,
and all of the Directed planets octile their natal positions, which
comes around age forty-five. Psychology has recognized this
period as a common time for a "mid-life" crisis. Individuals who
have been living conventional lives focused on job and family may
suddenly rebel, make radical changes, and shock their associates.
Where the "rules" are being effectively handled, the early forties
may be a time for major achievement and success, a fulfillment
phase in the Saturn cycle.
The third transiting Saturn opposition to natal Saturn usually
comes early in the seventh decade of life. Many individuals will
have retired by this time, and if they have not continued activities
which maintain their ability to cope with the world, this decade
can start a downhill slide into impotence and illness. The couch
potatoes who have retired to the TV will be losing muscle tone. The
lack of self-confidence may be shutting down the immune system.
The lack of a sense of accomplishment can lead to depression.
Medically prescribed drugs often contribute to problems with
memory and balance. Obviously, the antidote is to do something
which restores the sense of personal power and self-worth,
something which produces a sense of accomplishment. Individuals who do that can be successful "late bloomers," sometimes in
careers that they had wanted to try but been unable to when they
were younger, due to limiting responsibilities. 64 Saturn quincunx Saturn calls for analysis with the usual
goal of improving the situation. The bottom line with Saturn is
always "what will work?" or. "what will happen if 1 do this?" Depending on the stage of the life, we might study something to
advance job prospects, or parenting skills, or to develop a rewarding hobby If retirement has provided extra time. If we are dealing
with problems in any area of life and our own analysis has not
provided reasonable solutions. It is appropriate to look for additional information from a specialist (authority figure) in the area
of the problem. The quincunx invites us to look outside the
"standard" grooves of our thinking and our life. Saturn-Uranus Aspects Saturn conjunct Uranus can be a challenge as we try to mix
tradition with innovation, bureaucratic hierarchy with equality, rules and limits with the drive to defy all rules and
transcend all limits. Successful integration can produce great
success in the world through bringing new information into
effective production to meet the practical needs of the world. Can
you row a boat and rock it at the same time? If so. the world needs
you.
As usual, integration is easier said than done. When the
Uranus rebel overwhelms the common sense of Saturn, the
revolution may be exciting at first but end up destructive. When
the caution or outright fear of Saturn overwhelms the Promethean
instincts of Uranus, people try to turn the clock back. The
Epimetheans can range from religious extremists to Luddites like
the Unabomber. But these two sides of life are such a terrific team
when they work together, we have to keep trying even if we don't
personally have the aspect in our charts.
Of course 1 am biased, but 1 see the psychological understanding of astrology as just such a combination. The new awareness
of how our emotions control our bodies and our lives is being
combined with the ancient knowledge that the sky is a key to life
on earth. When we stop thinking that the sky is doing something
to us, when we realize that it is a mirror showing what we are
doing, when we grasp precisely how our emotional habits Planetary ^pects to Saturn 65 produce our destiny and how they can be changed to create
a more satisfying destiny, we are on the way to combining
Uranus and Saturn in a synthesis that is both exciting and
effective.
The knowledge is Saturnlan since we can test it and watch the
consequences. What happens in my body and the affairs of my life
when I focus on this emotion? What happens when I look at life
with a different perspective and different emotions? Uranus is the
willingness to experiment with new perspectives.
For those who have Saturn conjunct Uranus, it brings with it
a father with Uranian qualities. He might have been open,
accepting, original, articulate, and treated you like a friend. Or he
might have been cool, distant, indifferent, weird, or even insistent
that his way was the only way since Saturn can always do the
dictator number when driven by insecurity or an overblown sense
of responsibility. I have seen cases where the father was totally
accepting when the child was young but went into power-struggle
mode when the child was old enough to have his or her own ideas.
Obviously, we would expect such a father to have less air in his
own chart, hence more emphasis on the other elements. He would
be working on the lesson of air. the ability to be equalitarian,
understanding, and accepting.
A Uranian career can obviously include any field which
expands or disseminates knowledge. Work with the public is
common. Saturn is a key to the executive branch of government
and Uranus is a key to the legislature in a democracy. Social
issues and values can be important along with anything connected to the future.
Conflict aspects between Uranus and Saturn show the need
to make peace between the past and the future, between total
freedom and reasonable limits, between authority and equality,
between intellectual castles in the air and what is possible in this
physical world. Success is worth the effort and certainly possible
if one integrates the potential skills of the intellect with common
sense.
Harmony aspects between Uranus and Saturn suggest that
these very different life urges have been reconciled so we can draw 66 on the assets of each of them. In theory, we should be able to make
all of our desires complementary in order to be a whole person.
An opposition between Uranus and Saturn calls for us to find
opportunities to satisfy both the old and the new, conventional
and unconventional, free-wheeling and structured, theoretical
and concrete, etc. Hopefully, we can work out a partnership
between them within ourselves rather than attracting others in
our lives who are overdoing the one we are neglecting.
A quincunx between Uranus and Saturn needs compromise
as usual, which should be attainable with the help of the Uranian
broad perspective. There is always some danger of the Uranian
urge to escape limits and try something new leading to repeated
separations rather than hanging in and working out a compromise. Neptune-Saturn Aspects Neptune conjunct Saturn unites our need to cope with the
physical world with the mystical potential for oneness with
the Whole. Where Jupiter represents a conscious search for the
Absolute in the form of a set of beliefs which will determine our
ethics, values, and goals, Neptune symbolizes the subconscious
search for infinite love and beauty. The desires represented by
both Jupiter and Neptune are for perfection, but. of course,
different individuals can have very different ideas about what is
perfect. Theoretically. Neptune's realm is totally inclusive, but
just as humans may think they have found truth and stop far
short of the ultimate potential, humans may form small enclaves
which they call heaven, each presided over by its local god created
in the image of man. with the vast majority of their fellow humans
excluded. There are many ways to discover that there is more
outside their dream worlds. Maybe some people just get bored
eventually and peek through the curtain of their visions.
Since Saturn is always calling for a reality check, people
with it conjunct Neptune are rarely allowed to stay for long in
their visionary cocoon. The world keeps breaking through the
walls, often starting in early life with a father who had the same
Issue, who was trying to make peace between a beautiful dream 67 of a perfect world and the rude reality we live in. The parent might
be idealistic or artistic or psychic, playing a savior role in the
world. Or he might be a victim running away from the world
through drugs, alcohol, illness, psychosis, etc. Or he might Just be
unhappy because his life, other people, and the world never lived
up to his ideals. Obviously, the child is likely to be working on
the same issues as the parent to which he was drawn. Hopefully,
he or she can learn from the parent's example what to do or what
not to do.
Sometimes the Saturn lesson involves a lack of faith in a
benign Higher Power, in help beyond human understanding if we
can open to it. The urgent drive to conquer the natural world, the
focus on knowledge for power in materialistic, atheistic science
maybe partly due to such a lack of faith. People without such faith
can be anxious and depressed since no one can be in control of
their lives all the time. We have to do what is within our power and
then let go and trust.
Sometimes the Saturn lesson involves the limited beliefs
mentioned above — little, human-created gods with little exclusive heavens. Most of these are really religions of fear rather than
faith. Many so-called "new age" gurus are cut from the same cloth.
"Their" followers will be saved when the immanent catastrophe
arrives. Follow them, and contribute to their material comfort, if
you want to be saved. Over and over the prophets predict the
disaster and when it fails to materialize, the followers look for a
new guru and repeat the pattern. The end of the world as we know
it keeps being postponed.
However, the world is constantly changing. Some traditional
religions are building higher walls and buying guns, but some are
reaching across sectarian boundaries to communicate and cooperate. to become more inclusive, allowing women and gays to be
priests, opening to mystical, psychic experiences and to spiritual
healing, questioning the rigid dogmas handed down from the past.
Neptunian careers can include any type of service which
helps the world. The jobs can be totally mundane like work with
fluids, chemicals, drugs, the ocean. It is possible to work with the
aesthetic side of life or to persuade people that if they buy your
product or your service their life will be more beautiful. Neptune's
potential includes a highly creative imagination which can lead to 68 The Book of Saturn a career in the entertainment world or in advertising and public
relations, producing artists and con artists. Healing, including
self-healing, can be part of the gift of Neptunian faith.
Conflict aspects between Neptune and Saturn are often
experienced as a confrontation between faith and fear. A
variation on the same principles is faith versus realism. But what
we define as realistic depends on our beliefs about the nature of
ultimate reality. We know the materialists are wrong, but who can
say with certainty what is right? As long as we live in a physical
world, we have to respect the rules of the place. Too extreme
flouting of the rules gets us thrown out of it. But life encompasses
much more than this physical realm, and the urges symbolized by
both Uranus and Neptune call us to look farther. Life is a
balancing act. We need all twelve of our basic drives to be a whole
person.
Harmony aspects between Neptune and Saturn suggest that
our faith and our fear have been reconciled, that our dreams are
realistic and we are capable of moving toward them, of bringing
them into this world.
An opposition between Neptune and Saturn is a call for a
partnership between our ideals and our capacity to cope with the
physical world. They are magnificent when they work together,
bringing the ideals into manifestation in the physical worid.
A quincunx between Neptune and Saturn holds the hope of a
similar result if we can give a little on both sides while calling on
the talents of both sides to find a way to make things better. Pluto-Saturn Aspects Pluto conjunct Saturn is another combination of desires with
a major issue involving power. Pluto symbolizes a part of life
where we need to learn to share power and pleasure with close,
lasting peer relationships. This may be with marriage or business
partners or in counseling or consulting interactions. It also
includes competitive activity, whether in sports or games or
business. Saturn represents the power of the world and it should
include our ability to have a share of the power and the responsibility. Planetary Aspects to Saturn 69 ft As usual, it is possible to express these principles in either of
two opposite extremes which are both destructive. Those who
have not learned to share the power with peers or with the
world will seek total control. They may be playing Atlas out of
a sense of personal responsibility. "If I don't make it right. I will be
guilty." Or they may try to be dictator because that is the only way
they feel safe. The opposite extreme produces dependent and
helpless people who feel they have virtually no personal
power. They may hope for a parent-partner who will take care of
them. They may make sporadic efforts to claim some power to
protect their own rights and engage in power struggles. Or they
may use their helplessness to manipulate others to protect themselves. They may simply retreat from any close relationships
to avoid being hurt.
The obvious solution calls for sharing the power and the
responsibility along with the pleasures and possessions which are
part of the Pluto side of life. As with all major growth challenges,
this is easy to say. but not easy to do. The weak person has to
develop more self-confidence and the strong person has to be
willing to give up some of the control. We develop self-confidence
by doing things successfully, which means that we have to have
reasonable standards for what we consider success.
A successful integration of the Pluto and Saturn drives can
lead to major success in the world. Both of these sides of life are
associated with a strong will and a good memory, with patience,
thoroughness, precision with details, the urge to go beyond
surface appearances and to follow projects through to completion.
Both are cautious and deliberate. They are two of the three sides
of life which are sometimes called "obsessive-compulsive." (The
third is Letter Six in our alphabet.)
Pluto careers can include any activities involving joint resources such as bookkeeping, accounting, banking, investment,
pensions and taxes. Government work is possible using public
funds, or work with non-profit foundations. Any type of research
is appropriate. There could be interest in history, archaeology,
genealogy, antiques or other reusable objects. Depth psychologists and detectives and undertakers are Pluto professionals.
Pluto-type fathers may have been so busy working that they
had little time for their families. Security issues are almost always 70 important, but the parent might have struggled for financial survival or gained enough wealth to leave a comfortable inheritance to their heirs. Often, they are deeply emotional but have
problems showing the feelings, and the individual with this aspect
is likely to share that tendency, to keep a "stiff upper lip." Depending on their level of personal security, such fathers may
have been dictators or dependent and vulnerable or both, bluffing
to cover feelings of inadequacy. With both the Pluto principle and
the Saturn principle concerned with the ability to share power,
one dealing with equals and the other with power greater than
their own. security is usually a major issue.
Power struggles are normal with Pluto-Saturn aspects, and
can be helpful as long as they can be defined as a game where
we can win sometimes and gain confidence but can also gain if,
when we lose, we realize we are not destroyed, that we can play
again and may win next time. Muscles and other forms of personal
strength which build self-confidence are developed by resistance.
When the struggle risks life or death consequences, it has gone too
far. One of the major dangers of Pluto is going too far, not
knowing when to quit and how to let go. Water in general seeks
completion, closure, and Pluto as a fixed planet with enduring
self-will may find it difficult to be moderate. One possible remedy
is to remember the other sides of life, which are also important and
which will be denied if we carry one too far. Life is a Juggling act.
Conflict aspects between Pluto and Saturn show the need
to integrate these two sides of life. With any two basic drives, there
will be some similarities and some differences. The sides of life
which are naturally sextile or trine are more compatible with more
in common between them, so they tend to reinforce or complement
each other. Scorpio and Capricorn, the signs of Pluto and Saturn,
are sextile and have much in common as described above, so the
primary challenge of conflict aspects between them is often some
kind of excess. The potential talents of caution, precision,
thoroughness, etc. can become obsessive-compulsive, leading to over-control and fear of the unfamiliar Too much
emphasis on earth and water can be like wading through a
swamp.
Of course the opposite is also possible. Any conflict aspect
involving Saturn may be calling for realism. When connected to Planetary Aspects to Saturn 71 ft Pluto, the target about which we need to be practical, to
recognize limits, can be joint resources, possessions, appetites, and/or power. The individual may be trying to be Atlas or
not carrying his or her share of the responsibility in a relationship.
A common Pluto issue is learning to master the appetites, to enjoy
the sensual world without being a slave to it. Or there could be
lessons in making sure that relationships are mutually pleasurable. As always, compromise is the answer.
Harmony aspects between Pluto and Saturn suggest that we
have learned to handle both of these parts of life with relative ease
and success. We may be able to do justice to both partners and
career, to share the power and the pleasures.
An opposition between Pluto and Saturn shows the need to
compromise to be able to satisfy both of these basic desires. As
described already, thismay requlremakingtimefor both love and
work and making sure that our needs and the needs of the
emotionally important "others" in our life are being recognized.
A quincunx between Saturn and Pluto also usually can be
handled with some compromise. The drives symbolized by both
Pluto and Saturn tend to be analytlcaJ. supporting the natural
inclination of the quincunx, and understanding issues can usually help us find ways to improve them. CHAPTER FIVE SATURN ASPECTS ANGLES, ASTEROIDS AND Saturn
to the TO NODES Aspects Midheaven In the astrological alphabet, the Midheaven (MC) carries the same
meaning as Saturn, so an MC-Saturn conjunction is like a double
Saturn. (The Midheaven or Midi Coeli [middle of the sky] is the
above-the-horizon intersection of the ecliptic with the meridian of
the birthplace, the great circle which goes through the zenith and
nadir and the north and south points of the horizon. Most
astrologers use the Midheaven or MC as the beginning of the tenth
house in the horoscope.) Individuals with this aspect in their natal
charts will usually seek a power role in the world unless they are
extremely insecure, feeling that the world has all the power. (In
such people, there is a real danger of illness which relieves them
of at least some of the guilt they would otherwise feel for their lack
of accomplishment.) Several of the examples in this book describe
political leaders with natal or progressed Saturn conjunct the MC. 74 The Book of Saturn When Saturn conies to the MC in transits, which happens
at about 28-year intervals, the individual will be dealing with
power in some way. The timing of Saturn's first MC conjunction
depends on its house position at birth. Depending on one's age at
such times, individuals may move into a position of power, become
an entrepreneur, start a new business, be promoted to a higher
level in a larger business, etc. They may choose or be forced to take
on new family responsibilities, or "play parent" in other ways in the
society. They also may be put down in some way if they have
overreached and taken on more than they could handle.
Few people will have progressed Saturn reach their MC in their
lifetime since it moves very slowly and would have to be in the
ninth house close to the MC at birth to reach the aspect. If Saturn
is retrograde in secondary progressions, these house positions
will be reversed, since the planet will be moving into earlier
degrees of the zodiac as it is viewed from Earth. A tenth house
Saturn can retrograde to the Midheaven, but a retrograde Saturn
in the ninth house will move away from the MC and never conjunct
it. Solar Arc Directed Saturn moves about one degree a year, so a
slightly larger number of individuals, those who were born with
Saturn in the seventh to the ninth house, will experience that
aspect. This will still be a minority of the people in the world. The
progressed or directed MC also is moved about one degree a year,
so it will form a conjunction with Saturn for a different minority
of people, those who have Saturn in the temh to the twelfth house.
Of course, the arcs of direction (including solar arc) are never
retrograde.
Some traditional works on Saturn assume that the planet is
negative and always brings suffering, while the MC is positive and
always brings success and prominence, but a little observation
will easily show the fallacy of the assumption that any astrological
factor is inherently and always negative or positive.
President John F. Kennedy offers a good example of the
dual potential of the MC. He was born with Saturn in the tenth
house, the natural house of Saturn, and he was pushed by his
father into running for president of the U.S. after his older brother
died. When Kennedy's progressed Sun reached his local MC in his
chart calculated for Washington D.C.. the locality of the presidency, he was elected President. Three years later when Kennedy's Planetary Aspects to Saturn 75 ft progressed Sun reached his birthplace MC he was assassinated.
The Saturn principle, whether signaled by the planet or by the
MC, can show our potential for achieving power and also the
danger of a fall if we overreach.
Conflict aspects between Saturn and the MC show the
tendency toward power struggles in some form. This may be
constructive competition in sports, games, politics, business,
fighting for causes, etc. It remains constructive if we compete
within the rules of nature and of our society. Both sides can gain
strength and skill in the contest. If it turns into a life-and-death
war. it has gone too far. It is also less constructive if we end up
fighting members of our own team. But not using, blocking one's
power, can also be destructive. It can lead to illness or can
unconsciously invite attacks from others who will take our unused power and turn it against us, e. Vênus .. the legendary "boss
from hell" would be a projection of Saturn or the MC or other keys
to Letter Ten. Any part of our nature which is denied and not
allowed expression will make trouble for us.
Harmony aspects between Saturn and the MC suggest that
the individual has learned to deal with laws, limits, and power in
realistic ways. This ability should facilitate success in the world.
An opposition of Saturn and the MC shows a need to integrate
dominance and dependency, since Saturn would be on the 1C.
which carries the meaning of the Moon. The Individual would need
to be realistic about power and responsibility, able to wield his or
her share but also to accept help from others. A former client
offered an example of this aspect. He had gone through about
twenty jobs in the preceding five years. He hated taking orders but
was too insecure to quit a job. so he would come late until the boss
fired him. Shortly before I did his chart, he had finally recognized
the repetitive pattern and become conscious of what he was doing.
A quincunx between Saturn and the MC is usually experienced as the need to improve the world. If we manage to do this
in realistic ways, it can be quite constructive. If we keep leaving
the scene when we feel restricted or can't make the world conform
to the way we think it should be. we need to do some analysis of
our motives and look for realistic ways to deal with the situation. 76 The Book of Saturn Saturn Aspects to the Ascendant The horoscope Ascendant, which is the degree of the ecliptic on the
eastern horizon at birth, carries the same meaning as the planet
Mars. It symbolizes what we do naturally when we are Just being
ourselves. The zodiacal sign of the Ascendant, the placement of its
planetary ruler, and any planets in the first house are also part of
the picture of our natural self-expression, our sense of personal
identity, including the degree to which we feel we have the right
and the power to be ourselves. I also find two additional angles,
intersections of great circles, to be useful keys to one's sense of
identity: the East Point and the Antivertex. The following discussion of aspects between Saturn and the Ascendant can also be
read for its aspects to these auxiliary Ascendants. They are less
important than the primary Ascendant, but can be meaningful
and helpful when they have aspects to the traditional astrological
factors.
An emphasis on fire (through planets and/or signs) in the first
house will tend toward self-confidence and spontaneous selfexpression. Earth signs and planets there will usually be more
practical. Air will be curious and verbal. Water will be sensitive
and self-protective.
Saturn conjunct the Ascendant carries the same meaning as
Saturn conjunct Mars, though the planetary forms are the most
intense expression of the principles. There is always the potential
for conflict between fire and earth, between spontaneous desire
carried into action to go after what we want and the practicality
that weighs the possible results of such action. Individuals who
are confident about their ability to cope with the world may be
steam-rollers, trying to make their personal will into law, to make
the world be the way they think it should be. Individuals who feel
that the world has all the power may doubt their own rights and
block their own power. If this Inhibition is carried too far. it can
shut down the immune system and lead to illness. If the person
feels he or she has rights but no power, the normal response is
frustrated anger which can lead to either illness or accidents.
Surgery is one variation on such blocking of the Mars principle, in
this case being symbolized by the Ascendant. Planetary Aspects to Saturn 77 ft Saturn conjunct the Ascendant is almost always a key to an
important father-figure who was a personal role model. The
child may have wanted to be like the father or the opposite or a
little of both, but there was usually an intense effect. A grandfather or a stepfather or other person could have played the role.
Though Saturn can be a protective and responsible parent, it
represents limits, and, especially if it has conflict aspects to other
factors in the chart, it can indicate a very difficult early life.
Possibilities include poverty, working when very young, being
responsible for family members, harsh parents, etc. Among other
variations, I have seen charts where the impact was due to the
father being missing. Since Saturn's meaning is not limited to
authority figures, it can also indicate other types of limits on
personal freedom and power such as birth with a physical
disability or handicap. Integration of the two principles calls for
being realistic about what we can do, what we can't do, and what
we have to do, and continuing to develop personal confidence and
power to whatever extent we can.
Conflict aspects between Saturn and the Ascendant show
the need to make peace between the personal will and power and
the limits of our power. No one can do everything that he or she
would like to do, but we had better do something! Giving up is apt
to lead to a quick and unpleasant exit. Compromise remains the
name of the game.
Harmony aspects suggest that the person has learned to live
within the limits, avoiding the extremes of overdrive and selfblocking. The realistic use of personal energy will usually lead to
success in the world.
An opposition of Saturn to the Ascendant puts the planet on
the Descendant where it is connected to partners. This is likely to
indicate lessons in the area of lasting peer relationships, primarily
in the handling of power. Insecure individuals may choose a
father-figure as mate, looking for protection. Unfortunately, they
may find they have acquired a boss rather than a partner.
Alternately, they may pick someone who will let them be father,
but that is not conducive to mutual respect and they may get tired
of carrying most of the responsibility. It is also possible to delay
marriage for fear of being criticized, dominated, rejected, or hurt
in other ways when the power of the world is being projected into 78 other people. An original parent maybe a positive or negative role
model for what is being sought in a mate, or we can maintain a peer
relationship with a parent after we are adults. It is possible to pick
a workaholic partner, to attract others who are critical or to
perceive others as Judgmental, even when they are not— if flawfinding is displaced from the job into relationships. The solution
is the same for any of these variations: learning to share the power
and responsibility so each person has something to give which the
partner values and can receive.
Saturn on the Descendant can be expressed constructively
by working with other people, through a career involving teamwork or beauty or balance. In all relationships connected to
Saturn, it is important to keep the tendency to look for flaws
focused on the job rather than on the other people. A family
business is possible, working with parents or partners. One of my
clients who had Saturn in the seventh house was an artist who
appreciated his wife's willingness to pay the bills and manage the
home, leaving him free to focus on his creative work.
Saturn quincunx the Ascendant carries the danger of frequent separations, of difficulty in maintaining long-term commitments. This may occur in the work when Saturn is in the sixth
house or in partnerships when Saturn is in the seventh or eighth
house. It is also possible to stay in a situation in a chronic state
of dissatisfaction which is obviously not a comfortable solution.
With the quincunx, we need to do what we can to improve things
but also to be able to experience satisfaction from the positive
facets, not limit our focus to the problems. Saturn Aspects
Nodes of the to the Moon The nodes of the Moon are derived from the intersection of the
Moon's orbit with the plane of the Earth's orbit, which is visualized
as an imaginary floor reaching to infinity. Where the Moon crosses
that imaginary surface to move into the northern hemisphere we
locate the north node. At its south node, the Moon moves back into
the southern hemisphere. Planetary Aspects to Saturn 79 ft In traditional astrology, the north lunar node was described as
similar to Jupiter, where things came easily to us. The south lunar
node was said to be more like Saturn, a key to a part of life where
we had something to learn. Also like Saturn, once we learned it,
we had something to give to the world. Recent astrologers have
almost reversed this interpretation, calling the south node the
"path of least resistance," something we already know and should
avoid while pursuing the area of the north node.
I consider this appallingly bad advice. Any part of our nature
which is denied and blocked will become a problem. Oppositions
are natural partnerships. Each end needs the other, and we have
to express them as a team working together. The lunar nodes are
produced by the Moon's orbit, and I consider them similar to
auxiliary moons in the chart. They show where we seek emotional
security, which, for most people, means through personal relationships. Though the south node is often a bit more of a
challenge, both nodes are water in their basic nature, like the
Moon, so both are connected to the past. Both are keys to the
subconscious habits we bring in with us at birth
When Saturn is conjunct either node it is simultaneously
opposite the other one. so integration is needed in the areas of
dominance and dependency to allow us some of each. We maybe
struggling with time, trying to handle a career and a family, and
need to realize that we can't do everything well. We will also have
to deal with the polarity issues of the signs and houses in which
the nodes are placed.
Conflict aspects, which include Saturn square both nodes or
octile one and trioctile the other, pose the same issues and have
the same solution — interdependency.
Harmony aspects include Saturn sex tile one node and trine
the other, suggesting that these parts of life can be successfully
handled.
A Saturn semisextile to one node produces a quincunx to
the other node and a more questionable outcome. The individual
is likely to be feeling the need to improve their handling of home/
family and/or career, to be trying to "do it better." Success is
possible by combining the empathy of the Moon and the
practical responsibility of Saturn. 80 The Book of Saturn Saturn Aspects
Starting in to Asteroids 1801. following the invention of telescopes, astrono- mers began to discover small planets, mostly orbiting the Sun
between Mars and Jupiter. The new objects were called asteroids. though "planetoids" would be a more accurate name. They
are not little stars. The total which have been discovered and
named is now over 5.000 and climbing. The astronomer who
discovers a new asteroid has the right to name it. and the names
range from mythical figures to celebrities in many fields to
geographical regions to the personal names of friends or patrons
of astronomy, etc. The amazing experience for astrologers who
work with these small planets is the realization that they carry the
meaning of the name they were originally given. If we needed any
further proof that this world is meaningful, not random, ruled by
chance, the asteroids provide it. Somehow, the astronomer who
will give an asteroid its "right" name is the one who discovers it,
or the discoverer accepts an appropriate name suggested by someone else.
The first four asteroids to be discovered were Ceres,
Pallas, Juno, and Vesta. An ephemeris providing their positions
was initially published by Eleanor Bach in 1972. and some
astrologers have been workingwith them since then. ACS was able
to publish a more accurate ephemeris shortly after Ellie Bach's,
giving daily positions for the first four asteroids. I worked with
them from the time they were first available,
introduction for the ACS ephemeris. and wrote the Based on experiences to date, Ceres symbolizes a blend of
Cancer and Virgo. It is usually a good key to one's mother-figure
and to the ability to be a nurturing parent. But it is less emotional
than the Moon, with the Virgo practicality, the urge to do a good
job. I see it as the service side of Virgo, the attitude that the
purpose of work is to help people.
Saturn aspects to Ceres intensify parental issues. Harmony aspects strengthen the capacity to be a "good" parent,
whether we do this with a personal family or in a service occupation. Conflict aspects show problems needing to be resolved,
which may be Job-related or connected to the family. Conjunctions 81 can be manifested either easily or with difficulty.depending on the
level of integration of the person. Both oppositions and quincunxes
are often a key to tension from trying to handle both a family and
a career. With any combination which includes both Virgo and
Capricorn overtones, it is important to have reasonable standards. No one can do everything well! Possible dangers include a
critical parent or being critical of one's own children, heavy work
obligations which limit the time and energy available for the
family, health problems which are often due to work pressures,
etc. Budgeting time to make sure there is some time for pleasure
may help.
On the positive side, Saturn-Ceres aspects may indicate highlevel skill in handling the physical world. Any service profession
is possible, especially some type of healing work. Parents may
have been very competent and responsible, with a strong work
ethic. Since these factors represent keys to the two parents, a
conjunction can indicate similarities between the parents or one
parent playing both roles.
Pallas (Athena) carries the meanings associated with Libra
with possible overtones of either Sagittarius or Aquarius. It is
usually prominent in the charts of all varieties of counselors and
consultants, including social workers, psychologists, astrologers,
lawyers, politicians, business consultants, etc. Part of the drive it
symbolizes includes the Libra sense of fair play and social justice
and a strong intellectual component is part of its possible connection with Sagittarius or Aquarius. It can also show talent or
interest in the graphic arts, the Libra attraction to form and
balance and harmony.
Saturn aspects to Pallas can point to a career as a consultant
or in the arts. As a key to one's father, Pallas may point to a
pleasant relationship, but power struggles are also possible. The
desire for equality and fair play which Pallas symbolizes can lead
to involvement in social causes like "women's liberation" or to
personal battles against domination. The shoe can also be on the
other foot. Any aspects between Saturn and Pallas except for
sextlles and trines may point to a lesson in treating others as
equals, a call to avoid playing Atlas or boss.
Juno is the smallest of these first four asteroids, but it can be
mighty important in a horoscope. It is the "marriage" asteroid. 82 The Book of Saturn signaling the Pluto passion for an intense, committed, lasting,
close relationship with a mate. In more than 20 years of work with
these little planets. 1 have never seen anyone get married or
unmarried without a progressed aspect involving Juno. Plus,
Juno conjunctions between charts have "explained" strong attractions between people whose charts were otherwise not particularly compatible. Juno signals both the positive and difficult
potentials of Pluto: emotional intensity, persistence, depth, sensitivity, along with the hazards of Jealousy and possessiveness.
Juno aspects to Saturn may indicate an intense relationship
with the father, which can range from love to power struggles to
either or both individuals having to learn to let go. Occasionally,
conflict aspects to Juno may be a key to the death of a fatherfigure. With a conjunction, the father maybe a role model for the
choice of mate, either positive or negative, or the two may stay
involved after the child is grown. If a mate is chosen to play a father
role, power struggles are likely later when the "child" in the
relationship wants to become more equal. Alternately, the more
dependent partner may use manipulation for self-protection and
to meetpersonal needs. Fire and air are usually openly expressive.
Earth and especially water may hide their feelings for security
reasons.
Juno careers can include the large range listed for Pluto. The
section of Pluto should be read for additional information on Juno
potentials, which can include interest in depth psychology, occultism, reseajch. the past. Joint resources, and issues with
sensuality and appetites. In Saturn's role as indicator ofpossible
lessons, any of these areas could be a place for growth.
Vesta has been associated with more dramatic events in the
lives of clients than any others of the first four asteroids. It seems
to be the "ultimate" Virgo. With Ceres, the goal of the job is usually
to help people. People with a prominent Vesta sometimes seem to
be driven to "do a good job for the sake of doing a good Job." The
accomplishment is the reward. The hazard in this attitude is that
sometimes the focus on the job is so total that the effect on people
Is Ignored. This tunnel-vision focus on a single goal can also occur
with Saturn and with Pluto and Juno, so aspects between any of
the preceding and Vesta can signal the ultimate in a compulsive
one-pointedness. When there is a lack of empathy and compas- Planetary Aspects to Saturn 83 ft sion. the result can be ruthless. A slightly more benign form of this
compulsiveness produces a workaholic.
On the positive side, this commitment to doing something
worth doing and doing it well can indicate an enormously capable
person. When combined with empathy and compassion, Vesta
often signals the capacity for healing. Unfortunately, it can also
show a danger of illness. Individuals driven by the need to do
something really well who have not found a satisfying vocation are
in danger of illness which will let them escape from unfulfilling
work without guilt.
I have seen Vesta-Saturn conjunctions in world leaders
and in moral monsters. The latter include Jim Jones, who is
blamed for the mass suicide of hundreds of people in Jonestown,
and Jeffrey Dahmer. who murdered several young people in
particularly gruesome ways. Leaders who had this aspect in their
progressions duringmajorportionsoftheirlivesinclude Gorbachev
and Yeltsin, the two men most responsible for bridging the gap
between Russia and the western world. Neil MIchelsen. the
founder of ACS who was noted for his strong work ethic and focus
on health and nutrition, also had the aspect. I have also had a
variety of clients with the pattern and tried to encourage them to
set reasonable standards for themselves, to do the best they could,
but then to try to relax and enjoy the Journey. Chiron
Chiron was discovered in 1977 in an orbit between Saturn and Uranus, where it takes about 50 years to go around the Sun.
Astronomers think that it may be a nearly-burned out comet since
they have seen it change in brightness as comets do from time to
time. Many more astrologers started including Chiron in their
charts soon after its discovery than were including the initial four
asteroids. This may have been partly because an ephemeris of its
positions was made available almost immediately, and partly
because Zane Stein wrote a book about it soon after its discovery.
Although astrologers working with the small planets have
been universally impressed with the way their apparent meaning
matches their names, and Chiron was named for a figure in Greek 84 The Bock of Saturn mythology, there are still differences of opinion about the precise
meaning of Chiron. Part of this is probably due to the individual
astrologers who are working with him. We each see in the world
what fits our own nature and experience.
In Chiron's myth, he was a teacher and healer who was
incurably wounded. He was immortal so he could not die. The
gods took pity on his suffering and transformed him into the
constellation of Sagittarius. From this range of possibilities, some
astrologers have focused on the issue of healing and illness and
associated Chiron with Virgo. Some have emphasized his uniqueness and called him a maverick. I have found Chiron prominent
in people who have a passion for knowledge, who love to learn and
to teach, fitting the Sagittarius connection. But 1 have also found
Chiron prominent in healers and sometimes individuals who needed healing, fitting Jupiter's other sign. Pisces. 1 have also seen
the Jupiterian optimism and ideals. I have rarely seen the inescapable "wounding" which some astrologers made a major
theme for Chiron. I basically think that Chiron is a kind of "little
brother" of Jupiter with many of the same potentials.
Aspects between Saturn and Chiron can point to Jupiterian
careers such as teaching, preaching, traveling, etc. When studying charts connected to the murder trial ofO.J. Simpson. I found
Chiron consistently prominent in the lawyers and in charts for the
different stages of the trial. Lawyers, along with issues of morality
and truth, are obviously Sagittarian. As is always possible with
Saturn, it can first indicate a lesson in coping with the world, and
once learned, a skill to help the world.
Fathers connected to Chiron seem to also have the Jupiter
range of possibilities. They may be Intelligent, educated professionals, or idealistic, or remote, looking for their own goals, or
struggling with faith and too high expectations. Since work with
Chiron and the asteroids is so new. we will have to continue to
observe them in many charts before we can feel certain about their
full meanings. CHAPTER SIX SATURN TWELVE IN THE HOUSES Since the planets are the most important form of our astrological
alphabet, generally the most complete statement of the meaning
of the twelve sides of life is presented in the aspects between the
planets, especially in the discussions of conjunctions, the strongest aspect. Though there will be a lot of repetition, when looking
up the interpretations of planets in the zodiacal signs and in the
twelve houses, you are encouraged to also read the sections on
Saturn conjunctions with the ruler of the relevant sign and the
related house in the natural zodiac. For example, read Saturn
conjunct Mars when investigating Saturn in Aries and Saturn in
the first house, the "natural" house of Mars.
Aspects provide important clues on the ease or difficulty of
handling the various combinations of planets in signs and in
houses. Even when a planet is in a sign or house which is
potentially in conflict with its principle, if it has mostly harmonious aspects the desires it represents will usually be easier to
integrate. On the other side, the desires symbolized by a planet in
a harmonious sign and house will still need attention and care if
there are difficult aspects to the planet.
Try not to overrate any single factor in a chart. It is essential
to consider the whole chart and to always look for themes, for
repeated statements of the same principles. 86 The Book of Saturn Saturn in the First House Saturn in the first house is less intense than Saturn conjunct
Mars, but it represents the same issue. Personal will must be
integrated with the limits of personal will. There is an inherent
potential for conflict between our first house sense of our own
identity. our right and power to do what we please, and the Saturn
principle which represents the "rules of the game." The "rules"
include "natural law." cultural regulations, authority figures, and
the conscience. We may resist any limits on our will and fight
the world, trying to make our own will into law. Or we may
doubt our own power and rights and give up, convinced that
if we tried to do what we wanted to we would just fail or be put
down by the world. To integrate the conflict we need to compromise so that there is a place in our lives for each of these sides of
life. We need to find some things which we want to do and can do
which are not in conflict with the rules, so that we have our share
of the power of the world.
Saturn is a key to authority figures, and our first exposure to
them is usually a father-figure, which could be a grandfather,
stepfather, etc. In the first house, the parent is a personal role
model for the child, who may want to be like the father or may
want to do the opposite. I have seen both extremes—individuals
with brutal fathers they feared and individuals who adored their
fathers. Endless variations are possible.
One example of a first house Saturn was a woman whose selfesteem was damaged because her father obviously preferred her
sister. Years after the death of her father, this woman was still
having recurrent dreams. She would hear her father calling "wait.
I'm trying to catch up to you." She would turn in the dream,
thinking "at last, my father wants to be with me." Her father would
see her face,
disappear. say "Oh, I thought you were your sister," and If we doubt our own worth and power and feel that all the
power is outside of our control, we may not attempt many things
we could otherwise do. In extreme self-blocking, we can shutdown
our immune system and become ill. No one can do everything they
want, but we had better do something. Saturn in the Twelve Houses 87 ft Saturn in the first house also shows an identification wllh a
career. Once we have learned the rules which let us survive in this
physical world, our skills permit us to cope with the world. They
define our role in the society, our status, our share of the power
If we develop practical skills. When something is part of our
identity, we have to do it or feel wiped out, so people with Saturn
in the first house have to feel powerful through some sort of
accomplishment. But at the same time, the first house is demanding that our work be active, independent, varied, and under our
own control This can produce an entrepreneur, a self-employed
professional or business person, etc. Mechanical skills are possible, which can lead to work with machines or tools, including
modern technology, military, or medical fields, etc.
The current U.S. Vice President has a first house Saturn
combined with Pluto and Mars and all of them in Leo, calling for
a position of power and leadership. His father was in the government and A1 Gore has also served in a variety of government jobs.
The identification with power and accomplishment may cause
problems if such people retire. But a recent client who had been
a highly successful business executive has managed it successfully by substituting control over his investments for his former
job managing employees.
Part of the Saturn principle is a critical attitude, since to work
effectively we have to look for the flaws and correct them. It is
possible to so identify with this attitude that we are critical about
everything in our lives, or we may just be too self-critical. In trying
to handle any combination of two or more of the basic life desires,
compromise is almost always the best solution. We have to learn
to be ourselves, defend ourselves, and assert ourselves in the first
house, but Saturn always reminds us to live within the limits. Jim
Jones, who led hundreds of followers to suicide in the jungles of
Guyana, is a tragic example of a first house Saturn man who did
not learn to live within the limits. He despised his father and took
him as a negative role model. Fred Astalre (rhythm and timing of
dance) lived a disciplined and productive life. Percy Shelley faced
the health challenges that are possible with Saturn in the first, but
was a productive poet. Robert McNamara and George Patton had
personal confrontations with power. 88 Saturn in the Second House Saturn in the second house can show first a lesson and later skills
in handling the material world. This can include many variations
on making money, collecting possessions, indulging appetites, or
creating beauty. The more common reaction is to be careful with
money and possessions, to always have some put away for a rainy
day since Saturn shows where we are conscious ofthe power of the
world. But. since Saturn can be a lesson, there will be some
individuals with this position who are learning to earn a living, or
to conserve resources, or to moderate the appetites. I have also
seen some who were workaholics and needed to learn to relax and
enjoy the flowers. The chart shows the issues in the nature. The
individual habits determine the details, and they can be changed
if we are willing to make an effort.
Fathers described by the second house may be pleasant,
indulgent of themselves or others, intent on making money,
artistic, or many other variations. The Individual'schoice of career
is also likely to be somewhat Venuslan. This may simply mean the
person wants to enjoy the work, or the salary may be the main
focus, or aesthetics maybe important. Usually, security is sought
and there is enough practicality to achieve it.
Newt Gingrich, who became Republican Speaker of the House
of Representatives in the U.S. Congress in the election of 1994,
has Saturn in his second house if the birth time of 3 AM given by
his family is accurate. He has been highly successful in raising
funds for Republican causes despite his Gemini tendency toward
periodic foot-in-mouth bloopers. Prince Charles has Saturn here
with his inherited money carrying a great responsibility. Arnold
Schwarzenegger of movie fame and Republican politics also has
Saturn here. Saturn in the Third House Saturn in the third house may be originally experienced as doubts
about one's mental ability, but once the individual has learned to
cope with the world, he or she will often work in a mental career.
The father or siblings may play a role in the mental development. Saturn in the Twelve Houses 89 ft One female client with a grand trine to Saturn In Libra in the third
house was told by her father that she was stupid. Where Saturn
is placed, we have to prove to ourselves that we can cope by doing
it. This woman got a BA In mathematics, an MD degree, became
a successful psychiatrist, and still said "I don't have a very good
mind." Where Saturn is concerned, we just have to keep doing it
till we know we can. Setting realistic standards may be part of the
lesson.
Other individuals with a third house Saturn might have
fathers who are equalitarian and accepting, encouraging a sibling
relationship, or there could be older siblings who played parent or
younger ones for whom the person felt responsible. The third
house Saturn lessons involve developing skill with the intellect
and the ability to handle peer relationships. Growth may come
through learning to handle a basic part of life which has been
neglected, or it may just call for knowing "when to do which."
When should we be equalitarian and let others do their share and
when should we take responsibility?
Other third house careers may involve dexterity leading to
work with the hands. Letter three in our alphabet can indicate skill
with eye-mlnd-hand coordination. A recent client hasjust opened
her own hair-care salon so she is now the boss, but she is
recognizing that she can't do everything and looking for associates
who can handle some of the routine details which are less
satisfying to her Pisces" love of beauty. Peter Sellers and Ellen
Burstyn. both drawn to communicate through
Saturn here. So did writer Hermann Hesse. Saturn in the Fourth movies, have House Saturn in the fourth house emphasizes the early home and
parents. Children with this position usually learn to work early,
though this can be for many different reasons. Life on a farm is
possible, with chores for everyone. Help from the children may be
needed because of poverty, illness, or just a large family. There
might be a single parent playing both parental roles. Guessing
details is a futile effort in astrology. When we understand the
principles, we can often change the details. 90 The Book of Saturn The main issues for Saturn in the natural house of the Moon
Involve dependency versus power and responsibility. Some people
are struggling to do justice to both a family and a career in the
world, and they have to accept the fact that we can't do everything
well. The answer to dominance/dependency is interdependency
— each person able to give something that others value and can
receive. As small children, the power is all outside and sometimes
Saturn in the fourth house shows a truly difficult early life, but as
we gain skills we can create the secure home and family we want.
Fourth house careers can include "mothering" our own family
or the world. We can feed, clothe, house, or comfort the public. An
office or business in the home is possible, or a family business
which follows in the footsteps of the parents. Family roots,
genealogies, antiques, could be treasured. Security is very important. but concerns can range from self-absorption in an insecure
person to the urge to protect all of life including mother earth.
Some individuals might not have children of their own for fear of
"not doing it right." but they might substitute pets or a garden to
satisfy the parental instinct.
In her book Profiles of Women. Lois Rodden gives an interesting example of an author with Saturn in her fourth house. Sidonie
Gabrielle wrote under the name of Collette. began writing as a
child, and said that it was "as easy as frying eggs." Her chart fits
the theory that the natural water nouses, four, eight, and twelve,
are especially important keys to habits brought in from past lives.
The water element represents the subconscious side of the mind.
Collette's Saturn is in its own sign. Capricorn, conjunct Mercury
within Just over two degrees. The pattern is appropriate for a
career writer working in her home and affecting masses of the
public. Letter four primarily signifies our need for emotional
security for which we look to our home and family, but it can be
extended to apply to one's homeland and its people in general.
Apparently, Collette did not go through the initial doubt of her
mental ability which is so common with Mercury conjunct Saturn
and/or Mercury in Capricorn. In her case, she seems to have
brought in an already developed career talent.
But Collette also had the need for closeness which is indicated
by a strong fourth house. Hers included a Sun-Moon conjunction
in Aquarius in addition to Saturn-Mercury. Collette was married Saturn in the Twelve Houses three times, each time 91 ft to a man in a related profession: a collaborating writer, her Editor-in-Chief, and a Journalist. She
wrote fiction, drama, criticism, and literary correspondence for a
newspaper, but was best-known for her stories of girls and women
in love. Her specialty certainly fits her Libra rising and Mars in
Scorpio, which show her identification with a mate, and her Venus
in Pisces. Neptune in the seventh house of partnership, and Jupiter in Leo. which show the tendency to idealize love and
relationships.
An astrological colleague with Saturn in the 4th house says
she did not have harsh, punitive parents or a difficult childhood.
She and her siblings didn't have to do any work, though their
single parent worked hard. Saturn ruled her seventh house and
her grandparent did some parenting. She was aware of "poverty"
in that depression-era messages were received from both her
mother and grandmother, so she felt "poor" sometimes even
though she wasn't. She worked from the home, followed parental
footsteps in career, and works in a field involving emotional
support of people. She also chose not to have children. Others with
a fourth-house Saturn include Glen Campbell. Ernest Hemingway. and Omar Sharif. Saturn in the Fifth House Saturn in the fifth house shows the need to deal with love and selfesteem. Fire and earth can be natural antagonists and need to be
integrated. If the fire wins, the individual keeps changing, looking
for new excitement and thrills and applause, but is likely to have
twinges of guilt because at the end there is little to show for the
energy expenditure. If the earth wins, the individual persists until
something has been accomplished, preferably with tangible results. but feels frustrated at being tied down, not able to keep
moving. Compromise is needed to allow some variety and some
achievement.
Fathers described by a fifth house Saturn can range from
loving and responsible to too involved in personal ego to notice the
needs of others. They may be dominating or easily manipulated
with flattery. They want to be heroes. They need an audience. 92 Since the fifth house is a key to the person's own ability to love and
accept love and to procreate children, there are likely to be lessons
somewhere in that area. The example of the father can point to
growth potentials whether the father was a positive or a negative
model. Some individuals with this placement may not have their
own children because of the responsibility and fear of failing in
some way. Some produce children but separate from the partner
and have to learn to share the responsibility. Single parents may
be carrying too much and separated parents too little.
people choose a career involving the children of others. Some The fifth house shows a need to create something unique and
to have it acknowledged by others. Possible careers can range
from the entertainment field to teaching, from selling and promoting to investment. If possible, the individual needs to be in charge
of the work rather than have to take orders. There may be intense
ambition, but also the danger of giving up if the goals seem
impossible to achieve, or too much work, or taking too long.
Saturn reminds us that reaching the top is a longjourney, that it
requires time and effort, so we need to keep going.
Another example from Lois Rodden's book. Profiles of Women,
was Barbara Rooney, who had Saturn in her fifth house in a close
conjunction with Venus in Pisces. One of the traditional keynotes
for the fifth house associates it with the entertainment world, and
Barbara Rooney chose careers in that area moving from beauty
queen to model to starlet. Shortly before she was twenty-two years
old. Barbara became the fifth wife of Mickey Rooney and switched
to a career of producing children, one of the many potentials for
the creativity of the fifth side of life. Barbara and Mickey had four
children in the next five years, to the dismay of traditional
astrologers who often suggest that Saturn in the fifth will deny
children.
But Mickey got into financial trouble while he was siring
offspring rather than successful movies, and he filed for bankruptcy in 1962. shortly before the birth of their last child in 1963,
On January 24, 1966. Barbara Rooney filed for separate maintenance and Mickey counter-filed for divorce. A week later, on the
morning of January 31. Barbara and her lover were found shot to
death in the bathroom. She was shot in the jaw and he was shot Saturn in the Twelve Houses 93 ft in the temple and his body was sprawled over hers. The police
ruled it a murder-suicide.
Saturn calls for realism. It is hardly realistic to continue to
have children while going a half million dollars into debt and
sustaining an affair with a potentially violent lover. Many aspects
in Barbara's chart showed the potential for tension. Progressed
Saturn formed a T-square to the lunar nodes in the second-eighth
houses for many years, showing a lesson in handling finances and
passions. The second house includes our personal resources and
the eighth house covers shared resources among many other
meanings. The handling of debt and joint money, possessions,
sensuality, etc. is a Letter Eight issue. The midpoint of Saturn/
south lunar node can be a special key to lessons since both of
these factors point to growth areas In the nature. Barbara's Saturn/South Node midpoint was on Uranus, square the Sun.
and opposite the midpoint of Ascendant / Mars. This configuration
in fixed signs and cardinal houses reinforced the tendency toward
power struggles already described by cardinal factors (Saturn and
the lunar nodes) in fixed houses. If we lack an outlet for "healthy"
(game-playing) competition, the power struggles can be manifested in very uncomfortable ways, displaced into relationships
which should be cooperative or with the power projected into
others who may use it against us. Barbara was expressing her
competitive nature appropriately while working in the entertainment field, but when she tried to satisfy all her potentials through
relationships, she became vulnerable, with her power displaced
and projected.
Others with Saturn in the fifth house include Winston Churchill,
Merv Griffin. Dean Martin, Bruce Lee. and Henry Kissinger. Saturn in the Sixth House Saturn in the sixth house intensifies the work ethic, the need to
do something worth doing and to do it well. This may be a key to
major success, but the individual might sacrifice other important
parts of life to achieve the success. Or. since Saturn is usually a
lesson, we might have to learn to work effectively at the start of life.
The Saturn desire for power will normally push toward owning
one's own business or having a professional career in contrast to 94 the sixth house willingness to work for others, but both of these
life drives want the Job done right. This may lead to feeling that we
have to do it ourselves — no one else will do it right.
One client business owner with Saturn in the sixth house
complained of his inability to find responsible employees. His need
to oversee every detail could not let anyone else have a share of the
power which is part of responsibility.
It is also possible to set such high standards that they are
impossible to attain and one never feels the sense of satisfaction
in the accomplishments which both Saturn and the sixth house
crave. If the frustrations become too strong, especially if they are
repressed so the individual is not aware of them, illness is a
danger. An illness or accident can get us out of a job without guilt.
Guilt is a health hazard if we feel responsible for something that
is outside of our control or can't be changed. Part of Saturn's
lesson involves doing what we can and then accepting the limits
of being human.
It is possible to be born with health problems so that a major
life lesson involves learning to function effectively with the body.
If we accept some type of life continuity, which Is usually called
reincarnation, our habits at the start of life are brought in from
past existence and we keep revising them as we learn and grow.
The horoscope at birth shows our habitual desires, skills, and
conflicts. We act on the habits, get the consequences, and change
the habits which bring undesirable consequences. The horoscope
and any other tool for self-awareness helps us understand the
principles and change before life gets painful.
A father described by Saturn in the sixth house will be dealing
with Virgo issues. He may have been a workaholic, or just very
capable, or unable to function effectively in the world, or very
critical with "puritan"ethics, or ill. Astrology shows issues. We do
not know whether they are being handled well or badly until we
observe the life.
Appropriate work for an individual with this placement includes all types of service or craftsmanship, taking things apart
and/or putting them together. Usually there will be skill with
details, patience, thoroughness, and a desire for tangible results.
Individuals with this placement include Jimi Hendrlx, Nelson
Rockefeller, Alfred, Lord Tennyson, and Simon Wlesenthal. Saturn in the Twelve Houses Saturn in the Seventh House Saturn in the seventh house indicates the need to learn when to
be an equal and when to wield responsible power and when to
accept limits. The latter will usually be connected to the rights and
power of other people. With integration, we can cooperate with
others in marriage and in teamwork in a job. sharing the power
and the responsibility.
A seventh house father may be a partner or may be gone in
light of the potential for separations in the opposition aspect and
the natural opposition of the seventh house to the first house of
our own identity. The father may be artistic and pleasant or
argumentative and combative. If we learn compromise and cooperation early in life with both authority figures and peers, we will
be prepared to enjoy our adult equalitarian relationships.
Often Saturn in the seventh house calls for recognition that a
variety of types of interactions can be appropriate, including
cooperation, competition, and helping others. We just need to
have a place in our lives for each and to know when to do which.
1 was initially puzzled by a male client whose chart was
dominated by air signs, which are normally equalitarian, but he
had both major lesson factors, Saturn and the south lunar node,
in air signs. But Saturn was in the seventh house and the south
node was in the tenth house, pointing to lessons somewhere in the
area of equality and responsible power. I described the issue to the
client, and he was able to understand it. He said that he was a
manager in hisjob. responsible for seeing that employees worked
properly. He recognized that his tenth house Aquarius was
leading him to be too equalitarian with the employees and they
were taking advantage of his leniency. But in his seventh house,
which was calling for equality, he "had his thumb on his wife" to
quote his phrase.
Seventh house careers can involve all kinds of teamwork,
especially counseling or consulting in some way. Fields involving
arbitration and law and politics are common choices. Litigation is
part of the potential, or other forms ofcompetition. Power struggles
are "healthy" and can contribute to both sides gaining skills if they
"play by the rules," are able to win sometimes and lose sometimes, 96 The Book of Saturn and keep in mind that it is a game. Remember that until we are
exercising our share of the world's power, we still feel that it is in
the hands of others. Other seventh house careers can use its
potential artistic talent for Jobs in the graphic arts such as design,
photography, architecture, city planning, and landscape gardening.
Individuals with Saturn in the seventh house include Prince
Albert (whose work was being partner to Queen Victoria). Henry
Cabot Lodge (diplomat, negotiator and politician), Michelangelo
(artist), and Jerry Rubin (confrontational politics). Saturn in the Eighth House Saturn in the eighth house is. like Saturn in the seventh, usually
working on issues of power versus equality. As part of our desire
for deep lasting peer relationships, but with the added intensity of
water, the eighth house can be more challenging than the seventh,
where we are usually more consciously aware of both sides of
situations and more willing to compromise. Water instinctively
seeks fusion, but in the eighth house, as with Scorpio and Pluto,
we also want control. It is not easy to be passionately involved with
a mate but able to release to allow equality, to control ourselves
but not anyone else, to realize we cannot possess another person.
Complicating the situation is the water need for dependency and
the Letter Eight fear of loss of control. The prize for success is
shared power and shared pleasure with possessions and appetites. We learn self-knowledge partly through the mirror of the
mate and self-mastery partly out of respect for the rights of the
mate.
In an interview with a female client who had Saturn in the
eighth house I was delicately trying to get across the issue of
sharing power with her husband without suggesting that there
was something "wrong"' with her. She just looked at me and said
"Yes. my husband and I do fight a lot. We enjoy it. Then we kiss
and make up." So I said "Fine." Usually I advise competing with
members of the other team rather than our own. But if you are
doing it consciously as a game, it is not a problem. When
something is happening in our lives which disturbs us and we are Saturn in the Twelve Houses 97 not sure why it is there or how to deal with it, then we need to do
some analysis.
An eighth house father may be possessive and dominating if
his family is his main or only place where he can feel in control.
Or he may be so busy seeking security in the material world that
he is rarely home. This combination can also indicate the death of
a parent or other important authority figure in the early life,
teaching us how to let go. Unless the father is unusually secure,
he may feel deeply but seldom express his emotions. Emotional
manipulation is a sign of too much insecurity to seek what we
want openly. There may be sexual issues, especially if the relationship between the parents is poor. If the father tends to repress his
emotions, they may periodically come out explosively or they may
lead to illness. He is likely to be trying to learn moderation, when
is enough, and how to let go. If the child can learn from the father's
example, he or she will be ahead of the game.
We can direct the Saturn drive for power in the world into a
career with teamwork. It could deal with joint resources in
banking, investment, taxes, insurance, or public funds in government work. Or it could deal with the search for hidden answers
through depth psychology, archaeology, detective work, or any
type of research. Saturn and the eighth house bring together two
of the "obsessive-compulsive" sides of life, so individuals with this
combination are often very good at detail and organization, with
phenomenal memories and a strong will. If they possibly can, such
people keep on going until they get there.
Jerry Garcia demonstrates how one can handle one of the
possible Saturn lessons but still be struggling with another one.
Jerry had Saturn in the eighth house, where the most common
forms of the Saturn lesson involve mastering appetites or learning
to share power, possessions, and pleasures with close peer
relationships, to handle joint resources. Jerry was tremendously
successful in the area ofjoint resources. His band. The Grateful
Dead, was one of the top earners of royalties. For years, their
concerts were consistently sold out, and they made a lot of money
selling records and CDs and many other spin-off products such as
T-shirts. Plus, Jerry was enormously generous with his earnings,
giving much to charity, includingsupportlngother musicians who
were less successful. Unfortunately, he did not manage his 98 appetites as well. His early death was partly blamed on his unhealthy diet and his addictions to tobacco and a variety of
drugs. He ended with diabetes and blockages in the arteries to the
heart.
Bob Packwood, the Oregon Senator who was forced to resign
after many women accused him of sexual harassment, has Saturn
in the eighth house in Capricorn. The position fits his long career
in the Federal Government, but warns against the abuse of power.
Other individuals with Saturn in the eighth house include Jacques
Cousteau (emphasizing the shared resources of our water planet),
Sigmund Freud. Jean Houston and R.D. Laing. The last three were
all involved in psychology and/or psychiatry. Saturn in the Ninth House Saturn in the ninth house connects our beliefs about the world
with the physical reality of its laws and limits. Beliefs can range
from the materialistic atheism of western science, which can only
maintain its dogma by ignoring most of human experience, to the
equally dogmatic and equally narrow beliefs of a variety of
fundamentalist religions with small gods presiding over small and
exclusive heavens. To stay in good standing, you have to follow the
rules: "don't look, don't question."
It does not take much knowledge of astrology to demolish both
of these extremes. Astrology shows that we live in a world that is
inherently meaningful, not a world of random chance. It is not
chance when a newly discovered minor planet (asteroid) is given
a name which describes its meaning when you observe it in
horoscopes. It defies logic to claim that a single universal God can
have chosen one group of people or one leader or one holy book to
favor, while everyone else is condemned.
An effective synthesis of the principles of Saturn in the ninth
house calls for a realization that Truth is a goal we never reach but
the Journey can be a marvelous career. Plus, with Saturn, we can
and should test every new idea, note the consequences, and keep
enlarging our understanding. We don't even have to totally deny
the ideas which don't "work" as we thought they would. They can
be put on the shelf. They might work at a different time under Saturn in the Twelve Houses 99 ft different circumstances. The Cosmos Is almost certainly bigger
than our current mental capacity.
A ninth house father may be a searcher, whether a highly
educated professional sharing his knowledge with the world, or a
vagrant wandering the world looking for an unattainable ideal. We
could have a father from another country, a conventionally
religious father or an independent thinker with high standards, a
wastrel and irresponsible father who assumed that god would
provide, or many other variations. The father might have expected
too much of the child or vice versa or he might have had an
outrageous sense of humor and been an eternal optimist. From
him or his surrogate, we learn not to expect perfection of authorities or life. We can learn whether he showed us how to do it or how
not to do it. We can learn to keep questioning and not close off our
options, but to test them and watch the consequences.
The ninth house consequences can include confrontations
with human laws and judgment as well as cosmic. Former U.S.
President Richard Nixon had Saturn in the ninth house. He
thought he was above the law and was forced to resign after the
scandal known as Watergate.
Astrological research by Franqoise and Michel Gauquelin
analyzed the horoscopes of thousands of famous professionals
and found that Saturn was in the ninth house (or early in the tenth
house) significantly often for scientists. As previously noted,
scientists tend to be materialists. Ninth house careers often
involve public service, including fields which profit from higher
education or which deal with long-range areas. Common choices
are teaching, preaching, writing, the law, publishing, libraries,
traveling, foreign countries, etc., etc. Bon Voyage.
Richard Nixon's Vice President, Spiro Agnew. also had Saturn
in the ninth house, and he was forced to resign due to infractions
of the law. Steve Allen did a show which involved meeting the great
minds of history, Edmund G. Brown, former Jesuit and former
governor of California, and writer Albert Camus all had ninthhouse Saturns. 100 Saturn in the Tenth House Saturn in the tenth house is "at home," producing a double
statement of the same principle, which is still stronger if Saturn
is close to the MC. Several of the individuals we will examine in
more depth were bom with Saturn conjunct the MC, and most are
functioning in power positions. However, it is also possible to have
Saturn in its own house and still feel that the world has all the
power. We only know we have it when we have used it and proved
it to ourselves. There are major hazards in having the potential for
power and not using it, including health problems or having the
world use power against one. Any part of us which is denied and
blocked, is not allowed to express, will make trouble for us.
On the other hand, we can't do it all. Atlas people may end with
back problems or just find they can't do what they feel they should
be able to do. One client with a very conflicted tenth house Saturn
was carrying three jobs simultaneously: a regular job to earn a
living, a second job to earn money to buy material to build a house,
and the third job was building the house. He was keeping himself
under incredible pressure with hardly time to sleep. He asked
about back problems and 1 explained that they often stemmed
from such pressures, but were not predictable, that he could have
also had problems with his hearing or his teeth since they were
also associated with the Saturn principle. He commented that he
had those problems as well. I urged him to extend his time table,
to give himself more time to accomplish his jobs.
A tenth house father can exemplify either of the extremes of
feeling responsible for the world or feeling powerless and anxious
or depressed. Guilt can be a pervasive issue if we think we should
be doing more than we can do. A recent mother of grown children
who has Saturn in Pisces in the tenth house kept saying she
wasn't doing enough, while her grown daughter kept insisting the
mother was doing too much for others and asked me what her
children could do to help her. I suggested theyjust tell the mother
she was great and encourage her to enjoy life. But with that
placement of Saturn, it is true the mother could not live with
herself If she just sat in front of the TV or played bingo. She has
to feel she is accomplishing something for the cosmos. Saturn In the Twelve Houses In general, tenth house careers are most satisfying if the
individual sees tangible results from the efforts, and. of course, if
they are in charge of what they are doing. Some people with a tenth
house Saturn have to learn to take orders and some have to learn
to give them, or at least to delegate the duties some of the time. An
emphasis on earth, especially if water is also strong, can show an
overly serious nature. If the burden is getting heavier, we may
need to broaden our perspective and cultivate a sense of humor.
Individuals with Saturn in the tenth house include Muhammad
All, Albeit Einstein. Zsa Zsa Gabor and Daniel Berrigan. Saturn in the Eleventh House Like Saturn in the tenth house, Saturn in the eleventh house is
another common pattern in the charts of people who seek careers
in public service. The eleventh house deals with more equalitarian
organizations and with the expansion of knowledge, with humanitarian issues including equality and freedom, with casual friends
and the legislature in a democracy. Where Saturn describes the
limits, the eleventh house seeks to go beyond the limits. Where
Saturn is the epitome of hierarchy, the eleventh house demands
equality. Where Saturn insists on staying grounded, the eleventh
house builds rockets to go to Mars and beyond. Saturn is the law
and the eleventh house rebels against it.
Obviously. Saturn in the eleventh house calls for integration
if we want to avoid constant inner conflict. But what a great team
they are when they work together. It takes the innovation and the
willingness to take risks of the eleventh house to build rockets, but
it also takes the understanding of gravity and other forces in our
physical universe. The practicality of earth and the abstract
intellectual skills of air are magnificent when they work together.
Once we accept the necessary limits which let us survive in and
cope with a material world, we can be free to do what we please.
We can choose any career which expands or disseminates knowledge. and. if possible, lets us be our own boss working with peers.
Eleventh house fathers can be Aquarian in many ways, from
intellectually brilliant and verbal to defiantly different, from being
a friend with their children to being cool, indifferent, and some- 102 times just physically gone or emotionally unavailable. The father
may be theoretically learning to be equalitarian, understanding,
and accepting, the air principles, but may actually still be dogmatic or controlling. He might also Just be unpredictable or rather
strange. Whatever his version of the principle, the child has a
chance to learn what to do or what not to do.
Sybil Leek is an interesting example of a person with Saturn
in the eleventh house. Her data is given in Lois Rodden's book
Profiles of Women. She has been called "The Billy Graham of
Witchcraft" and her autobiography Dm/ Netuno of a Witch is probably a
primary key to the current fame of modern witchcraft as a nature
religion. Sybil was involved in the occult from childhood, and she
parlayed her unconventional interests and her psychic talents
into a variety of careers. These included being the subject of a BBC
documentary, running an antique shop, being president of several
companies, worldwide lectures, participation in parapsychology
research, raising two children, writing as a journalist and poet,
explorations into astrology, and homes in her native England and
adopted U.S. Saturn in the eleventh house fits many changes of
job or ajob with great variety and/or unconventional jobs. Sybil
managed to integrate the Saturn demand for realism with her
strong eleventh house and Mercury in Aquarius which pushed her
to go beyond the usual limits, and with the mysticism of her SunVenus-Uranus closely conjunct in Pisces in her fourth house.
Other individuals with Saturn in the eleventh house include
several varieties of rebels: Marlon Brando, Lenny Bruce, Adolf
Eichmann. and Vincent Van Gogh. Saturn in the Twelfth House Saturn in the twelfth house connects the ultimate creation of
structure with the final dissolution of structure. Twelfth house
careers include artists, saviors, and victims: the prisoner and the
Jailer, the patient and the doctor, the homeless person and the
social worker. We can work within the society's rules or fight them
or give up. Saturn demands realism, but the twelfth house needs
faith in a Power beyond humans. When that faith is present at the
subconscious level, we are totally protected. We still have to do our share of the practical effort, but then we can let go and trust,
knowing It will be ok. The Gauquelin research was mentioned in
connection with the ninth house. In addition to Saturn in the
ninth house for scientists, they also found Saturn significantly
often in both the ninth and the twelfth houses of famous doctors.
Doctors are both highly educated and playing a savior role, but the
emphasis on the physical world in their training may make it
harder for some of them to maintain faith is a Power beyond the
physical world. The burden of personal responsibility which results when we lack such faith may be one of the reasons many
doctors die young.
A twelfth house father can manifest any of the variations
already mentioned, and many more. He maybe an artist, a savior,
or a victim in innumerable ways. He may be missing, having gone
looking for his beautiful dream. He may be too busy saving the
world to be there for his family. Or he may adore his family and be
idealized in return. Or he may expect too much of himself and his
family and vice versa. As with Saturn in the ninth house,
sometimes we have to learn not to turn human authority figures
into gods. When we put our faith in a fragment of life, it Is an
idolatry and we may have to lose it to force us to find a bigger god.
One of the hazards of Saturn in the ninth or the twelfth house
is the worship of power. Nixon was a ninth house example. O.J.
Simpson is a twelfth house example, with Saturn and Pluto
conjunct in Leo in the twelfth house. Theevidence presented at his
trial and since strongly suggests that he did murder his estranged
wife and her friend, Ron Goldman, though the Jury in the murder
trial acquitted him. Up to the deaths of Nicole and Ron, O.J. had
gotten what he wanted most of his life. He was a football star,
acquired wealth from commercial ads, had some roles in movies,
and mingled with the Hollywood elite. He had power and money
and fame. If he did murder Nicole, what he lacked was the twelfth
house capacity for empathy and compassion, for morality and
faith in a Higher Power. His own ego desires had replaced a bigger
god. He spent over a year in Jail during the trial, one of the painful
possibilities for Saturn in the twelfth house, and he has since been
rejected by many of his former friends, so his ego is suffering. He
Is also reported to be having nightmares of Nicole's death, which
suggests that his inner Saturn, his conscience, is still alive. 104 The Book of Saturn Other individuals with Saturn in the twelfth house include
Larry Flynt (a pornographic publisher who was shot and partially
paralyzed). Ira Progoff (a depth psychologist who is expressing the
ideals of the twelfth house). Robert Redford (who is into environmental causes) and Walt Whitman (a famous poet, who created
beauty in the world).
Astrology shows our psychological issues and potentials. We
create the details of our lives. CHAPTER SEVEN SATURN Astronomy and CYCLES Calendars The ancient world knew Saturn as the most distant planet which
symbolized its association with limits or boundaries. Saturn
marked the end of the region of the "wanderers." the seven visible
lights which moved against the backdrop of the stars which were
grouped In relatively stable constellations. This realm beyond
Saturn belonged to the "fixed stars." With the advent of the
telescope, Saturn's rings were clearly visible and offered an
additional symbolic representation of limits. As astronomers have
acquired more powerful telescopes and in this century have been
able to send rockets into space which could relay closer photographs back to Earth, they have discovered more tenuous rings
around all of the four big gaseous planets: Jupiter, Saturn,
Uranus, and Neptune. No one knows whether space is boundless,
whether the expanding galaxies we see will continue to move out
in all directions forever or will someday collapse in upon themselves. The more we increase our ability to probe farther, the more
worlds we discover.
The tenuous rings around the other three big planets hint that
nothing In this physical world is totally without limits. The four
giant planets symbolize the transpersonal sides of life which reach
beyond everyday personal needs and Interpersonal relationships. 106 Three of them deal with the ultimate beliefs, values, and goals of
life, always seeking to transcend limits. Saturn (which has more
massive rings) reminds us to keep our aspirations grounded, to
look fa" ways to bring our visions into form in a physical world.
Astronomers have also found additional moons orbiting the
planets. By August 1995. 18 had been discovered for Saturn.
Later reports of additional moons were said to be mistaken.
Though Saturn is not the largest planet in the solar system, its
moon Titan is the largest moon. Astrology is not able to use these
moons since, when we observe their positions from Earth, they are
too close to their respective planets to be differentiated. We can
use the asteroids, the small planets which are mostly orbiting our
Sun between Mars and Jupiter, but that is another story for
another book.
Saturn was the slowest of the seven "wanderers" which were
visible to the ancient world without telescopes. The Sun. Moon,
and five visible planets moved relatively rapidly against the
backdrop of the "fixed" stars whose movement in relation to each
other was imperceptible in a human lifetime. Saturn was sometimes called the "chronocrator" or time-keeper, but the Sun and
Moon were the primary sources of calendars. Known as the
"lights," the Sun ruled the day and the Moon ruled the night. Many
cultures had two calendars, a solar year of the seasons when the
Sun moved in front of the visible groups of stars called constellations, and lunar months based on the Moon's orbit of the
constellations in about 28 days. Since the movements of the Sun
and Moon were incommensurable, that is, they did not come out
even, different cultures tried different ways to make the calendars
mesh. One common technique was to have 12 months of 30 days
each and to make the extra five days of the solar calendar a special
time of religious rituals. Since the solar year is not exactly 365
days, that would still produce a problem in time as the seasons
gradually moved out of synchronization with the calendar.
The seasons were highly Important, especially to agriculturists who needed to know when to plant their crops. Early astrologers searched for reliable patterns In the cycles of the sky. The
Egyptians used the heliacal rising of the star Sirius. the day when
it rose just before the Sun, as the key to their time to plant. They
had discovered that the annual flooding of the Nile river would follow, providing water to germinate their seeds in a semi-desert
region with very little rainfall. The Moon's period from one new
moon to another was divided into four weeks of seven days each,
and the days were named for the five planets and the Sun and
Moon. The correlations are easy to see in English for Sunday,
Monday, and Saturday. The names of the other days come from
the equivalent Norse gods. Tyror Thuin Anglo-Saxon was the war
god. so Tuesday is the day of Mars. Wednesday was given to
Woden, the closest match with Mercury. Thursday belonged to Jupiter, so Thor, the Norse god of thunder, was the source of the
name in English. Venus owned Friday, with the English name
coming from Frig, the Norse goddess of domestic fertility. The
French words for the days of the week are a closer fit to the
Roman names of the gods for the different days. They are Mardi
for Tuesday, Mercredi for Wednesday, Jeudi for Thursday, and
Vendredi for Friday. in Planetary Cycles Mundane Astrology In addition to Saturn, Jupiter, the next slowest planet known to
the ancient world, was also an important timer for longer periods.
Saturn's cycle through the zodiac takes about 29.46 years while
Jupiter's is just under 12 years. Jupiter and Saturn are conjunct,
in the same degree in the sky, approximately every twenty years.
The general patterns in the sky at these conjunctions were
interpreted as clues to the nature of the next twenty years for the
society. Early astrologers were interested in the general situation
in their immediate world. They wanted to forecast the weather, the
possibility of wars or plagues or famine, and the well-being of the
ruler. This part of astrology is currently called "mundane" astrology, and few modern astrologers devote much time to it. Most
modern astrology students are interested in the horoscopes of
individuals, which reportedly came into wider use in Greece a few
hundred years before the Christian era.
Current mundane astrologers still watch horoscopes calculated at Jupiter-Saturn conjunctions as keys to the world scene.
The conjunctions occur in each of the elements for approximately 108 The Book of Saturn 200 years, so they cycle through the four elements in about 800
years. Astrologers have noted that each of the U.S. Presidents who
was elected close to a Jupiter-Saturn conjunction, after they
moved permanently into earth signs in 1840. has died in office.
Their conjunction in 1802 was in an earth sign and was not
followed by the death in office of President Jefferson who was
elected in 1800. Jefferson's protection may be due to the fact that
the following conjunction in 1822 was in a fire sign, so the earth
element had not yet been established. Our first presidential death
in office followed the earth conjunction In 1840. Some of the
deaths were from natural causes and some from assassinations.
Franklin Delano Roosevelt was elected for his third term as
president in 1940, but survived to be reelected once more in 1944.
He died in 1945. so he did not leave the office alive. The 1980
Jupiter-Saturn conjunction was the first in the present 800 year
cycle to occur in an air sign. Reagan was elected as U.S. President
that year, and was shot just two months after his inauguration.
In a previous century, he would have died, but he was saved by
modern medicine. We will have one more Jupiter-Saturn conjunction in an earth sign, in Taurus In 2000. We will see what happens
to the president elected that year. After 2000. the conjunctions
continue to occur In air, followed by water, until a new major cycle
starts in fire.
Conjunctions between Saturn and Uranus occur at approximately 44 to 45 year intervals. The U.S. has managed to be at war
around the time of the last three, but in light of the frequency of
wars, the correspondence may not be very helpful. During the
three 1897 conjunctions we were starting the propaganda which
would propel us into the Spanish-American war. In 1898 we
invaded Cuba. Puerto Rico, and the Philippine Islands. This was
really the start of our role as an imperial power in the world. World
War 11 was spreading and we were helping England when Pearl
Harbor in December 1941 precipitated our full participation in the
war just before the Saturn-Uranus conjunction In 1942. There were three conjunctions again in 1988 when we were gearing up
for the Gulf War against Iraq in January-February 1989.
A clearly meaningful Saturn cycle has involved its conjunctions with Neptune, which occur at approximately 35 year intervals. Since the middle of the last century, these conjunctions have Saturn Cycles marked important stages in the evolution of communism. During
the three 1846 conjunctions, Karl Marx was writing Kapital, which became the "bible" of communism. Three conjunctions can
occur if the faster planet passes the slower one, then retrogrades
to go over it again, and finally passes it for the third time.
The 1882 conjunction followed widespread unrest among
ordinary citizens in several countries in 1881. Russia's Czar
Alexander 11 was assassinated, leading to a period of persecution
of both Jews and Roman Catholics and helping to set the stage for
the Russian revolution. U.S. President Garfield was also assassinated. and protests increased in the U.S. over the treatment of
Jews, Blacks, and American Indians. Irish tenant farmers also protested their treatment while their leader was sent to jail.
The Russian Revolution followed the 1917 Saturn-Neptune
conjunction. Within four months after the August conjunction,
the Bolsheviks were in power. There were three conjunctions in
1952-3. Stalin had held absolute power in Russia since 1928. His
death in 1953 marked a change in the government, which began
making tentative steps toward more openness and individual
freedom.
Three conjunctions came again in 1989, and most of our
readers will remember that the Berlin Wall came down that fall
and within an incredibly short time all of the eastern European
countries freed themselves from the dominance of the Soviet
Union.
Three Saturn-Pluto conjunctions in 1914-1915 marked the beginning of World War I. By the 1947 conjunction, we were
starting the "Cold War" between former allies; the U.S. and
western Europe against the Soviet Union and its satellites in
eastern Europe. 1982 had a fairly "normal" number of small wars,
including the ongoing one between Iraq and Iran, Israel versus
Lebanon, and England against Argentina, which invaded the
Falkland Islands.
Much of history is a list of wars, so to find a more meaningful
thread in the conjunctions of Saturn-Uranus and Saturn-Pluto,
we would have to extend our series of dates and look more deeply.
Saturn is the primary key to bureaucratic structures and the
power people who run them, so it should have meaningful IIP The Book of Saturn patterns when governments are involved. We also expect it to be
involved at times of natural disasters such as earthquakes or
avalanches, but so far. we have not found a reliable formula to
forecast such events. We can always find something appropriate
looking hindsight, but attempts to predict disasters produce too
many "false positives," to use a medical term. That is. there are
often aspects which would fit a disaster when nothing major
occurs. Astrology is a "work in progress." With computers and
sophisticated programs now being applied to it. we may see major
breakthroughs in the coming years.
The Saturn-Mars conjunction in February 1962provides a
good example of the hazards of predicting detailed events and of
the use of these conjunction charts in Mundane Astrology. A
major stellium was present in the sign of Aquarius, including the
Sun. Moon, Mercury, Venus, Jupiter and the south lunar node in
the middle degrees of Aquarius, while Mars and Saturn were
conjunct in the early degrees of the sign. Many astrologers
predicted drastic events during that period. Hindu astrologers
and others using sidereal zodiacs were especially convinced that
there would be catastrophes, since their zodiacs put the mass of
planets in Capricorn, the sign of Saturn. However, nothing major
happened in the world at the time.
Planetary conjunctions mark the beginning of new cycles, and
sometimes there are no major events at the beginning but later
aspects to the conjunction chart mark important stages in the
cycle. Saturn, as previously stated, represents governments,
bureaucratic structures, the people who run them, and the
consequences of past actions. Mars symbolizes our feeling that we
have the right and the power to do what we want, so Mars is always
involved in wars and other forms of violence when people are
fighting for personal rights or overdoing personal power. Conflict
aspects between Mars and Saturn are typically present in wars,
revolutions, riots, etc.. when individual wills are challenging
power structures and people or governments are confronting each
other.
In the fall of 1962. when Mars had moved halfway around the
zodiac to form an opposition to the degree of the Saturn-Mars
conjunction in the preceding February, the U.S. nearly went to
war against Russia. In the Cuban missile crisis, the U.S. and Júpiter Russia confronted each other over missiles Russia was putting in
Cuba. Russia agreed to withdraw the missiles and we settled back
into the more normal "cold" war state. Though we now have three
planets beyond Saturn, it remains an important key to the Law
and limits of all kinds; to natural law, cultural regulations, and
authority figures who enforce the law. It also symbolizes one's
internal law. the conscience and guilt. Saturn for Individuals One of the best known of the planetary cycles in the charts of
individuals is the 'Saturn Return." Since Saturn circles the zodiac
in about 29 years, it will transit over its natal position in individual
charts around the ages of28 to 30. 56 to 58. and 84 to 86 for those
who make it to that age. In view of its promise of "feedback" on how
we are doing, these periods are important times when we get a
report card from life. Depending on the degree to which we have
worked effectively with the laws of life and of our society, we may
move into power positions, achieve major goals, and produce
lasting results in the world. Both scientists and artists often do
some of their most creative work in their twenties. At the opposite
end of the spectrum, we may fail if our efforts have been unrealistic
or overly ambitious. Or we may be pressured by life to take on
responsibllties we have been evading. Individuals who have been
reluctant to grow up may finally settle down in a profession or in
their personal relationships. life learns through the consequences
of actions. Saturn signals a time to pay attention to consequences.
The well-known astrologer. Grant Lewi, suggested two other
Saturn cycles in individual charts which can be important. Its first
transit over one's Sun and one's MC can come at any time up to
age 29. depending on the distance in the natal chart between
Saturn and the other two factors. Lewi considered the MC cycle
especially important. He offered examples of famous individuals
who moved into power positions in the world as transiting Saturn
moved up to the MC. Lewi wrote that they tended to retain power
as Saturn continued through the last three houses of the chart,
but that they often went into a position of greater obscurity or
more inwardness as Saturn transited the lower half of the
horoscope. When it passed the IC, the fourth house cusp, they Júpiter 112 might start a new climb back toward a more prominent and public
life. Saturn's cycle with the Sun is described as similar, a rise to
a peak of power and recognition followed by a later reduction in
both.
In my personal experience, we need to be wary of overrating a
single factor in a chart. I have not seen many charts in which these
Saturn cycles worked in this simplistic way. Saturn's passage
through the horoscope signs and houses is clearly meaningful,
but the details vary widely depending on the individual's situation. For example, a woman who had been working in her home
as Saturn transited through the top of her chart opened her own
business outside her home when it was passing through her first
house. This is an appropriate action as she took personal power
(first house) over her career (Saturn), but her life was much more
public following this action than it had been before. Lewi's formula
is most likely to occur when the Sun and the MC are close together
so the two cycles reinforce each other. When the Sun is in the lower
part of the chart, they tend to cancel each other. As in all work with
astrology, it is important to look for repeated messages. Anything
important in the life will be symbolized in the chart in a variety of
ways. CHAPTER EIGHT EXAMPLE CHARTS Humans have studied the relationship between the Earth and the
sky for thousands of years, but there are still many uncertainties
and areas of disagreement in the subject. Humans, life, and
astrology are enormously complex. There are many different
medical systems for diagnosing and treating the physical health:
allopathy, chiropractic, homeopathy, naturopathy, etc. There are
many different schools of psychology which diagnose and treat the
psychological health: operant conditioning, psychoanalysis, cognitive, humanistic, transpersonal. etc. Similarly, there are many
astrological systems. Hopefully, in time we will have systematic
research which will answer some of the questions. It seems logical
that different systems are more helpful in different circumstances
and/or with different people. Psychological insight will obviously
be more helpful to individuals who are willing and able to work on
changing personal habits. Many people will prefer traditional
"good day/bad day" astrology, hoping to manipulate the world
without having to change themselves.
Planets are ranked as prominent or important in a chart when
they have many aspects to other factors and the aspects have tight
orbs, that is. they are nearly exact. There is a wide range of opinion
among astrologers on the issue of orbs. How far can the angular
distance between two planets be from 90 degrees for one to
consider that the planets are still square each other? The only
agreement is that the closer the distance is to 90 degrees, the more
important the square Is thought to be. 114 The Book of Saturn Conjunctions, when the planets are very close to each
other, are the most important of the aspects. Among the most
important conjunctions are the ones between a planet and an
"angle" of the chart such as the Midheaven or the Ascendant. The
section on planetary aspects discussed the source of these angles,
which are the intersections of great circles that have been projected against infinity. The intersections come in pairs which are
opposite each other as we look out at the sky from Earth. The most
important pairs are the Ascendant-Descendant, which are basically the eastern and western horizons at birth, and the MC-IC.
which lie on the circle that goes through the zenith and nadir. The
charts I have chosen as examples are individuals who were born
with Saturn conjunct one of these angles. These are people dealing
with power in the world, with the "rules of the game."
There are many astrological systems which offer information
about one's continuing life after birth. They show the psychological state of the individual, which can produce a variety of life
details depending on personal habits and choices. The most
commonly used system is transits, which calculates the actual
positions of the planets at the time being investigated. Two other
systems which are also widely used in astrology are clearly
symbolic. In Secondary Progressions, the patterns in the sky are
analyzed one day after birth for each year of age. To understand
the psychological state at age 40. one looks at the sky 40 days after
birth. In Solar Arc Directions, the distance the progressed Sun has
moved is added to every factor in the chart. The whole chart is
turned like a wheel with everything moving at a constant speed.
Since the Earth orbits the Sun at a rate of about one degree a day.
from our point of view the transiting Sun is moving about one
degree a day. Since one day equals a year in the Secondary
Progressions, that approximate movement of one degree is the
annual increment added to everything in the chart in Solar Arc
Directions.
These systems of progressions and directions and many more
ways to manipulate the sky are obviously symbolic, and my
personal opinion is that transits are equally symbolic. I think that
we are born where we "fit" the state of the cosmos, and the many
changing patterns picture the natural stages of growth of the
character with which we started. Just as planets and signs and
houses symbolize the same twelve psychological desires/drives. Example Charts so we can "say the same thing" in many ways in the natal chart,
the different systems which let us understand our current life and
look ahead will provide the same basic information in a variety of
ways.
This is a book about Saturn, not a general textbook on
astrology, so if more than this brief explanation is desired, a list
of references is provided in the appendices. The individual discussions which follow will also be brief, with examples from the three
principal systems which help us understand our ongoing lives and
help us handle them more effectively. Since our focus is on Saturn,
we will be looking at events which involved power issues and
changes of marital or career status, part of Saturn's realm.
People can and do change their attitudes and actions in their
personal lives, and when we change our habits we change our
destiny. However, we cannot change anyone else. We can only set
a good example and encourage others. 1 think that the future is
less easy to change when more people are involved, so the major
events which involve masses of people may be largely predestined.
If this is true, one's personal character may have a very small role
in producing the events, but it attracts us where we "fit" to experience the events and learn from them. Human minds do not
produce earthquakes unless we are prepared to grant a lot of
power to the minds of fish, since there are many more earthquakes in the ocean than on land. Human character can lead us
to live where we will experience earthquakes or war or whatever
will bring about growth.
Life seems to be a mixture of fate and free will. The "big" events
may be largely predestined as consequences set in motion in the
past, while at the same time individuals have choices and can act
in unpredictable ways. If this is true, astrology with its predictable
cycles should be able to predict the major events which involve
masses of people. One of the reasons astrologers keep experimenting with new factors, new techniques, new systems, is this feeling
that they might help make more precise predictions. Third Party Candidate John Anderson was born in Rockford. 1L on February 15. 1922
at 8:55 PM CST. Saturn was rising at his birth, within one degree ■(£ 116 The Book of Saturn of his Ascendant but retrograding. That means that In the following days It was appearing against earlier degrees of the
zodiac as it was seen from Earth, so it moved away from the
Ascendant into the twelfth house.
Anderson was an Illinois lawyer elected to the U.S. House of
Representatives as a Republican. Though originally very conservative. he became more uncomfortable with his Party during his
years of government service, and in 1980 he declared himself an
Independent and ran for the Presidency.
The major emphasis in Anderson's chart is in air signs in fire
houses, which are not normally associated with conservatism.
Earth and water are the elements which usually cling to the status 09gB 10 12 05 52 i 14
a 12
n? 46 Júpiter - 04
0
o
12
31
^ '-p 24
VloT"
U 09T 32 12 Saturno 06 ^ 50
nQ9=a u 03 17 10 07 I 07
T
48 ^ 16"
2i
04
K
12 ii 09788H 08 fn. cf
28
K
43 XooV0
\R 03 12 52 05 09 n 10
John Anderson
Source: Birth Certificate
GauqueHn Book of American Charts 12
H
45 Example Charts 1 17 ft quo. But knowing that the planets are the most important factors
in the horoscope, we can note that the water planet Pluto in a
water sign is closely conjunct the MC. which is equivalent to
Saturn. At the same time. Saturn itself and a lunar node (as an
equivalent to the Moon) are conjunct the Ascendant and the East
Point, two keys to one's instinctive identity at the start of life. The
other auxiliary Ascendant, the Antivertex, is conjunct the Moon.
(The chart shows the Vertex at 20 Aries 24: the Antivertex is
directly opposite.) Mars, which is always a key to identity, is in the
water sign ofScorpioand in thenaturalhouse of Taurus for earth.
Thus, in spite of the air signs and fire houses. Anderson's chart
shows an underlying identification with water and earth.
However, we start to grow after an initial emphasis on the first
and the fourth and tenth areas of the chart, the latter two being
the keys to the heredity and family we come into. We tend to
develop toward the fifth, ninth, and eleventh sides of life as we
evolve. With Anderson's stelllum in Aquarius in the fifth house,
including his Sun in the sign, it is not surprising that he moved
away from the focus «n tradition suggested by his dominant Saturn and Pluto on the major angles, and toward more independence.
Anderson declared himself a candidate for the Presidency as
an Independent on April 24. 1980. The Democratic candidate was
Jimmy Carter, with Walter Mondale as Vice Presidential candidate. Ronald Reagan and George Bush were the Republican candidates and they won. Anderson got 7% of the vote in the
November Júpiter , 1980 election.
Transiting (T) Saturn was retrograding in 20 Virgo when
Anderson announced his candidacy. It was trine his Vesta, a good
augury for job success, semisextile the first house Libra group of
Jupiter. Antivertex, and Moon, and it was quincunx Mercury and
Juno in Aquarius. The semisextile is considered weak but potentially harmonious. The quincunx points to changes, either in the
details of what we are doing or by moving into new activities.
If we limited our analysis to T Saturn's aspects to Anderson's
natal chart (and Ignored the historical odds against third party
candidates), we might have thought he had a shot at winning. But
aspects with transiting planets are used with all of the other
systems, applied to progressions and directions as well as to the 118 Rings. Natal
Progressed
Solar Arc Directed tr
S
24
Vv
8 6
S5
03 ?7
1
8
S
» Sol R V n •> 3
as-*1
l* ^ S o sen
[n Mercúrio a r Urano £ ,Be.V
B
V^"'
\i|18 «te 10 Mercúrio tor w mg
11 / John Andtrson
- FeO »&. 1922
Os
7cno Júpiter .00 Sivdam Tir*>#
47Nt6 flBWS Tm^
NATA^CMAm
Jortn A/AW ton
11 ISWTGn S5n Qs
Zrrn 6.00 SteAtart) T fn»
42W8 tf3W5 TrocKal
f^Lywanj to APA 74 i960
John AsnHrrmon
Fwt vS 1922 2Qh bvn 0*
Zone 6 00 Stor«l* Sol T«t«
42<VI6 &9W 5 Trtpot
^Oecieo io Apr 24, iaao
OAs# rng T? Júpiter kl7v2P
Sic™ ]
L Pi™ Netuno 14^ 36 '6
'20» a^ E xff
': /.o 22
/
70 John Anderson
April 24, 1980 ;
6
ri
CO
1 n >0 natal chart. So we note that T Saturn was square to Progressed ( Plutão )
Mars, a suggestion that Anderson's personal will and power (Mars)
were in conflict with the limits of his power. Squares do not
guarantee failure, because the person may get what he wants but
have a hard time dealing with it after he gets it. but in this case it
did foreshadow Anderson's defeat.
T Saturn was also aspecting two progressed asteroids, Plutão Juno
and Plutão Ceres. Both of these asteroids were connected to work and
to joint resources in Anderson's chart. Plutão Juno was in his sixth
(Virgo) house and Ceres is partly Virgo in nature. Juno is
associated with Scorpio and Plutão Ceres was in the sign of Scorpio. It
was also In the second house of personal resources. T Saturn's Example Charts 119^ opposition to Plutão Juno and octile (or semi-square) to Plutão Ceres fit his
inability to get the job he wanted, and the connection to resources
fits the shortage of funds which hampered his campaign.
Progressed aspects when Anderson announced his candidacy
included Plutão MC. which carries the Saturn meaning, square Plutão Vesta,
the asteroid most connected to the actual details of one's job. Plutão Vesta in Gemini in the ninth house speaks of problems in getting
media coverage, which is obviously connected to the lack of funds
to buy ads. Plutão Ascendant in 23 Scorpio was square Mercury and
Juno and octile or trioctile the Ascendant, the Plutão lunar nodes.
Pluto, and the MC. a much stronger statement than the transits
of the odds against Anderson.
Directed (D) Saturn was in Júpiter Sagittarius on the third house
cusp and octile Jupiter and the Antivertex. The third house
repeats the emphasis on media activity which is strongly shown
in both the progressions and the directions by planets occupying
the third house. The current positions of the Plutão and D MCs are the
same, but the D Ascendant is moved at the same speed as the rest
of the chart factors, so it was on the third house cusp with Saturn.
By the time of the election on November Júpiter . 1980,T Saturn had
reached five Libra, so it was approaching a conjunction with natal
Saturn. Anderson's second Saturn Return. The return of Saturn
to its natal place can be a time of very meaningful feedback from
the cosmos telling us how we are doing in handling the "rules of
the game." We will see cases which did not fit Grant Lewi's theory
of Saturn's movement through the houses, but Anderson's life did
follow the script. Since this campaign, he has mostly been off the
political stage. There were, of course, many other aspects in all
three of the systems described above, but our primary interest is
in the way in which Saturn can help us understand how we are
doing in the world. Peanut Farmer and President Jimmy Carter was also defeated in the presidential race in 1980.
He was born in Plains. GA on October 1, 1924 at 7 AM, CST.
Instead of being born with Saturn on the Ascendant, it was on the
East Point, which is actually the Ascendant at the Equator. 120 The Book of Saturn Though it is not as Important as the birthplace Ascendant, the
East Point carries the same meaning, and. when It has close
aspects. It Is quite meaningful. Carter not only was born with
Saturn within one degree of the East Point, but it was also just one
degree from Juno, and the trio were in Scorpio, the sign of Pluto
and Juno. Carter was noted for his close relationship with his wife,
and they have continued to work together in a variety of projects
since he left the presidency.
Carter's identification with power was not only shown by
Saturn in the first house and intensified by being on the East
Point. He also had the Moon, which ruled his Cancer MC. in the
first house, and Venus, which ruled his Libra Ascendant, in the 28S 28
25 54
00 a
22 21
. 23
R
01 47
20 00 / H
33 D / I 44 13
5^
zs
32 24
0
41 11 U 08
7 08 0 12
1 06 00 TL 55
55
01 K
48
13 \ 1 28 23 T 01 24 H 04
47
•V
U
H
20^ 25 38
22 41
26 5?
25
44
28
Jimmy Carter
Source: Birth Certificate
[Loisl Rodden-ISAR Database 28 01 53
00 K 54 26
T
oe DC
T
33 Example Charts 121 ^ tenth house, giving a repeated message. He was also Identified
with Idealism with Pluto, ruler of the Scorpio In the first house,
placed In the ninth house, plus he had the Antivertex, another
auxiliary Ascendant, in Sagittarius conjunct Jupiter, the planetary form of Letter Nine. His life since leaving the presidency has
demonstrated this Idealism combined with the responsibility of
Satum more than almost any president In our history. He founded
an academy devoted to peace, he has worked as an arbitrator
repeatedly to try to reconcile warring groups In many countries,
he Is Involved with supporting the Atlanta Project which strives to
provide positive options for people on welfare and at risk for drug
use. and he has been actively Involved In Habitat for Humanity
which builds homes for poor people.
T.*)
1641 Rings Natal
Progressed
Solar Arc reeled 28 a M Lua Lua i3o
lies ft
Kr
Jimmy
On
Ocl 1.
Zor*
Stsnca*) Tif*
3ZN
NATAl. CHART
Oct 'SB*
larm
Standard
3?^ 34*73
fCV 97*
Jimmy
Od
cam 6 00 SnarcUrd Trm
37H B4W23
1976
Ol*b Jimmy Carter
November 2, 1976 10° »T
23 T • 7R Natal Mean Nodes Sol 20130
13 20=30 122 The Book of Saturn Carter won the presidency in November 1976 with T Saturn in
16 Leo conjunct his progressed North Node in the 10th house, trine his natal Jupiter and progressed Mercury, quincunx progressed Mars and progressed Uranus, and opposite the progressed South Node. The conflict aspects did not deny the victory
but foreshadowed problems in the office. The tenth house placement of transiting Saturn was appropriate for executive power.
The trines between planets in fire signs were appropriate for
success in getting what Carter wanted, while the opposition to the
Node in the fourth house (and quincunx to Mars, which was
originally in the fourth house) fit his separation from his home to
go to Washington D.C. for his new career. Plutão Saturn in 1976 was in 8 Scorpio, holding a semisextile to the
Sun which lasted for years. Such long-term progressed aspects
are important keys to basic character. The Saturn-Sun semisextile
shows Carter's ability to handle constructively the personal power
drive symbolized by the Sun and the rules of the world which are
alwaysbigger than any individual. By the time he was inaugurated
on January 20, 1977. Carter's Plutão Moon had reached a conjunction
with his Sun and a semisextile to Plutão Saturn to signal his move to
a position of fame and power. Plutão MC was conjunct Mercury for both
events, and its quincunx to the (mean or average) South lunar
Node (at 20° Aquarius) and Vesta was appropriate for his change
of residence and work. Plutão Ascendant in 8 Sagittarius was sextile the
Sun and semisextile Saturn to reinforce the potential for increased power. Many other aspects could be mentioned, but our
focus is on Saturn and its surrogate, the MC.
D Saturn for Carter's election was in 23 Sagittarius trine his
tenth house Venus and Chiron in his sixth house, a very positive
configuration for success in work with fire signs (personaraeslre)
in earth houses (coping with the physical world). . When he lost the election in November 1980. T Saturn wasTn
5 Libra holding octlle-trloctlle aspects to the (mean) lunar nodes
and Vesta. Plutão Saturn had moved only a few minutes, but Plutão MC had
moved into an octile to it along with a square to Plutão Jupiter. D Saturn
was in 28 Sagittarius octile the Moon. Example Charts 123 ^ United We Stand
H. Ross Perot has been in the news In recent years as he attacked
the two primary polltlcaJ parties In the U.S. and tried to found a
third party. Perot was born on June 27, 1930 at 5:34 AM CST In
Texarkana. TX. Saturn was setting at his birth, within one degree
of his Descendant and retrograding Into his sixth house. In
addition to the Ascendant, Saturn opposed the Sun and Jupiter
In Cancer In Perot's twelfth house. The Moon, Pluto, and Ceres
were also in Cancer but In the first house while Mercury, Pallas,
and the East Point were In Gemini In the twelfth house.
The combination shows a strong Identification with the role of
parent, which Is repeated by the presence of Aries in the tenth
house. An Identification with Idealism Is Indicated by the Sun 23K 48
o
- a \
/i
oo\
06
H
09 cf 17
d.
1/ o
38
0^2
52 09 / 5 18
'E^41f"23
,
w 46
C0
S07
O05S05 47 D I7S 46 .6
T
08 24
59 10 04
16
09
^ 08 Áries ? 51 q E 1B® 36S
2
ft
17 n 09 ^
V* 50
V
27A1
01 \
\ / a.
24, xse np _ 23 TP 48
H. Ross Perot
Source; Birth Certificate
GauqueUn Book of American Charts 25
n.
06 U
00
fn.
38 K
49 28 06
09 47 •{£ 124 The Book of Saturn which rules the bit of Leo In the first house being In the twelfth
house and on Jupiter, and by Mars closely conjunct Chiron, which
Is like Jupiter. Perot may have good Intentions similar to those
demonstrated by Jimmy Carter, but I am less confident that his
desire to be parent and god of our country will always be handled
as wisely. His squares and oppositions In both cardinal and fixed
signs and houses show a strong power-struggle nature. So far,
this seems to have been mostly constructively handled In his
competitive business and In politics, but handling power wisely
remains a lesson for him.
When Perot ran for the U.S. presidency In November 1992, T
Saturn was In 12 Aquarius sextlle his local MC In Washington
D.C.. the power center which was the goal of his effort. It was also
widely sextlle his tenth house Uranus, opposite Venus, and .49 J} H 48 1*8 Washineion
MC 12T18
ASC27S<M Rings; Natal
Progressed
Directed 03
T
56 06,
09/ 0,
30
M 18
?3
0 54
30 q 14, 08 'cfOO Sa 14 09
S
47
]?€5 04
>72234 11* i3S 1'
83 19
•jfl
> 14$ C1
PI 'lb' -il
O.-Ctl
SI'S1'
50 T. Saturno \2~
101 6 oil 15
0\ T
OS
04 ' nou ' 59 .13 n V
i^ H
\T T
49 6/f\ 08* :
1^
I 00 Oil 48 Lua 21^ 46^
u, i il V4 02
■03* 21B 09 Lua Uno* 20 38
40
'OS
ov 04
r H. Ross Perot
November 1992 tyf 09
32 Example Charts 125 ft quincunx the Ascendant. The latter two aspects can indicate a
separation from one's goal, though Perot did better than most third party candidates In our history.
On the positive side, Perot's Plutão Sun was trine his Plutão Saturn and
sextile natal Sun. Plutão MC was sextile natal MC at the same time,
since It progresses the same distance as the Plutão Sun. Plutão Moon In
8 Scorpio was sextile Saturn and PMars was conjunct Jupiter, so
Perot was feeling considerable confidence in his ability to get what
he wanted. However, other progressed aspects showed a mixed
bag, with enough conflict patterns to show that success would be
difficult. Some of the squares included Plutão East Point square Mars
and Plutão Chiron and Plutão Venus square Plutão Pluto, and Plutão MC was trioctile
Saturn.
Perot's D Saturn at the time was In 8 Pisces, sextile its natal
position and just starting a trine to the Ascendant as well as a
quincunx to Venus. However, there Is a cautionary note to
remember when working with current patterns. Unless the Individual has changed, the current aspects show the timing of an
Issue in the life but the natal aspects show the way the person will
tend to handle the Issue. Plutão Saturn was natally opposite the
Ascendant, so. despite a current trine, the nature of the opposition. the hazard of problems with power, was still potentially
present in Perot's nature.
Perot is currently spending some of his billions to found a third
political party, and he may well run for president again in the fall
of 1996 before this book is in print. T Saturn at that time will be
in 1 Aries square his Jupiter, quincunx Neptune and the south
lunar node to form a double quincunx or yod, and It will also be
octile Mars and Chiron. This Is not an encouraging combination
of aspects for success. The yod Is often an indication of a major
new direction in an individual's life. While this could conceivably
point to Perot being elected to a political office for the first time, the
odds are against It. Plutão Sun will trine natal Saturn in the fall of 1996 instead of Plutão Saturn as in 1992. and Plutão Moon will be sextile-trlne Its own nodes,
but the rest of the picture Is more conflicted. Plutão Ascendant on
Neptune shows the danger of seeing one's hopes rather than what
Is really there. Plutão Venus will be on the south lunar node, signaling
a lesson. Plutão Mercury will square the Sun, suggesting problems with 126 The Book of Saturn the media and Perot's reputation. Plutão MC will square Vesta, showing
conflict involving two keys to work, though it is also sextile Pallas,
our political asteroid.
D Saturn is in 12 Pisces, so it is semisextile Perot's MC
calculated for Washington D.C. but trioctile his local Ascendant
there. His odds are not good for winning the gold ring in 1996. Alphonse D'Amato
Another person who is very much in the limelight as this book is
being written in the spring of 1996 has spent his life in government
work. A1 D'Amato was born on August 1. 1937 at 10:15 AM EDT
in Brooklyn, NY. He earned his law degree in 1961, passed the New
York Bar exam in 1962. and has worked for the government in 29 H 37 cn;
CO
10 26 03 u
28 26
13
02 Gêmeos n
K
I
^8234?
60 28
o
08 en:
zs> Júpiter H 37
25
53
01 il 08
n?
06 03
TP
3b 0 05 13
33 25
T
42 0 V
29
M?
40 /1/ro?16
Ep 29 ftp 33 I?
lu ^ 04T56R
Uc 29 H 05 C8
25 25 18
42 o
66 n
13
K
>8
53
26
42
fn.
05 Alphonse D'Amato ^
^ 1820w
3!
16
33
10
03
29x^37
, Source: [Lois] Rodden-ISAR Database
quotes mother - 29
H
40 03
H
35 127 some capacity ever since. He was elected to the U.S. Senate as a
Republican In November 1980 and reelected twice since then. He
Is currently head of the committee which Is Investigating the
Clintons' Involvement In Whitewater and Arkansas Savings and
Loans.
Like Perot. D'Amato was born with Saturn conjunct his
Descendant and retrograde, but In D'Amato s case It was farther
Into the seventh house so it has not yet progressed back to the
Descendant. When he was first elected to the Senate and moved
beyond work at the state level, T Saturn was In 5 Libra opposite
Its natal position. This aspect fits the astrological theory of
planetary cycles, which describes the conjunction (In this case a
Saturn return) as a new beginning, the first square as a turning
point. the opposition as the start of a fulfillment phase for the area
Rings: Natal
Progressed
Directed ?9ir37 03 0,OS 25
26 aV 40
45 as 49 00 41 42 35
as
49 020 >5, A 08 T [>/ C ^Orp 20
40
T.'i trn
08
50 L U''
18^
26?a
n. 04
36 V 0?T 35 >j
02 Plutão 47 ^H03 29
\ 00 45 25
OS 26 ■ Júpiter 2 Alphonsc D'Amato
November 1980 78^17 03 128 The Book of Saturn of life symbolized by the planet, and the last square as the start of
completing the activity of the cycle preparing for a new beginning
at the next conjunction. In the case of Saturn, each of these
quarters of the 28 year cycle would be about seven years.
D'Amato's entry into national prominence in 1980does not fit
the Grant Lewi theory that we go into a period of obscurity when
Saturn crosses the Ascendant going into the first house of the
chart. Obviously, we always have to look at the whole chart, and
in the end. the details depend on the person. In DAmato's case,
as in many others I have seen. Saturn in the first house marked
a time of attaining personal power in the world.
DAmato also had aspects from two of his progressed angles to
Saturn when he won his election to the Senate. Plutão Ascendant was
quincunx Saturn and Plutão East Point started a trioctile to Plutão Saturn
in early 1981. Neither aspect is considered easily harmonious, but
DAmato had some aspects for harmony, including Plutão MC sextlletrine the lunar nodes and Plutão Moon trine Mercury.
D Saturn was in late 16 Taurus, forming a grand trine to Neptune and (almost to) Pallas, a strong suggestion of success. Bogey and Bacall The power Issues of Saturn can be lived out in arenas other than
politics. Lauren Bacall was born on September 16. 1924 at 3 AM
EDT in New York City. She was a successful actress in a Broadway
play in 1942 and a hit in Hollywood in 1944. where she starred
with Humphrey Bogart. She married her co-star on May 21. 1945
and they had a happy marriage until he died of cancer in 1957. As
we would suspect from the fire and fixed emphasis in her chart.
Bacall was a strong-minded and very dramatic lady. Though she
made many films, her tenth house Aries and Saturn opposite the
MC were manifested in frequent power struggles with her bosses
at Warner Brothers in Hollywood. In fact, she was suspended
twelve times and finally bought out her contract from the studio
in 1950. Her greatest successes in her later years were on
Broadway, where she received a Tony award in 1970.
Saturn was widely conjunct Juno, the marriage asteroid,
when Bacall was born, and Plutão Juno was on Plutão Saturn when she met. 129 starred with, and married Humphrey Bogart. The Juno connection to Saturn points to some kind of lesson involving relationships. which could have called for learning to share power and
pleasure or for working out an obvious "freedom-closeness dilemma" which is shown by the oppositions in Leo-Aquarius and
both the signs and houses of Aries-Libra. Hindsight, in light of
Bogey's death after only twelve years of marriage, we can see that
the latter was a primary issue. Saturn is often found in either
water signs and/or houses, especially Letter Eight, when we are
learning "when is enough" and how to let go. Water and earth tend
to hold on while fire and air tend to move on. One potential of the
"freedom-closeness" dilemma is the choice of a mate who will
leave, whether voluntarily with conscious awareness or through
death under the control of the subconscious. Obviously, no one
chooses such a mate consciously. At the time of Bacall's marriage. e 22 27 T 56 04
26 10 29 23
0 T T
080 09
to
28 19
H 10 13 a: 23
56 00
\TP v 07 S\ 16 00
H
29 07 a 34
cf 25 22 39
U
09
± 22 & 24 dtr
to 03
09
A
36 H 04 12 09
36 20 Netuno 21 n 39
22u{
a
14
n? Sol 17 23
ny
07
26 iT7 04 Vx Saturno . Saturno 25 00
56 07
x*
26 fn.
15 27 ^ 56
Lauren Bacall
Source; Profiles of Women and
R.l.D. Autobiography and quote from her 09 26 22
K 04 28 ^ 130 The Book of Saturn
27 T M
».^13
,
0
0« «"
o
0 26".sr
75
M
Ifl
o Th
8$ 13-i 33 6 3 D 42 ,3 S\
24 E ? Júpiter %-* M
19 7 i>i« U 130 16 1,2©
ti}' 140 21 14V
C 34 . 2J7 53,
V9 2Lfl
.A ?" * Mercúrio T
40
7
O
34
R
7
10
o
oe
R
10 I
22
T
47
R ^26 ,
t
?a
M
13 , r
H
36 Mercúrio is
M ir^
»57H H12#
26 if
M
23 (nr*f nog
M43
Uumn Stfc^/
Sep 16,19? Júpiter 3rt Dm OS
7
l5
Zone 5 00
Tim*
3«'
Mvas n tlo**
40M4? 74W0 Tropes
a»
NATAL CHART
L*ur9n BscsJl
Sep 16,1924 Dm 04
Zone 5 00 Sol »| Júpiter «^ Júpiter Tim*
40N42 74W o Tippcel
310 MAY 21 1945
> t a as
Leurvn Sece//
Sep 16. 1924 Ti 0m 09
ZOA* 5 X Oeylerv Time
40N42 74W 0 TfDpctf
^pirecled to May 21.1945^
15OUer nng
'37
, ^
^ Júpiter U 07 0
tt »s'M 07/
IS
* .
37j\ Plutão •»
57 ?6^ i
.' Mercúrio I?
33
V
*
as ©
13
o
13
a
25 v»
? 2 Lua Lua X**
f^ Lua i.
13 15 Lauren Bacall
May 21. 1945 Plutão Moon In early Aquarius was square N Saturn to repeat the Issue
of holding on versus moving on.
Other Saturn aspects at Bacall's marriage Included Solar Arc
Saturn In 20 Scorpio 33 square her mean lunar nodes, pointing
to the freedom-closeness Issue. Both the sign and house polarities
of her nodes call for resolution of the Inherent tension between the
urges for freedom versus closeness. T Saturn was In 8 Cancer 35
on the twelfth house cusp, suggesting that her subconscious faith
was highly Important. As the Gauquelln research demonstrated,
twelfth house planets are often keys to highly successful Individuals. My Interpretation Is that a positive subconscious faith leads Example Charts 131 to success, while a lack of faith invites anxiety, depression, and a
variety of problems. T Saturn also was trine Pallas in the eighth
house, which is part of the partnership area, but it formed octiles
or trioctiles to the Leo-Aquarius polarity to add to the theme given
by the other systems. No matter how we manipulate the sky. it
keeps giving us the same information. Pushing the Limits Janis Joplin was another star in the entertainment world who was
born with Saturn opposite the MC, the cusp of its own natural
house. Joplin was born on January 19. 1943 at Mercúrio :45 AM CWT in
Port Arthur, TX. Like Lauren Bacall, Joplin resisted the "establishment." but she was far more rebellious than Bacall. Joplin's
chart is dominated by Aquarius, with Mercury, Venus. Ascendant, south lunar node, and Pallas in the sign and Uranus, its
ruler, conjunct Saturn. The emphasis on Letter Eleven shows that
it is a major component of her nature, but Saturn's conjunction
with Uranus shows that it remains a lesson. In such cases, the
challenge is often the danger of excesses.
Joplin was also strongly Piscean, with the Sun, Mercury, and
Venus in the twelfth house and Vesta plus the two auxiliary
Ascendants, the East Point and Antivertex, in the sign of Pisces in
her first house. The primary urge of Letter Eleven is to go beyond
any limits, while Letter Ten reminds us that there are limits if we
want to survive in this physical world. The conjunction of Saturn
with Uranus and the placement of Capricorn in the natural house
of Uranus repeat the need to integrate these two very different
drives. We do this by voluntarily accepting the necessary limits,
and then we can do what we please.
Joplin did not accept any limits. Though she had her Sun in
Capricorn and Mars in the natural house of Capricorn, the nature
of the planets is always paramount and these two planets of selfwill were expressed as "my will is law" (the one-ten and five-ten
combinations) and as "my will is god" (the one-nine and five-twelve
combinations). Once you have a clear understanding of the twelve
primary drives of astrology, the subject is quite logical. You
understand what is driving the person, though you do not know 132 The Book of Saturn 35
00
24 07 O"
24
00 06
48
00 bo
o 28 25
33 np 02 40
09
29
14
02
U 25
08
37
28
K 31
Ep 03
13
09 H
02 T 14 rrp
12 28 A
a 25 A 08
06 13
000 07
T
06 Gêmeos 1
44 53
10 0 50 25
-U
33 a 16 19en:
CP
05
08
OC
49
00 zp Janis Joplin
Source: Birth Certificate
Profiles of Women 46 24
C9
56 35 07 Jl 15 how the person will handle those desires, and it is always possible
to change the ways we are trying to satisfy the desires and
consequently to change the details of our lives. Joplin's first house
Aquarius showed she identified with the rejection of any limits.
Her Pisces search for infinite love and beauty was expressed
positively through her musical talent and destructively through
drugs. Joplin died of a heroin overdose on October 3. 1970 in
Hollywood. CA. She had said "Man. I'd rather have ten years of
superhypermost than live to be seventy sitting in some GD chair
watching TV."
The defiance of any practical limits is clear in both Joplin's
natal chart and in her progressed aspects when she died. As has
often been mentioned, the south lunar node points initially to an
area of life where we have something to learn, and then, after we
have learned whatever it is. something to give the world. Joplin Example Charts 133 ft had her Plutão mean south node conjunct her Ascendant for her whole
short life, and her Plutão Sun was going over it for the last two plus years
of her life. The Sun symbolizes our growth potential. Maybe her
early departure taught Joplin something. Her Plutão nodes stayed sextile-trine her Mars for most of her life, encouraging her feeling
that she had the right and the power to do what she pleased. She
also had several aspects for shorter periods of time which added
to the overconfidence that led to her excesses. Remember, harmony aspects show inner harmony between our different desires.
They show that we know what we want and think we should have
it. If what we want is not realistically possible, as will be shown by
other conflict aspects, usually to earth planets, houses, or signs,
we may keep over-reaching and hitting walls.
Joplin's progressed chart included three grand trines. among
the strongest statements provided in astrology of the feelings that
we should be able to do what we want. Her Plutão East Point was in a
grand trine to her MC and Pluto. In this case, the fire signs
outweighed the earth houses. An air grand trine included Plutão Uranus to Plutão Mercury and Plutão Neptune. A water grand trine linked Plutão Moon, the natal Antivertex . and the local MC in Hollywood. Plutão Moon was also trine Plutão eighth house cusp, which had been crossing
the local MC for the preceding two years while Joplin was
increasing her drug habit.
Karma arrived on October 3, 1970. as indicated above. Plutão MC
was in Saturn's sign with a quincunx to Saturn and to Plutão Pluto a yod which often signals major change and new directions in the
life. She had failed to accept the physical limits symbolized by
Saturn and to learn the Pluto lesson of moderation, mastery of the
appetites, and "when is enough." But Uranus was the star in
Joplin's flight from the limits of the physical world. In addition to
the grand trine mentioned above, Joplin's Plutão local Ascendant in 0
Pisces 7 was square Uranus. Plutão Jupiter was octile it and Plutão Mars was
trioctile. Plus. Joplin's local Plutão Part of Death had been conjunct
Uranus for nearly two months. It is pretty clear that she wanted
out.
The other forms of Saturn were less dramatic, though T
Saturn, which was retrograding just under 22 Taurus, was within
two degrees of Joplin's natal Part of Death in 23 Taurus. (Though
progressions and arcs of direction are limited to one-degree orbs. 134 The Book of Saturn for transits to provide appropriate information, it is often necessary to stretch the orbs to two or three degrees.) The Arabic Part
of Death is derived by adding the Ascendant to the eighth house
cusp and subtracting the Moon. It can be calculated for both natal
and progressed positions. Of course, it can point to many types of
"endings," not just physical death. Also, since astrology pictures
one's state of mind, many aspects will be functioning on the
mental-emotional level without any expression in events. Hollywood
Progressions:
MC; 11^36
ASC: 00X07
EP: 08H2h
XX:
16X46
tt*; 13=2=35 Rings; Natal
Progressed
Directed 07^15
DO n JV 50 35.
00 M
05 "28 25
8 33 O? ~
! ST M35
M08
O 12
M 12 21 24
K/rf
22
56
49 07 06 71
f 05
'd 09 n
15 Vt 21 Áries 56
01
00 _
"28 24
00 •a»_ W Mercúrio . Júpiter , U24
1028 3S4«
§07 ><35 H3' 37
1®iH
7/02
H
.22 jm: w54
_vro/OI
23 i/39
n
vU' 23 M 43 vtP/T
7? T
7 Urano 28
.26 V
01
07 V i T
T
06
00 43 N 38
-34rI
V'
00
i
i,«46
^ Mercúrio V* 14 n
^\
U2fl Jin B
ii25/\og j U24A59
v6 A
3 4J
16,
■ 35 A
IvA
39 i
.DO.
04 "r
fOOOSl
'43
n it
■16_
44 S3 1
D M5
13 r? F
i i
"54
00051
I l\
36 *1 19
10
Janis Joplin
October 3, 1970 v86 52 07 115
TA 21055 R Plutão . Part of Death 29048 17
iV"
23W
fi B04 ^22
25
A
33 ^'7 All
>06 a.
55 So
76
03
2Sn 59
I\N
50
.35
■^o; Example Charts 135 ft Joplin's Solar Arc Saturn was Just coming to four Cancer and
quite unimpressive with just a trine to the East Point, though we
could find other aspects if we looked to midpoints, planetary
nodes, Arabic Parts, etc. Arc Saturn had spent two years passing
over what I call the Arabic Part of Saturn (Ascendant plus Saturn
minus the Sun), and the aspect had ended Just over two months
before Joplin's death. We could interpret that aspect as a call to
recognize the Saturn limits which are necessary If we want to stay
here. As already indicated, it Is pretty clear that Joplin did not
want to do that. Helping Humanity Rosalynn Carter's original claim to fame was as the wife of U.S.
President Jimmy Carter, but she earned recognition for her
personal ability through her work for the mentally ill and as an
author both of her own books and of a book written Jointly with her
husband. Carter was born on August 18. 1927 at 6 AM CST in
Plains. Georgia. Her chart shows intense idealism, with four
factors in Leo in the twelfth house, including Mercury which rules
the Ascendant, two more factors in the ninth house including
Chiron closely conjunct her Moon, and Saturn. Ceres, and the
south lunar node in Sagittarius. But Carter also is very identified
with earth with her Ascendant. Mars, and Venus all in Virgo in the
first house.
Her life demonstrates a successful blend of the earth practicality and the idealism of Letters Nine and Twelve. Her inherent
talent for this integration is shown repeatedly in her chart. Chiron
is similar to Jupiter, so its placement in the ninth house reinforces
the idealism. But it is in the practical sign of Taurus and closely
conjunct the Moon, which symbolizes our need for emotional
security and/or our capacity to help to provide it for others. Where
security is at stake, we tend to be more cautious. Additionally,
Chiron and the Moon are closely trine the Virgo Ascendant. In fact, Plutão Chiron held the trine within one degree from her birth to Carter's
taking on the role of First Lady when her husband was elected U.S.
President. 136 The Book of Saturn 03 H 07
A
07 05
rr
38 27 01 Z9 06 n
26
H
06 16
cn;
SID
27
CC:
r.o
19 09
A SO
:
'24
A 32
V
38
c? 29 A 20 07
06
0
£5
04
04
10 0 05 02
T 02
48 T
31 01
T
21 12 05
H
38 12
o isw
55
24 (TP 01
V*
21 TIL 05 Saturno 15
1701 08
ITL
K
15
45 09 43 U
26 19 Áries ? 06 07
35
08 06 03 yf 29
Rosalyn Carter
Source: Printed in Dell Horoscope
"from her mother"
Profiles of Women
Carter also had Saturn, our primary earth planet, iijJthe
Jupiter sign of Sagittarius, and It was trine Jupiter and Uranus In
Arlesfor many years In her early life, while Plutão U ranus Is still holding
atrlne to Saturn. These aspectsshowCarter'sablllty to harmonize
her Aries personal will and power with her Idealism In "lawful"
(realistically possible) Saturn ways. The potential for Integration
does not mean that It was achieved without challenges and effort.
Satum Is opposite the MC. trloctlle Pluto, and widely square the
Ascendant. When Carter became First Lady, Plutão Saturn had held an
exact opposition to the MC for years and Plutão Antlvertex and Plutão Pallas,
(our most political asteroid) were conjunct N Saturn. Plutão Saturn was
also quincunx Plutão Chiron while Plutão Mercury (her Ascendant ruler) was
opposite Plutão Chiron, as she had to face the reality that she did not
have the personal power to completely realize all of her Ideals. Example Charts 137 Solar Arc Saturn at the time was In 19 Capricorn 3 conjunct
Carter's Vertex (which Is like an auxiliary Descendant) and
trloctlle her MC. In Washington, she had to confront a power
system and powerful Individuals. T Saturn was In 16 Leo conjunct
her local (Washington D.C.) Antivertex and semlsextlle natal Mars
while sextlle progressed Mars, both suggesting an Increase In her
personal power, but It was alsosquare Pallas and Vesta and widely
opposite her Plutão Moon for the difficulties she would face In her
attempts to work for political Justice for the public and especially
for the mentally handicapped. In Carter's natal chart. Pallas, as
a key to social Justice, on Vesta, a key to one's Job. plus Saturn,
a key to career In the larger sense, were all In the third house,
pointing to her concern for educational opportunities for every- T7
I6ii
291) O24
26r «» roe* mg
Romalynn Can
Augg 18. 1927 eh On
« 6 00
32NU2 &AW23 T *5icpca
NATAL CHAfTT
Roasfynn Car**
Aog id. 1927 Mercúrio ) On Cb
Zcn« 6.00 SwttvC Trro
32N2 6iVV23 TtCCA Plutão 'og'wssd to MOV 2 1976
Roaarynn Cartes
ifl 1927 Mercúrio * On OS
Zero 6 00 Sandflro T*n#
32N2 6«vw23 Ttvpc*
OtodM lo Nd® ? 1976
5.7 Saturno *
j- t Rosalyn Carter
November 2. 1976 3 / ^ 7 p 138 one. Since leaving Washington, both Jimmy and Rosalynn Carter
have dedicated their lives to promoting peace in the world, and
they have also worked for Habitat for Humanity, not Just fundraising, but literally helping to build houses for low-income people
who would otherwise have remained in very substandard home
conditions. Equal Rights Illustrating another variation on how individuals can handle a
natal Saturn opposite the MC, Gloria Steinem expressed her
Aquarian Saturn in a writing career devoted to supporting equal
rights and freedom for women. Despite her Scorpio Ascendant,
which usually indicates an inner conflict between the freedom
drive of the first house and the Scorpio desire for a mate. Steinem
was definitely tilted toward freedom. Pluto, her Ascendant ruler,
was in the ninth house, adding to the freedom drive and to the
conflict over closeness with its placement in Cancer. Mars, coruler of her Ascendant, was conjunct the Sun in Aries to repeat the
issue. The Sun and its house show where we want love or at least
admiration, while Aries says "on my terms."
Steinem was born on March 25, 1934at 10 PM EST in Toledo,
Ohio. In her case. Saturn in Aquarius became a remote father who
left the family when Steinem was twelve years old. Her Plutão MC at the
time was quincunx her Aries Sun. Character (habits) create
destiny. When we want independence more than dependence, the
universe is likely to say "OK" and give it to us. In high school.
Steinem was able to leave a home in the Toledo slums and live with
an older sister. Her strong Aquarius, including Jupiter in the
eleventh house, and additional emphasis in the third, sixth, and
ninth houses, plus her Antivertex in Sagittarius, all point to high
level intelligence. Steinem graduated from Smith College magna
cum laude and received two years of graduate training in India
afterwards. She started her career as a writer in New York in 1960.
Steinem has been a leader in many civil rights organizations
and campaigns over the years and has received many awards for
her public work. She was a co-founder of MS Magazine in July
1972. and one of thirty-three well-known women who signed an
ad in the magazine in 1973 announcing that they had had Example diarts 139 ^ 21 24 IF 31 Júpiter 21 X, 00 V
10
If
23 u
16 07
SI A
23 55 26
IF
31 CO
22
(57:
CP
33 11
I
19 23
49 20
02 12
K
25 46 1
DO n 07 12
07 0 37
Ep 26 K 3/ x*
39 26 T 05
04
15 46
Gloria Steinem
Source: Birth Certificate
Gauquelin Book of American Charts a9
08
820 24
H
23
28 35 02 05
0"
09
o
04 T 05
29 T
H 46
00
24 H 31 21 2: 57 abortions. Steinem's progressed chart when she took on the Job as
editor of the new magazine pointed to her new public role with Plutão Sun crossing the Descendant. Plutão MC opposed Pallas, the asteroid
of politics and social Justice, and Plutão East Point squared Pallas as
the new magazine became a bellweather in the women's liberation
movement. Plutão Pallas was quincunx her Ascendant for this new
public activity. It was also octile Plutão Saturn, while the latter had
been quincunx Vesta for years as Steinem explored a variety of
Jobs in her quest to improve the world.
Solar Arc Saturn was in the first degree of Aries for this shift
in her career, and it had an octile-trioctlle to the lunar nodes in the
houses of the mind and writing. T Saturn in the middle of Gemini
was sextile-trine the nodes. The placement of the nodal axis in the
Gemini-Sagittarius houses and the Leo-Aquarius signs is classic
for perpetual students and natural teachers and writers. Steinem
has certainly used her talents. ■(£ 140 The Book of Satum «" o
Mn ?S*
•» s2S
X
/ \ 20
M
"»
\ I5A
0 ;
IB ,
^ 0
28 55 R a23
6/orfj SlWn^n
2S. 934 22fi On
2ooe
Tune
MW33 TfCpCM
NATA4 ■HART
Gtoria St&rmm
U>r? Lua 1934 ??»> On Qs
zone SOOSlandanl Time
41K» 8JW33 TnpcH
fMa^esad to JUL 15 197-2
GJori* Stmfnmm
934 22f Om
Mur
zone 00 Stonoarj Tirm
sag B3W33 Tfupcei
O reeled
1972
OUe# nng ?6" «F U9
1820
C!«
2B B rfieo
O 12 O M
cf a ooi 12 D D *26
• 29 Mercúrio 29 TT05
H 46
r ^28 T
2* M 33 Gloria Steinem 21 S V July 15. 1972 Life as Theater
Shifting to two examples of women with Saturn conjunct the
Descendant. I chose one whose Plutão Saturn retrograded back to stay
in the sixth house and one whose Plutão Saturn crossed into the
seventh house.
Ethel Barrymore was born on August 15. 1879 at 10:00 AM
LMT in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania. Her famous theatrical family
traced their roots In the theater back for nine generations. At the
age of 13. Barrymore and her two brothers. Lionel and John, put
on a performance of Camllle in a local barn. She had already had Example Charts 141 ^ a real stage role at age twelve with her Plutão MC sextlle Venus. The
twelfth house Venus in Libra combines the major keys to artistic
talent: Venus and its signs for pleasure in the "ordinary" world and
Letter Twelve for the quest for infinite pleasure and beauty.
Barrymore made her first movie in 1900 and was a star in the
theater by 1906. She was still a star at age sixty-five when she won
an Oscar as best supporting actress in None but the Lonely 'Jeart
March 15, 1945 in Hollywood.
Barrymore's chart when she won the Oscar Is a good illustration of the Importance of local houses, which are calculated for a
current residence or the location of an event. Both natal and
progressed house cusps can provide useful information with the
local chart calculated as if the person was bom in the new area. 21 S53
08 I -5 u *
25
V
24 24 20
o
CP
22>
A tUiii Júpiter 03
\22
oeft?
A 2. Júpiter tip
26 Mercúrio 02 20
I
28 "tAs9 \ 16
0
» ,7*\ 23
24 «
27 55
1 52 48 V 12 0 05
A Fp25 H- 47 U
24
n
41 17
48 21 ^ 53
Ethel Barrymore
Source: C. C. Zaln
Profiles of Women 08
25 T
52 24
H
26 09
H K
23 T 30 ^ 142 The Book of Saturn In Hollywood, the site of the Oscar ceremony, several of
Banymore's angles were aspectlng Saturn. Plutão Saturn held a long
sextlle to her MC there while her Plutão MC was on Plutão Ceres and trine
N Saturn. Her Plutão Ascendant was quincunx Plutão Saturn and her natal
local MC, trine Jupiter, and opposite Neptune and Plutão Chiron. This
produced a dramatic network of aspects. The yod from Barrymore's
local Plutão Ascendant to the natal MC (equivalent to Saturn) and Plutão Saturn connected personal action to career changes, while her
local Plutão Ascendant was also in aspect to all three planetary keys to
ultimate values: Jupiter. Neptune, and Chiron. The configuration
fits the realization of long-range goals. T Saturn was In early r. Saturno 8S Rings; Natal
Progressed
Directed Gêmeos 359 03 09 Netuno 39 3« 17 03 09
03 OS
n
26
20 zj> 34 16
24 zs 27 w 30 2^58 T
53 04 T Of
T
33 20
I4a« 32 28 *0
25 • 2 Júpiter 't'07 n73S 30 23 npoi
24
28 hp 46
36
29 hp 5S T "ti
T 48 as 55 02 n28 35
02 09
24
38 53
o C9 27 33
26 Sol 76 07
53 09 JO
nu 29 05
K
48 £6
nu
58 00
03 Et
K
37 K 07
00 Ethel Barrymore
Mar 15, 1945
Relocated to Hollywood. CA " **59 28 34 Example Charts 143 ft Cancer trine Barrymore's Plutão Jupiter and sextile her early Virgo
planets. Solar Arc Saturn was conjunct Pallas and trine her natal
Ascendant.
Barrymore was married long enough to have three children, as
we would expect with her Sun in Leo and her Cancer stellium.
which included the Moon in its own sign, one of its nodes, Ceres,
an asteroid associated with mothering, and Juno, the marriage
asteroid. But though her family was highly important to her, her
work was the center of her life with her loaded tenth house and her
sixth house Saturn, and she left her husband in 1923. Psychologists have recognized the period of the mid-forties as a typical time
for a mid-life crisis, when many people become dissatisfied with
their lives and make major changes. Around the age of forty-five,
the Plutão Sun is octile the natal Sun and. for those who progress the
MC by the solar arc, the distance moved by the Plutão Sun, the Plutão MC
will octile the natal MC during the same two-year interval. Solar
Arc Directions move every factor in the chart the same distance as
the Plutão Sun, so in this system, every factor (planets, angles, nodes,
etc.) is octile its natal position for two years around the age of fortyfive. Many people at this age are asking "Is this all there is?" Beauty in Motion Margot Fonteyn was also a star in the entertainment world. Like
Barrymore, she started young and continued to perform into the
years when most people have retired to the sidelines. Fonteyn was
born on May 18, 1919 at 2:15 AM UT in Reigate, England.
She started dancing at age four, studied at the famous Sadler
Wells Ballet school at age fourteen, and was a professional dancer
a year later. By 1940. she was the prima ballerina, and in 1956,
she was given the Order of the British Empire, which made her a
part of the minor nobility with the title of Dame. Through the
1970s. Fonteyn was featured in a BBC series, appeared in films,
wrote two books, and received awards from several countries. Her
meeting in 1962 with Rudolph Nureyev, a ballet star from Russia,
led to what amounted to a second career as his dancing partner.
Fonteyn had met her future husband at Cambridge in 1936,
and almost twenty years later they met again when he was the ^ 144 The Book of Saturn Panamanian Ambassador to England. This time, the relationship
led to marriage in 1955. Fonteyn's husband. Roberto Arias, was
shot in June 1964 in a political fracas in Panama, and the spinal
injury left him partially paralyzed. Fonteyn's encouragement helped him to keep going. At the time, her Plutão Vesta was on Saturn
and octile Venus and Plutão Pluto, while Plutão Venus was on Plutão Saturn
square Mars and octile Plutão Sun. Plutão Saturn had been square Mars for
years but had ended that aspect and moved into a square to
Fonteyn's Sun. The combination fits her husband (Venus) becoming a major career (Saturn). Plutão Moon had recently entered Virgo in
the seventh house to repeat the idea of work and / or health issues
connected to peer relationships.
Adding to the squares between factors in Taurus and in Leo.
Fonteyn's Plutão Ascendant in late Taurus was square her rising Pallas
which can signify partners as well as politics and "causes."? Juno. 2 rr L
22 rt 05 02
21 X*
49 x*
ZA 35 TP
10 TP 27 A 56 o 25s:C2
' Ia I w
/ V 33
45
1
i
Id
\n.p Saturno 21
52 Gêmeos A 05 Netuno 06
■& 03 A 46
A
zo
D6 tn;
48
21
35
tJi
OS
ZP
39 45
UD cru
2426 02
0
49 22
09 02 03
23 Margot Fonteyn
Source: Quote in Predictions. Jan. 1968
Profiles of Women 40
02
14 J 32 C 56 ers 00 22
n
58 Exampl e Charts 145 3 the marriage asteroid, opposed Pallas and was quincunx Plutão MC,
aspects which sometimes lead to separations from relationships,
or. as in this case, major changes in them.
Fonteyn met the challenge with courage and strength, living
up to the potential of her emphasis in fixed signs and the faith of
her first house Pisces. Her natal Sun-Mars conjunction indicates
immense personal power, which was further emphasized by Plutão Mars semisextlle the Sun and Plutão Jupiter sextile Mars. Aspects
bfctween fire planets. Mars. Sun. Jupiter, are the strongest Indications of the natural confidence of fire. The Vesta-Saturn
conjunction, in contrast, though in the sign of Leo which does add
confidence and strength, is mostly earth, with the nature of the
1W » S/21/96 a, Lua '2* t 2se»H
m t
T.l
5H Margot Fonteyn
June 15, 1964 M*pof Foofryn
May 1919 15m
Zone
51N14 OWI33 TR•WOP
NATAL CHART
Ksprp^f For?
May 1919
Dim* Trr*
Zor»
5tN14 0W13 Tn
PtOQtBMO JUN
1919 15m
Zorm
Jtm
51N14 0W13 InrupCJT
xn
964
OuWono ?7fl07
*25*1
V2105^
6y
»
♦ 3« ^ Lua 21 0 ii le**
il 560 » Mercúrio 190 ii
E ten , Vênus 146 The Book of Saturn two factors and the sixth house emphasizing the practicality to
cope with the material world. Of our twelve sides of life symbolized
by astrology, the three "obsessive-compulsive" ones are Vesta.
Pluto, and Saturn (Letters Six, Eight, and Ten). When they aspect
each other, especially with a conjunction as part of the configuration since it is the strongest aspect, we know that all details will
be under control or the individual will die trying.
Fonteyn's Solar Arc Saturn was in 5 Libra square Pluto and
opposite Chiron when Arias was shot. The combination of a
cardinal T-square in the arcs and fixed sign squares and oppositions in the progressions is a power struggle pattern. T Saturn was
also dramatic— opposite her Plutão Moon, square the lunar nodes and
quincunx Vesta and Neptune, but trine to Pluto/Venus. Fonteyn
had been using her power struggle potential in appropriate and
healthy ways in her competition as a star in the entertainment
world. The injury to her husband brought out her immense
strength and stamina in new ways as her husband became a
"career" in the sense that she took personal responsibility for
helping him survive and recover. Saturn in the seventh house can
be a problem if one partner is playing parent and the other is forced
to play the role of child in what is theoretically a peer relationship.
As a temporary role in an emergency, a partner becoming a caring
parent can be very constructive, as Fonteyn demonstrated. Into Orbit When it comes to Saturn conjunct angles, the MC seems to be the
favorite among prominent politicians in my collection. 1 turned up
six in a brief scan, including a range from very conservative to very
liberal. As has been said repeatedly, it is necessary to consider the
whole chart and even then, the details still depend on the person.
The early family and surroundings are obviously vital in understanding a person. But people can also grow and change. Three of
the six have been lifetime Democrats, two were Republicans, and
one started as a Democrat and changed parties.
Long before he went into politics, John Glenn was famous as
the first American astronaut to orbit the earth in a space capsule.
Glenn was born on July 18. 1921 at Júpiter PM EST in Cambridge, OH. Example Charts 147 ^ He was a naval aviation cadet, went through fltght school, served
as a Marine In the Pacific In World War Gêmeos and also served In Korea
in 1953. He served with NASA from 1959 to 1964. and made his
famous orbital flight on February 7. 1962.
Glenn's Saturn and Jupiter were both conjunct his MC. sextile
his Mars, trine his Antivertex and, more widely, forming a grand
trine to Vesta and the Moon. The grand trine in earth signs and
houses indicates a very competent person. When we add his
stellium in Cancer in the eighth house, it is not surprising that he
is a political conservative. It is more surprising that his early life
included so many risk-taking activities, but Glenn also had some
strong trines involving fire signs and houses. His fourth house
Chiron in Aries has held a progressed trine to Neptune in the ninth
house for most of his life, demonstrating a very secure faith, which
included the subconscious level since Neptune is a water planet 18 TP 37 n
V .6
20
17 PP
33 55
16
a 22 03 o A A CA 37
TP
7
TP 37 Júpiter 8/
?0 37
TP Oo
09 C7
TP 04
55 K Mercúrio 10 I 51 X*
01 03
01 CP 20>^ 23
09 0 09 02
13 04 Saturno ->
09 55 u
13 22
T
25
59
18 T 12
03
John Glenn
Source; Birth Certincate
[Loisl Rodden-ISAR Database 18 K 37 55 12
C) 148 The Book of Saturn Rings: Natal
Progressed
Directed 18hp37
q Netuno cf Vt 0 ?
Yf, 13 11080300 03 (45108362608 Qi
06
16" 12,
T- Saturno I8S53 0?
A
0/ 33n4 ii609 24 23 22
14. 10
5 26'L W ^21} A
HPor. % Júpiter 37 070626 aY/A
CA 01
'8
Mr'
- 46
U/.M 09^19
s32
Jfr
•n.
i 15 1?
12^53
6301
20' rnn
r^>
m oo»
npl
ifo ll*p '
Aa
4S\
■63
N
26
03
101 •-1
0! Júpiter 1A1 3W 0 N 04
n' , 20
OOj;
* 0 ?"**'
.13"
#•36
12'
,28^23.
^ 29''
IS
4S
OS
0? yOl40
a 05114
'5 62 vU
Ux 22,
on T T 26
S9
n
T Tx 07 :2c. 47 32 12
/a
/S3
00,
27 1/ 24
11/
39/
John Glenn '03 23 04 25 28 18 M 1/ November 5, 1974
and Chiron Is In a water house. Sagittarius rising and Its ruler.
Jupiter, In Its own house with strong trlnes and sextlles, are keys
to conscious faith.
Throughout his NASA period and beyond It. Glenn had his Plutão Saturn sextlle his natal Sun, a very positive Indication of the
ability to achieve his ambitions. In February 1962, when he was
a space pioneer. T Saturn was sextlle his Ascendant from Aquarius
and trloctlle natal Saturn and MC. His Plutão Venus was conjunct his
Sun and sextlle Saturn. D Saturn (In 29 Libra) did not have any
traditional aspects to the standard factors, but D Neptune was
conjunct natal Saturn.
Glenn was elected as a U.S. Senator from Ohio in 1974. He had
a business career between NASA and his entry Into politics. T Example Charts 149 Saturn was in 18 Cancer in 1974conjunct Mars and closely sextile
his MC, which is at the midpoint of Jupiter and Saturn, giving
extra strength. Plutão Jupiter and Plutão Saturn were holding a long
conjunction as Jupiter gradually passed the slower planet. Glenn
also had his Plutão MC in a grand trine to Pluto and Uranus, but Plutão East
Point was trioctile Saturn. D Saturn was square Neptune and trine
Mercury. By the time he took on the office, D Saturn was opposite
Vesta for the job change and about to sextile the Moon. Football and Politics Jack Kemp is like Glenn in being a lifetime moderately conservative Republican who came into politics from a different field than
the usual law background. Kemp was born on July 13. 1935 at
3:15 AM PST in Los Angeles. California.
He went into professional football after graduating from
college and was especially successful in 1964 and 1965. He helped
the Buffalo Bills win three consecutive Eastern Division titles and
two AFL championships. In 1965 he was named the AFL player of
the year and the most valuable player in the Bills. But he had a
series of injuries after that, including two broken ankles, two
broken shoulders, a broken knee and eleven concussions. By
1969 he was forced to retire from football and he worked for a
bank in Buffalo. He had previously been a special assistant for
Ronald Reagan, who was then governor of California. In 1970 he
was asked to run for Congress in New York's thirty-ninth district,
and he won in November. He was reelected in 1972, 1974 and
1976 with huge margins. In 1978 the Democrats did not even field
a candidate against him.
Kemp's Saturn was precisely on his MC at birth, but it
retrograded back into the ninthhouse. It was closely trioctile Pluto
and more widely octile-trioctile the lunar nodes and Mars and
square East Point. Chiron, and the Moon. Its only harmony
aspects were a wide trine to Jupiter and a sextile to Uranus, but
the latter aspect became exact in progressions and has lasted for
years, showing Kemp's capacity for success in public service work,
with the planets and houses all connected to the transpersonal
area. ^ 150 The Book of Saturn 09 19
w
T
05
49
d
10 21
0 Saturno 20 09 12 H M
575 27 10
ft 28
IT
07 22 a J*
124
6 13]]; 3i 28 Vênus 29 I 36 07
13* zo
OS 22
25
28 03 19
cz
ze
50 U
25 12 si 27 04
12
rrp
00
rrp
62
27 ^09 n? 20
Jack Kemp
Source: Birth Certificate
Gauquelfn Book of American Charts cf
21 16
13 K
K 46
26 54 21
K
55 43
09
13 Another key to success In his later adult life was Kemp's Plutão Jupiter moving Into sextlle-trlnes to the mean or average Plutão lunar
nodes. There are two ways to calculate the lunar nodes; their
average position, which moves approximately three minutes a day
retrograde, and the "true" node, which Is Irregular, sometimes
retrograde and sometimes direct. Both seem to be meaningful, so
I look at both positions. Charts like Kemp's are Important since
they demonstrate the potential for success despite major conflict
aspects.
Other than the general potential for a power struggle life
suggested by the conflict aspects to the dominant Saturn, the
main keys to a possible attraction to sports are shown by Chiron.
If we take It as similar to Jupiter, we can note Its close conjunction
to the East Point, which Is like having It on the Ascendant, and Its
long progressed opposition to the Moon In Sagittarius In the house Example Chart :s 151 € %f- of work, plus Its quincunx to Jupiter, Mars and Jupiter In the fifth
house, fire planets In a fire house, add to the fire emphasis.
Activities which require physical energy and/or personal risks are
usually associated with fire In some form,
Kemp had a T Saturn return on his natal Saturn and MC
during the last few months of 1965 when he was especially
honored. Despite the conflict aspects to Saturn, he had obviously
worked hard and successfully to attain his ambitions. But he also
had his Plutão Ascendant on the Plutão south lunar node, which Is often a
lesson not too dissimilar to Saturn, and the angle aspect lasted for
some years during which he was experiencing multiple Injuries.
Note that the nodes formed a grand cross with Mars and Juno In
cardinal signs in fixed houses. The cardinal-fixed mixture Is
T>
UlH
09 H20 Rings: Natal
Progressed
Directed
58 oe
TT •#
T
58 27
55
50
04 02 OS
T sr a
05 T
31 W Júpiter .
20 •38 12 25
3l
07 5,07 ®S03 29 08 as
sa 55
22
01 I * 64
cr 13 in, V I« :
37
21
\\17 //19o0
\/ ^O2C22 /2vg
A pa 1322
23 "02"■n
41 0*
02 /
K 28 hF /
V 29
/
Jack Kemp
November 15, 1965 IS
07 36 «rt24 ;e
50 30 25 05 T
m 57 50 5
if'
^46
4i
vZ6 01
m.
59
21 23 is
25
tTP 04 v\
11\
\
2e\
52
✓V
in — Mercúrio 03 152 The Book of Saturn especially likely to be involved in power struggles, and we can't
expect to win them all.
By 1969, when Kemp left football, his Plutão Ascendant had reached a conjunction with Pluto, one of the keys to joint resources, including banking. By November 1970, when he entered
politics. Kemp's Plutão Moon was in Mercúrio Aries semisextile his Saturn-MC.
His Plutão Ascendant was trioctile MC-Saturn and T Saturn was octile Plutão MC. Despite the conflict aspects involving Saturn and the MC,
Kemp won. When he assumed the new office in January 1971. his Plutão Moon was crossing his Plutão MC, a highly appropriate aspect for a
change in his work and his home, with Plutão Moon opposite the IC at
the same time. Plutão Saturn was not helpful, since for years it stayed
in an octile-trioctile to the lunar nodes and Mars, but Plutão Sun did
have a trine to Kemp's MC in Washington D.C. and Plutão MC was trine
the Moon, quincunx Jupiter, and sextile Chiron. D Saturn was, of
course, right there with the MC since Directions move the whole
chart the same amount. Dixiecrat
Jesse Helms is the former Democrat who turned Republican
during Richard Nixon's first term as president even though he was
concerned about Nixon's appeasement of China and friendship
with Tito in Yugoslavia. Helms was a rabid anti-Communist and
defense hawk. He had been involved in media work on a newspaper and as a radio commentator in North Carolina before entering
politics.
Helms was born on October 18, 1921 at 11 AMESTin Monroe.
North Carolina. Like Glenn, who was bom the same year. Helms
had Jupiter conjunct Saturn, but they were in early Libra with
both in the ninth house, making a stellium in Libra versus Glenn's
in Cancer. However, his power drive was at least equally strong
with a tenth house Sun and Capricorn in the first house. Also, his Plutão Jupiter and Saturn moved into his tenth house, with Saturn
holding a conjunction with the MC for years that is still exact
within one degree. Helms' grand cross is in cardinal signs and
houses and politics is an appropriate arena for the power struggle.
His chart suggests that he lacks the secure faith of Glenn. Though Example Charts 05 "L 27
n?
92T 10
o 5 153 „ Netuno 58
c^: 44
K
03
075
ZJ> X* H
38
Ep05
06 33
43 22 0 47 23
yS
35 59 28
O
32 05 H
Jessie Helms
Source: Birth Certificate
(Loisl Rodden-ISAR Database 06 I 35 Chiron and Neptune were trine at birth, the aspect was never
exact. Instead, Helms has Plutão Neptune square the Moon for his
whole life, showing problems with subconscious faith. Plutão Jupiter,
a primary key to conscious faith, squared the East Point, then
Juno, then his East Point in Washington D.C. and then Pluto,
pointing to continuing issues involving beliefs, faith, and ethics in
some way. In addition to his support of the military-industrial
complex. Helms is noted for his support of tobacco, a major crop
in North Carolina, and for his recent campaign for reelection
which played on racial tensions.
Helms was first elected to the U.S. Senate from North Carolina
in November 1972. Plutão Saturn had already reached his MC by early
1964 if his birth time is accurate. Astrologers always worry about 154 The Book of Satu rn even hour birth times. Plutão Saturn was quincunx Uranus, so Helms
was probably in a perpetual state of discontent. His Plutão Ascendant
added a quincunx to Pluto as a further support for changes in his
associates, but he also had several very harmonious progressions.
Inner harmony does not guarantee success, but it supports it
since it shows that we know what we want and think we should
have it. Helms' Plutão MC was sextile Venus and trine the Plutão Moon. while Plutão Venus was sextile Saturn. T Saturn had very mixed aspects. It
was on the Descendant square Mars, but trine Plutão Mars, which was
on Plutão Ceres. D Saturn opposed Vesta, an appropriate aspect for a
change of work. By the time Helms was sworn into the office in
January 1973, his Plutão Moon was opposite Saturn for the change and
T Saturn was back to 14 Gemini sextile-trine the Plutão lunar nodes.
Rings1 Natal
Progressed
Directed 06 =^35 25
25 07
05
09 04
tIL 06 04 06 "S Júpiter 42 59 08 £0 22 N
26
K
%57 28
K
32 O
3a x 06 I 52
14 Netuno n S3
47 U44 57
*
08
05 * 42
Qlfi net K
n?
05 b> 06
07 <n 28
27 Lua * 26 n?
26 09 04 09 zs 1° 33
43
U09
08 33
23
&
23 23 23 05
57 01 28 T T
03
27
T
24 fcj.
26 2B
55 06
06 T35 Jessie Helms
November 7, 1972 £8
32 22 36 0? T
OS 0« 02 m 10 i Gêmeos 3B
T.'i
I9JIH Example Charts 155 ^ Texan
Lloyd Bentsen Is one more well-known politician bom in the same
year as Glenn and Helms, but earlier than Helms so his JupiterSaturn conjunction is In Virgo like Glenn. Bentsen was born on
February 11, 1921 at 2:30 AM CST in Mission, Texas.
He traveled a more typical route into politics, getting a law
degree in 1942, practicing law briefly, serving as a Judge for a
couple of years, then in the Texas Congress, and being elected as
Senator from Texas in November 1970.
Bentsen has remained a Democrat, but he is a fairly conservative one. with Plutão Saturn holding a conjunction with his MC like
Helms, though in a different sign. In contrast to Glenn and Helms.
Bentsen has fewer factors in the top half of his chart, but all three nP 14 Urano . 48 TP TP Vx
03
0
07 a Saturno 20
a
16 29 as
iO
02 20 47 a
£ c. J 10 12 10
2 12 51
20 X*
24
29 x*
V 11
02 14 51 29
26 T
20
08 T
cf
07
12
T
22 030409 28 29
T 60
H
17
H
18
H K
18
06 41
20 T
34
21 48
Lloyd Bentsen
Source: Birth Certificate
Gauqueltn Book oj American Charts 19 H 10 1-5
d
47 «(■£ 156 The Book of Saturn men have Sagittarius rising. Bentsen has an additional strong
focus on Idealism with five factors In Pisces: three planets, the
Moon, and the asteroid Vesta. Of course an emphasis on Idealism
and faith does not tell us how the Individual will express It. We
have to watch the life to know that. An Identification with "God"
can be manifested as a desire to only do the right and perfect thing
or as the feeling that we "are God" and have the right to do anything
we please. Bentsen's public Image Is untarnished, but less wellknown material poses troubling questions about his and George
Bush's Involvement with the Savings and Loan debacle In Texas
which might make Whitewater look like minor league.
When Bentsen was elected Senator In November 1970. T Saturn was In 19 Taurus with a very positive trine to his MC and
a conjunction to progressed Pallas, our political asteroid. By the
time he took office the next January, T Saturn had retrograded
?tT 10 Rings Natal
Progressed
Directed 14
IV R
46 ;o'
I+ t-l
Rpl ^
39 Lua 29
R
17 1 'OH
•n. 1/
61 'a Itl
.1? i Tf 29
?tiN 3?/
11
.©
,0? 'R
204 a. 1 ■R 1H 1?
>
/ a <
^R
.04" 30
ii
i 03u 3 Mercúrio E 0,1
? ISH ^3 /If
, 29y
3r> T
HI V. iz*
11
'I
02 V 5
07 14 1
H M Mercúrio / n 'oiT
25
510 :
(o 27 19
G-6 14
Lloyd Bentsen
November 3, 1970 46
1<JH 10 10
a
'os
U 19,
4J ' 39 10
ft 5 ts V
6 7! ttno
IS 0 69 T.1)
' 16 Urano .iw 11
hi
10
T 47
on
, Júpiter ®24
23 TT.,
03
T 33 '
o
22
11
17 '•17 Example Charts
ioipio
E?
14
ft? Rings; Natal
Progressed
Directed
70; 14 2
03
17
11 10 157 jfr A Júpiter -1
5
00
o
bO 16/ 2J 47 1G
M^ -j.24 s.>- CO
"^^30 10
✓
12 r,R 09 09
1*7 17 "7
462119
R ^ I 16
23 1
12
mI'tP
'Tl
'29 Plutão 140 fy7A A03
w
20 \ R
^"wR
OS
ip 3 82_gj_n lF
!\ Pp^ Netuno ^
'iA
. 29» T.*)
29/ 06 41 fl
13 FJ>
21
08/ s
50 11
02 N ■R
' 1/
4S Lloyd Bentsen ■48 Ef
28
11 • Netuno 0ft
H
27 .11
So
0?
41
ec®OS32
U 0125 Mercúrio 06
o 16 3 15 1
a.42«)io
5 29 O 29 U ?6
t / Mercúrio o O
. VVR
A\ T A* Plutão * X » B Júpiter .1
'= c; n ; Lua _T
• H H HlK
- ' 41 ru 14 ' Áries 10
'A fpTTm
t
,™ i0 17 06 1 jy ft
cf 0b 3 Júpiter , Júpiter , 0
-T 1' ■O
427qIt
lip,2 47
0)
o
T T 17 I
m
K Júpiter '
~t9H 10 November 1. 1988 back into a trine to Jupiter. His progressed angles also showed the
potential for a major change of career and power in the world. Plutão Ascendant was trine natal Saturn and Plutão East Point was trioctile Plutão Saturn. Plutão MC was trine Mercury and had recently ended a trine
to Plutão Uranus, which was holding a long Plutão trine to Pluto. Plutão MC was
also quincunx Venus in the fourth house for the change of
residence as well as career when he moved to Washington, D.C. Plutão Venus was trine Plutão Jupiter and Plutão Juno, forming a grand trine in
earth signs and fire houses — a successful steamroller combination, Plutão Sun was trine Plutão Neptune and Plutão Mars was sextile Uranus,
about to start a sextile to Plutão Pluto. Plutão Vesta was on natal Mars. Few
astrologers would have any doubt about Bentsen's ability to win
that election. 158 The Book of Saturn In contrast to the very harmonious progressions, D Saturn
was just coming to an octile to Juno and a trioctile to the Moon.
1 wonder whether his wife was less than thrilled about the move?
Bentsen lefthis Senate post to campaign with Michael Dukakis
in 1988, running as the potential Vice President. At the election,
T Saturn was on his Juno with mixed aspects. It was sextlle-trine
the lunar nodes and trine the Plutão Sun. but square Mars and the
Moon. Plutão Ascendant was also in conflict with Mars with an octile.
Conflict aspects between Mars and the angles which share the
meaning of Mars are keys to some kind of ambivalence over what
we want to do or can do. yet Plutão Mars trine the MC and Plutão Saturn
showed that on some level he wanted the new power role. Plutão MC
quincunx one Plutão node and semisextile the other can signify some
kind of change, and Plutão Venus trioctile the MC and Plutão Saturn
repeated the mixed message. D Saturn entering a new sign and
quincunx the south node and semisextile the north repeated the
message. Dukakis and Bentsen lost, and the two men retired to
their respective home states. Minnesota Morals It is intriguing to note how many of our recent candidates for the
top executive offices have had Saturn conjunct an angle. Walter
Mondale was in the U.S. Senate for years, but he was also Vice
President under Jimmy Carter. Mondale was born on January 5,
1928at 10:30AM CST in Ceylon. Minnesota. Like Helms, Mondale
had Saturn at birth on the ninth house side of the MC and It
progressed onto the angle to stay there for years. But the resemblance between the two men ends there. Mondale was a deeply
ethical man, the son of a minister and married to the daughter of
a minister. Over the years, it has been fascinating to watch the
unusually high moral caliber of many of the politicians in and from
Minnesota. Some commentators have called the state the conscience of our nation. That does not mean that all of their people
in power are embryo saints, but many seem to have escaped the
common consequences of power, when its temptations for abuse
lead to a fall. Example Charts 159 ^ Mondale's potential for idealism shouts from the chart, with a
stellium in Pisces in the first house that includes Jupiter, its coruler. and Mars in Sagittarius repeats the identification with the
search for perfection. Every one of the ten male power people
considered in this section had some kind of combination of Letter
One (identity) with Letter Nine and/or Twelve (faith and ideals),
but it is much stronger in some of them. Plus, we still do not know
how individuals will select and manifest their ideals until we
observe their lives. These men are all bright and articulate. They
have all been successful in the world, some in several careers.
They have all used their power to change the world, though we. the
public, will put different values on their differing results.
Mondale. like his running mate Carter, is a liberal, though not
an extremist. Democrats tend to believe that the government can
and should help ordinary people. Republicans tend to believe that i /V ^ /
10
08 C 7 'iw
. ^05V 01 n.
14 40
v
01 74 x*
01 59 16
/
, 20^
i 16 v 2 ' 6/V»A5ZR
I
27
29
¥ 10
46 1 16
CP
07 C1 t
25
G4C
Walter Mondale
_
Source; Birth Certlflcate
Gauquelin Book of American Charts 29 10
08^ 17 1197 CI .c
17
1c 160 The Book of Saturn the government is a threat and should only defend us against
criminals and other countries.
Mondale was initially appointed to the U.S. Senate to finish the
term of Hubert Humphrey, and he took over the office on January Júpiter , 1965. He won a full six-year term as senator in November 1966.
He was the Vice President under Carter from January 1977 to
1981. He toured the U.S.campaigningfor the presidency for some
months in 1974, and tried again in 1984, but lost.
It is easy to see the feeling Mondale must have had that he
should use his personal power to make a better world. With Mars
in Sagittarius in the tenth house close to the MC and Plutão Saturn in
Sagittarius moving from the ninth house to stay on the MC for
years, with Neptune in the sixth house and the rising Pisces, he
must have felt an urgent need to work to save the world. His strong
Capricorn, added to factors in all the earth houses, shows the
potential for realism, but that often leaves the individual feeling
that no matter what has been accomplished, it is never enough,
as he contrasts what is with what ought to be. When I talk to
clients with this type of chart, 1 tell them that it is ok to be human,
to do the best they can but also to enjoy the journey.
The two sides of perfectionism are the ideals of Letters Nine
and Twelve and the awareness of flaws of Letters Six and Ten. In
addition to the emphasis already described, Mondale has also had Plutão south lunar node conjunct Saturn and Chiron trioctile Plutão Saturn
for years. When he took his seat in the Senate in 1965. T Saturn
was in 1 Pisces square Venus in double Sagittarius (the sign and
the house), trioctile Pluto, octile the Sun. but with at least one
harmonious aspect, a sextile to Chiron.
Mondale's Plutão MC in his Washington D.C. chart was in the same
degree when he lost his race for the presidency in 1984. One of the
fascinating exercises available in astrolog/ is the way you can see
repeated patterns at different stages in life and become aware of
the repeated issues being faced.
Other aspects at the time of the 1984 loss included Plutão Moon opposite Vesta, Plutão East Point quincunx Mars, Plutão Ascendant square Plutão Sun. Plutão Mercury opposite Neptune, PMC quincunx Pluto, and Plutão Mars octile-trioctile the MC and the lunar nodes. There were some
harmonious aspects, but it looked like a losing game. Conflict
aspects are not Just indicative of outer circumstances beyond our Examp leCharts Rings; Natal
Progressed
Directed 40 Plutão . Washington
MC:1K43 , 0n nfjn; W
]/ 1 •
"L 'K
0
G9 - 161 2(-./ 06 01 .
Jl.
s3S
•ifc
ru I6« '•J?
13
irj
3=49
S C-s M S9
5 09X40
QU H4? A
OS it1)
Ih Mercúrio \ Júpiter *l
ff v*
1
^ \
rtfr Ul a ■SD = 04
M
33
? Júpiter ^ *3?
5
idd Júpiter cnM ? , 30 M r 3b
43 T09
\
0 i 3' . ja"
^ //Ol
0 ,T 0913
OdT ;i6 i p 1 <"1? A
20^''
, fV ,* qj hy 35 Sol 1
1 04)
W
j
' 16
^ 'A ^r q
/
(
3 21 n Júpiter A .
24 02 pm
it'A
I IS
24 39\ 0!
A
lh B
T*
56 13 51
33 29
01 m
O 40 .10 17 1 57 Walter Mondale
November 6, 1984 control. They describe deep Inner ambivalence about our ability to
handle a situation. In idealists, they often Indicate the subconscious feeling that they just can't ever do enough.
Mondale was appointed Ambassador to Japan by President
Clinton, so perhaps he is currently expressing his Sagittarian
nature more through experiences in another country and less in
wishing he could do more to save the world. 162 Born to Power As examples of women born with Saturn on the MC. I chose two
who were born to power, one who earned it professionally, and one
who failed to use it effectively and had it used against her. The two
women who were born to power are Queen Elizabeth Gêmeos of England
and her sister, Princess Margaret. Obviously, there are many
differences between their charts, but Saturn provides a clue to the
one with the greater power. The Saturn-MC conjunction for
Elizabeth was just over one degree from exact and Saturn was
sextile her Ascendant. Margaret had Saturn in the tenth house,
but it was nearly four degrees from the MC and it was exactly
square her Ascendant.
Elizabeth was born on April 21, 1926, at 2:40 AM UT in London, England. Margaret was born on August 21. 1930at Mercúrio :22
PM GOT in Glamis. Scotland. George VI, the father of the sisters,
was the second son of the king and not expected to inherit the
throne. But Edward VIII. the oldest son, abdicated his right to be
King on December 11. 1936 in order to marry a divorced American
woman named Wallis Simpson. So George inherited the title and
his oldest daughter. Elizabeth became the next in line for it.
We can see major power issues in Margaret's chart with her
strong Aries, including all three angles, the Ascendant, East Point,
and Antivertex, square her tenth house Saturn and MC. The
aspects describe a confrontation between personal will and the
limits of personal will. Margaret also has Uranus in the first house
in Aries square Jupiter in Cancer in the fourth house, and
opposite Venus in Libra in the seventh house. The lunar nodes in
Aries-Libra complete a cardinal grand cross with Pluto, Pallas,
and the Moon in Cancer and Juno in Capricorn. With a cardinal
cross, we want to express our personal will as we choose, while
also being dependent or nurturing, while also maintaining close
peer relationships, while also having power in the world. Life
should be big enough to include personal interests, a home and
family, a mate, and a career, but it does take awareness and
compromise to make room in our lives for everything.
When the cardinal dilemma is not handled effectively, we may
repress one or more of our basic desires, or project them into other Examjje Charts 1 63 ^ Cl^
25
K
25 D5 22
39 33 H
10
u
06
T 02
T
a 36 5 tocR
74
2b
54
0
d"
25
0 25 24 12 -TV 56 06 01 n 38 07 V
™C2 /
0,03-,
28
07
02
2b
A Saturno 20
20
27
i£>
cr;
C£>
07,
CP
0
00 Plutão 01 SB 46 i/Sp 38 Princess Margaret
Source: Quotes British Register
ILoisl Rodden-ISAR Database
people, or displace them, trying to satisfy them where they do not
work well. For example, we may compete in relationships which
should be cooperative, against our own "team." Most individuals
with strong conflict aspects involving cardinal or fixed factors are
competitive and need a socially acceptable outlet for this. Healthy,
defined as "game-playing," power struggles are possible in sports,
games, competitive businesses, and fighting for causes. None of
these are easily available to a young princess, though the family
did raise prize race horses and loved riding. Margaret s power
struggle was displaced into relationship issues and finally into
defying the rigid rules of proper action for an English princess. She
first fell in love with a divorced man who could not make a
legitimate husband according to the rules of the official Anglican
Church of England. Margaret's marriage to a photographer even- ^ 164 The Book of Saturn tually ended in divorce, and finally she formed a liaison with a man
much younger than herself. None of this seems remarkable in our
divorce-prone society, but it was contrary to the protocol for a
member of the royal family of England.
Margaret was only six years old when her father inherited the
throne of England and dramatically altered her life. Her new power
role was played out in London, where her local MC shifted to four
Capricorn, barely over one degree from her natal Saturn, to match
the pattern in her sister's natal chart. In fact. Margaret's Plutão Saturn
had retrograded to one degree and one minute from her London
MC when the change came and her Plutão Sun was trine her local MC
and still within the one-degree orb of a conjunction with Plutão i n JC V2l/9e \ X M 20
22 rt
n hs
33 ft E 2 r oo nne* "" Mercúrio Prince* a mmpmrH
two 21^ 22m
Zone Dey*cht
56*36 3W0 T«opca
NATAL CHART
Princt* AMfOMf
1930 2lH22m (
Zone
56N36 3W0 Trctopical
Proof
FFfi 95?
Prtncw* m*rgMre1
Aog
900 22m
Zone J0C DftyegN T«ne
56N36 jw tropical
Oracled
1962
Outer nng W24 24«e
23- \ ie\ t 5 *0
Princess Margaret
February 8, 1952 06 R
O189 23 if Example Charts 165 Neptune. In one way, the new role invited an inflated ego. a hazard
with Sun-Neptune, but with its restrictions and obligations, it was
not an easy adjustment for a lively, emotionally expressive, funloving child. Solar Arc Saturn reinforced the pressure in the new
situation with an exact square to Margaret's London Ascendant.
T Saturn was less impressive in 16 Pisces, quincunx Ceres and
more widely semisextile Uranus and sextile Chiron.
Margaret was twenty-one years old when her father died on
February 6. 1952, and her sister inherited the throne. Saturn was
strongly aspected at the time, having continuously held a conjunction with Margaret's London MC and a square to her natal
Ascendant during the interval in which her father was King of
England. At the time of his death. Plutão Venus had reached a sextile
to Saturn, Plutão Moon trined it, and Plutão Mercury squared it and opposed
the Ascendant. Solar Arc Saturn squared the mean lunar nodes
and was quincunx Mars, highly appropriate aspects for stress
involving and/or a separation from an authority figure. T Saturn
gave the same message with an opposition to Uranus and a square
to Plutão Jupiter, pointing to major developments affecting personal
action and home and family. Plutão MC in London opposed the Moon
and squared the true lunar nodes. Many other aspects could be
mentioned,
Margaret. but it was certainly a time of major change for As with many of the examples presented in this book. Margaret's
chart demonstrates the psychological issues which she faced, but
she did not suffer the doom and gloom crisis events which would
be predicted by traditional astrology. She continues an active
social life among the world's elite, with financial security and the
pleasures which money can buy.
While Margaret's chart was dominated by conflict aspects in
cardinal signs and houses, Elizabeth was born with a powerful Tsquare in fixed signs but partly in cardinal houses, with one
corner sharing the cardinality since it was formed by the MC and
Saturn, a cardinal planet in its own nature. Most individuals with
a cardinal grand cross or T-square will make major changes in
their lives from time to time. They may change any or all of the
corners — personal action including health, home and family
matters, partnerships, or careers. The fixed sides of life are
characterized by "enduring self-will." They are not unchanging, ^ 166 The Book of Satu m but they show the determination to change when the individual
chooses and to resist being pressured into changing by outside
forces. The fixed instinct is to keep going until we get "there."
wherever we have defined as "there." Long-term progressed
squares between fixed factors are typically experienced as a kind
of impasse or stalemate. So the life may remain quite stable for
Jong periods despite an inner sense of tension and a constant
effort to stay in control of oneself and/or the situation.
If a genuine inner compromise has not been worked out which
allows some satisfaction for all of the desires involved in the
configuration, any of the standard defense mechanisms may
occur. Repression canlead to personal illness. Projection can lead
to others manifesting some of the personal desires for one. usually
in excessive ways. Displacement can lead to some desires being
sought in inappropriate places or ways. K
18
n?
25 a 33
24 06 20
fl?
00 02 14
01
V
u 20 06 Lua J4
07
12 S\
21
o^;
ro
23 12 23
49
20
Ep
31
90
Cf
22
1+ 2rK
13
.3
H
25 01
zo
05
27 04
H
T
21
40
T Queen Elizabeth n
Source: Fagln In American Astrology
says "recorded". Peoples of Women 60
2800
T
01 1? I 0
0 17 Example Charts 167 ft Queen Elizabeth's chart provides a classical illustration of the
central issue of both the cardinal and fixed sides of life:
handling of power in dealing with other people, the the need to integrate personal rights and power with the rights and power of
others, to make room for both. When we look at the earth and
water factors in the Queen's chart, we see the capacity for
enormous self-discipline and self-control. Capricorn rising and Saturn, the ruler of the sign, on the MC. which is like Saturn
conjunct itself, show an identification with the LAW. My will is
Law. 1 am responsible. If I don't make sure everything is done
correctly. I will be guilty. My conscience will get me or the world
will put me down. Traditional astrology saw the south lunar node
as very similar to another Saturn, describing an area of life where
we first had to learn something and then to give something to life.
(The north lunar node, in contrast, was described as more like
Jupiter, where things came easily. Some modern astrologers have
muddled these interpretations and told people to ignore their
south nodes. Believe me. it is as unsafe to ignore the south node
as to ignore Saturn.)
Saturn's placement in Scorpio adds to the inner compulsion
to gain self-control. Its position just inside the ninth house shows
an identification with the "Absolute" in some form. Depending on
the person, we may seek final truth, feel we have it and be a guru
or judge or teacher, or try to make the world conform to our vision
ofhow it ought to be. Elizabeth's identification with the Absolute
is repeated by the first house Jupiter and factors in Pisces,
includingthe Antivertex as an auxiliary Ascendant. Since Uranus
rules the Aquarius in the first house, its position in Pisces
reinforces the theme. The two extremes of such patterns, of a
personal identification with the Absolute, range from feeling we
"ought to be god" and trying very hard to be perfect, to feeling that
we "are god" so we have a right to anything we want. God should
give it to us or we can take it. Obviously, the latter attitude
produces con-artists and psychopaths. The safe place, as usual,
is in the middle — accepting our humanness. but continuing to try
to live up to our ideals while enjoying the journey.
The Queen's strongly occupied second and sixth houses add
to the earth tendency to take life seriously. Chiron conjunct the
Sun. holding a progressed conjunction for years, connects ideal- 168 The Book of Jatum 25 "1/ M
T.V
I4i£^48h
^o/1" v
.25
/ U"7H JK UMn oe
E 20 fR*' 5® 25®
H2 /o tme one
OiMwn Bfzab^th / f
Apr 21. 1926 2^ ^Gm Of
Zone 00 0«>eghr Ttmf
51H30 OWiO 'rmal
NATAL CHART
Ou»^ Netuno BUabtth 11
A{w2)
»40m Cb
2<yie 00 Dayton T«n»
iisx CWIO Tfe»«a(
Progresso PFB 1952
OueviT EMaMft
Apr 1926 40m
tone 00 aayfghl TsTW
Tropcai
51N30 OWIO Tr.
Orectegio TeO 8. 9W
OAe* V
02 w22« Mercúrio «
0205
|
12S *2
T m— 6 ae,s0
?
t sis'
»
29S»
> ?3' «5
» 23S3' Ql7S» H
2# 29/
73 25
re 13
75 o *>
Queen Elizabeth 11
February 8, 1952 ism to the ego. She is not only identified with the Absolute from
birth, she is driven by the desire to do more, tokeepexpandlngand
be recognized for it. Where our Sun is placed, we need to shine, to
create life, and to be admired. In double Taurus, both the sign and
house, thiscould be expressed through making money, collecting
possessions, indulgingthe appetites, creatingbeauty. etc. Though
her personal wealth is not public knowledge. Elizabeth may be the
wealthiest woman on earth. She owns extensive property in
addition to receiving income from the government, and only
recently has begun paying taxes on some of her wealth. She also Example Charts carries heavy responsibilities, 159 including financially supporting many relatives in the minor nobility. In general, she has reportedly
been a prudent caretaker of her wealth, and she has carried out
her royal duties with dignity and devotion.
When we look at Elizabeth's public life, the earth and water in
her chart are obvious. The fire and air are not obvious, so we have
to suspect some projection has been occurring. Her sister, Margaret. is an obvious target for some of the Aquarius and Aries. As
noted above. Margaret is strongly identified with her rising
Uranus in Aries. Elizabeth's children and their spouses are also
suspects. Mercury, rulingElizabeth'sfifth house, is in Aries in the
Taurus house and widely conjunct Uranus. The combination fits
the strong-willed and indulgent nature of some of her children.
Jupiter rules Elizabeth's eleventh house as a key to the spouses
ofher children, and its position conjunct Mars in Aquarius in the
Aries house certainly fits Fergie. Andrew's former wife. It also
describes the media circus around Diana, wife of Charles, the heir
to the throne, and the personal disruption this has produced in
Elizabeth's formerly carefully controlled and "proper" life. The
parts of a chart which are most commonly projected are the
partnership houses. Prince Philip is undoubtedly doing some of
Elizabeth's Leo. but with two water factors there. Moon and
Neptune, and Ceres which carries many qualities similar to the
Moon, he does it discreetly. The rumors of his private pleasures
remain rumors, while the next generation has their activities and
their photographs in the daily scandal tabloids.
As indicated above, Elizabeth's father died on February 6.
1952. She was proclaimed Queen two days later, but the official
coronation took place on June 2, 1953 with magnificent pomp and
ceremony. When she became legally the queen of England,
Elizabeth's Plutão Moon was conjunct Plutão Pallas in the seventh house for
her new public political role and trine Saturn for her increased
status. Her Plutão Sun was crossing thelC. opposite the MC, for the loss
of her parent and her change of career. Plutão Sun was also square Plutão Jupiter for the challenge to her faith as she took on the responsibility of the new role. As is typical in astrology, a single factor can
carry many meanings. Jupiter is always a key to one's beliefs,
values, and ultimate goals. In Elizabeth's chart, its first house
position makes it part of her identity and instinctive action. It 170 rules part of her tenth house since part of Sagittarius is placed
there, so It Is also a key to her role In the society and ability to
handle power realistically. It also rules part of her eleventh house
to add to the Aquarian tendencies shown by Its sign. Elizabeth has
notbeen a scholar — the Mars-Jupiter conjunction fits her love of
the country, dogs, and horses — but the royal family is known to
consult alternative health practitioners, including homeopaths. Plutão Jupiter's long square to Elizabeth's Saturn and then MC show her
struggle to control her Aquarian instincts to properly play her
royal role.
Other aspects when Elizabeth became Queen included a long
square from Plutão Neptune to Plutão Saturn and an opposition to natal
Jupiter, again showing the challenge to her faith from the heavy
responsibilities of the royal role. Plutão Ceres, which is like a VirgoCancer mixture, opposed the East Point and Mars as she changed
her job and became a surrogate parent of her country. Plutão MC was
trine Plutão Ceres and sextile the East Point and Mars as she took on
the new power. Many other aspects could be listed that fit the
major change in Elizabeth's life, but interested readers can spot
them for themselves.
Solar Arc Saturn was. of course, Just over a degree earlier than
the Plutão MC since the MC is directed by the amount of the solar arc,
so the relative positions of the two will remain constant. Solar Arc
Saturn had not yet reached the aspects to Plutão Ceres and East Point
and Mars, but they were In orb by the next year when the
coronation took place. At the time she became legally the Queen.
Solar Arc Saturn was semisextile and quincunx the lunar nodes,
a common configuration when we have changes in relationships
which affect our emotional security. Transiting Saturn was retrograding just under fifteen Libra, moving into squares to Plutão Vesta
and Pluto and quincunx Venus. The aspect to Venus which rules
the fourth house fits the separation from a parent, and a square
to Pluto is commonly present with a death, when we are learning
to let go. Vesta had been progressing over N and Plutão Pluto for several
years as George VI had been in failing health since 1948.
As her children and their "significant others" continue to make
headlines in the tabloid newspapers
remains a bulwark of propriety, now of the world, Elizabeth struggling against the possible dissolution of the monarchy. Like her sister, she has * Example Charts 1 7 1 jfc financial security and a life that many In the world would envy.
But she faces her own challenges and the challenges of life are also
Its opportunities for growth. Battered by Others* Power
Our third woman with Saturn on the MC. Instead of being born
Into a power role, became a victim of someone else's power. There
Is always the danger that If we are not expressing major emotions
voluntarily In the world In someway, they may backfire against us.
MC conjunct Saturn shows an Inner drive to be In a power position
In the world. Properly expressed, we do this through a career. If
this desire Is repressed, there Is a danger of Illness. If It Is
displaced, we may try to use power In Inappropriate ways. If It Is
projected, others may use power against us. 14 mp 34 08
30 21
15 10
X
19 04 Sol 05
16*
16
Ep 17
/ Júpiter K 45 20 K 01
17 V
14
CT
19 13 16
00
01
n? 17 14 c
00
v.
H
1613
16
30
za 06
46 d^:
zs>
45
01 02
zs>
35
18 33 01
I
17 55
06
55 12 02 1+
06
H
18 35 fl
00
T
17 08
30
Sharon
Source*. Birth Certificate
Profiles of Women 14 34 O 22 15 T 27 10
a
19 172 The Book of Saturn Sharon was born on July 23. 1950 at Júpiter :08 PM PDT in San Mateo. CA. Her data is given in Lois Rodden's Profiles of Women.
Sharon was an artist, which fits her creative Sagittarius and Leo,
her Libra emphasis, her Jupiter in Pisces and Moon in the Pisces
house. The Venus sides of life seek pleasure, and artistic activities
are positive outlets for this. The Neptune side of life is seeking
infinite love and beauty. Fire is the truly creative element,
symbolizing the urge to do our new and unique thing in the world.
Venus may Just rearrange things to make them more esthetically
satisfying, but Sharon had Venus on Uranus, which, like fire, is
driven by the urge to break new ground. Sharon's Vesta in Taurus
in its own Virgo house shows the potential for craftsmanship, for
practical skill with details in her work. Its trine to Saturn in Virgo
is an emphatic reinforcement of that potential.
In addition to the indications of artistic talent. Sharon's chart
points to the freedom-closeness dilemma which is so common in
our western world. Factors in the sign and house of Sagittarius,
Mars tn the Aquarian house, and a lunar node in Aries describe
the freedom desires. Factors in the sign and house of Libra and
Scorpio emphasize the desire for a mate, while Cancer and Leo add
to the hunger for close relationships. A compromise is needed to
allow room in the life for both. But the need to be in control of her
own life and/or the fear of being controlled can make it more
difficult to manage a comfortable peer relationship. Leo-Scorpio
mixtures are usually an indication of strong sensual drives, and
Sharon had her Leo Sun in the natural house of Scorpio, while the
Moon, ruler of Cancer on the eighth cusp, was in the sign of
Scorpio. If this natural desire is not being satisfied and the need
to use power is blocked, there can be a real danger of attracting
someone else with excessive sensuality and power drives.
Sharon was raped on March 1. 1977, She had been painting
in front of her window in a ground-floor apartment when a young
man broke in about one AM. Lois Rodden pointed out in her
discussion of the chart that Júpiter ,033 women were raped in Los
Angeles in 1977. so it is a shockingly common form of males using
their superior physical strength against females. If astrology is
finally recognized as a valuable tool by science, we may learn to
understand and handle more effectively the psychological tensions in both the predator and the victim which permit such
violence. Examp ifc Charts 173 14 Relocaied MC; ISTTP.W
(Los Angeles) S3
.10 v. 19 /
x% "r » 12/ t 0 / is
J 7 /»
U'S'"
s^« Urano 20 ' 2 5 /5& I L 6
\e i A r
16
*
7 "
10 - ' /
of 07 Mercúrio xd 23.
am Qi
7one 0 X
T»T»e
37*33 i?7Wi9
NATAL OWTT = ®' \ I I 23.1950 ien
Zone SX
Tim#
jncs izzwV®
muw> 11«77
Ju<ja (960 IS" 6*
2e«® 8J30 Owiiigri 1
J7S«n SJJWSf TIDI
. 5>W!*0 ® Mar 1. i r lO a 15
Sharon
March 1. 1977 Sharon's aspects at the time included an even more Intense
Saturn than her natal chart, since her move to Los Angeles put Plutão Saturn on her local MC within one degree. Plutão Chiron was square
natal Saturn, pointing to the issue of faith versus practicality.
Sharon acknowledged her lack of common sense in exposing
herself as she had. Plus, any conflict aspects between the first
house and the tenth show a confrontation between personal will
and power versus the limits of personal power, so they call for
realism. Sharon's subconscious desire for a mate but ambivalence
around the issues of power and freedom versus closeness was
suggested by her Plutão Antlvertex opposite Plutão Venus—an aspect 174 similar to having Venus on the Descendant. Plutão Saturn and the local
MC were octile-trloctlle the opposition, to repeat the theme. The
same issue of mate and power was shown by Plutão MC conjunct Plutão Juno, the Scorpio asteroid, and the Plutão Sun was octile Plutão MC. Plutão Mars
in Scorpio was conjunct Pallas, another asteroid connected to
relationships, to repeat the message, and Plutão Moon was conjunct Plutão Pallas in Scorpio with an opposition to Vesta. Plutão Vesta squared Plutão Pluto. The conflict aspects involving fixed planets and signs and
houses pointed to some type of power issue, which, of course,
could have involved money, or material possessions, or any number of variations on the ability to share the material world
with others for mutual pleasure.
Directed Saturn was quincunx Vesta and transiting Saturn
squared Vesta. I have not seen many cases involving rape, but I
would expect aspects to Vesta in any event which included sexual
problems. Vesta seems to be the "ultimate" Virgo, with great
potential skill in handling a Job but often difficulties in close
personal relationships, especially where sex is involved. Vesta was
the vestal virgin, totally dedicated to her Job. It is also frequently
prominent in healers or when there are health problems.
Sharon handled the traumatic experience and was able to
move on. Cosmo "Girl" Our last woman with Saturn on the MC is Helen Gurley Brown
who was born on February 18. 1922at 3 AM CST in Green Forest.
AR. Like Collette. Brown is a professional writer who discovered
her talent early in life. Though she said in an interview that she
was terrified from the day she was born, her fear did not stop her
from writing stories and poems as a child, from putting on school
programs and giving dancing lessons to other children, and from
being the class valedictorian when she graduated from high school in 1939. Brown attended two colleges but did not complete
a degree. Her father had died when she was ten years old and she
was a "depression" baby. She is described as having gone through
18 secretarial-type Jobs, including working as a copy-writer and
account executive for advertising companies in Hollywood, but Helen Gurley Brown
Source; Birth Certificate
Profiles of Women
realized that she did not like office work. At that point, her
husband suggested that she write a book about single women in
a permissive society, and Brown hit the big time. Her book. Sex
and the Single Girl, was published in 1962. became a best seller,
and was made into a movie. She was made Editor-in-Chief of
Cosmopolitan Magazine in March 1965 and reduced its emphasis
on fiction to focus on young women. One critic called her initial
May 1965 issue an antifeminist equivalent of Playboy. Brown is
still writing. She published books in 1965. 1966, 1969, 1982, and
in 1993 at the age of seventy-one she produced a book on survival
by women over fifty.
Brown's identification with the quest for knowledge and the
urge to pass it on to others is shown by her Sagittarian Ascendant
and by Saturn, which rules the Capricorn in the first house, being
placed in the natural house of Sagittarius. Though 1 usually 176 The Book of Saturn interpret ninth house factors as future-oriented, any keys to
Letter One, including the rulers of all signs in the first house,
provide information about what the individual is doing from the
beginning of life. The placement of first house rulers in the fifth,
ninth, or eleventh houses suggests that their talents from the past
will be carried farther. Saturn's conjunction with the north lunar
node also suggests talents from the past, while the sign of Libra
points to artistic ability. Brown's chart is strongly air, with its
emphasis on Libra and Aquarius, including factors in the natural
house of Aquarius. She is clearly a highly articulate and verbally
fluent person. The U.S. World Almanac from 1976 to 1981 named
Brown as one out of the twenty-five most influential women in the
United States.
Though secondary progressions are my preferred system for
current issues and projecting into the future, solar arc directions
can also be useful and often provide especially strong indications
of drastic events in the early life. The arcs are very easy to calculate
and can be done mentally for early events, since everything is
moved about one degree per year. When we add ten degrees to
Brown's natal positions to see the aspects in the year her father
died, we can see that the Sun would conjunct Uranus and
quincunx the north lunar node for a possible relationship change.
Vesta would square the Sun. Neptune would square the Moon.
Uranus would quincunx Jupiter. Pluto and the East Point would
square Jupiter. Saturn would conjunct Pallas. Ceres would
oppose Vesta. Clearly, any astrologer working with solar arcs
would expect age ten to be important.
When Brown married on September 25. 1959, her Plutão Sun opposed Saturn. Her progressed Sun squared Pluto and the East
Point and then conjuncted the Plutão south lunar node while she was
writing her best-selling book. Obviously, she was handling her
cardinal cross well, successfully managing to stay married, hold
down ajob, and still do her own creative writing at the same time.
Instead of her marriage interfering with her job, it was her
husband's suggestion which led to her success, though it was her
own talent and hard work which accomplished it. Brown's Plutão lunar
nodes held squares to her East Point axis and Pluto for many years
of her life, and Plutão Pallas, one of the relationship asteroids, was also
in the cardinal cross when she married. Other aspects at the time
Included PMC opposite Vesta for her change of work, and Plutão Juno. Example Chart i si 77 Mercúrio - " at
/a,
Xm
A
'•30n*1"v-Ml
Ij/k38»
OS J M «
18'«
a—
JrO*
RH 3*43 MO
Curteyi
Foft 1922 Dm
Zcrm
Tim®
S&9C0 99*X
MAT A*. OiAsrr V
fV 13
a i6s «S8?06
»R
a«, a its f#o 19» Om
Zon* 6 00 Sumord Tim®
36»C0 B3W26 TfCCNC^
SCP & ?22 Om
Zen* 600 9land»ft] Tim®
36M20 93W» Trapcal Mercúrio *msm S* Plutão 1959
Omw 26
/ Helen Gurlcy Brown
September 25. 1959 Oil Mercúrio r w the marriage asteroid, conjunct Plutão Uranus. Plutão Venus opposed
Jupiter and was quincunx Plutão MC. Plutão Moon had Just entered Aries
and formed a Plutão New Moon a few months after the marriage, with
the lights still opposing Saturn. The New Moon marks a new
thirty-year cycle in the life—in Brown's case, as a successful
writer. Saturn does not offer "something for nothing." but It can
signal success If we realistically work for It. ^ 176 The Book of Saturn Iron Lady
Though a majority of the men In my collection who had Saturn on
the angles turned out to be politicians, dealing with government
power. I found almost no women In that field. We do have one
prominent example In Margaret Thatcher, the first woman Prime
Minister of England. "Maggie" Thatcher was born on October 13,
1925 at Mercúrio AM UT In Grantham, England. Her birth time comes
from her thanks to British astrologer Charles Harvey.
Thatcher was born with Saturn In the sign of Scorpio conjunct
her Ascendant within less than two degrees. As additional emphasis on her Scorplonlc nature, Pluto, the Ascendant ruler, was In
Its own house In a station, about to go retrograde. A planet In a
station Is given extra weight, whether It Is changing to direct or
retrograde motion as seen from earth. Pluto's trine to Saturn and
23 03 IIP 51 16
05 28
02
15 29 a
28 24 ii 01
A A A A
3814 15 31 d"
C9
O 19
23 14 04 Uc
an
~.o- 25
u 25 14
11
48 30
47 Saturno 13 flu 46 15
0
16 12 16
04
0?
33
07 X
cp
14
x"
49
48 26 Saturno 14
¥?
29 U
01 22
H
29 31
29
Margaret Thatcher
Source; Charles Harvey quotes her
[Lois| Rodden-ISAR Database 03 K 51 T 21 05 T 28
T
02 Example Charts 179 the Ascendant which it rules is a sign of inner harmony. Also,
because of the water emphasis, it shows the potential for security
coming partly from others, whether from a partner or inheritance
or return on Investments, etc. Water is the element of the subconscious, so trines with water planets or houses or signs
show inner harmony at the subconscious level, the faith that the
world will meet our needs. A wide trine from Uranus in Pisces in
the fourth house reinforces the message. However, there is also
plenty of conflict in the chart. Plutão Pluto has remained opposite
Jupiter all of Thatcher's life, while Plutão Jupiter moved through a
square to the Sun and then a square to Mercury and Plutão Chiron. The
conflict aspects in cardinal signs in fixed houses added to squares
in the fixed signs of Leo and Scorpio show power-struggle tendencies in the character. These can be handled successfully in
sports and business: Thatcher chose politics — a highly appropriate outlet.
Libra is one of the most common signs associated with the law
and politics, so Thatcher's Mars. Sun, and Mercury in that sign
also made it a good choice. Venus or the Moon in Libra are more
likely to be peacemakers, willing to compromise. Mars and the
Sun. asfire factors which seek personal power, are more likely to
compete. Mercury in Libra can be a good "devil's advocate," willing
to argue on either side of an issue to make sure both sides are
represented. But Thatcher had strong convictions, with her
Sagittarius identification shown by the sign in the first house and
both auxiliary Ascendants, the East Point and the Antivertex. in
the sign. Leo in the ninth house is also usually a sign of personal
ego investment in one's own "truth." With three keys to "mothering" there, the Moon. Ceres, and a lunar node. Thatcher might be
sure that her beliefs were for the good of the people, regardless of
how the people felt about it. Neptune in the configuration adds to
the emotional subconscious commitment to personal beliefs.
Chiron in Aries repeats the identification with the Absolute and
"final truth", while Jupiter in Capricorn in the Taurus house
shows someone likely to put her beliefs into tangible form, to make
a career out of them.
Thatcher first became Prime Minister on May 3. 1979 as the leader of the Conservative Party in England. Unlike the system in
the U.S.. when a majority of one of the Political Parties is elected 180 The Book of Saturn to Parliament, the Party leader becomes the Prime Minister. At
that time. Thatcher's Plutão MC had just started a sextlle toher Moon,
though her local Plutão MC In London had started the aspect about six
months earlier. Plutão Sun had just started a quincunx to Plutão Pluto for
the change In personal action and power, and It was also octlletrloctlle the mean positions of the Plutão lunar nodes. I use both the
"true" and "mean" methods for calculating the nodes since both
seem to work. Plutão Mercury was on the Antlvertex opposite Pallas for
the change In Thatcher's political power and media attention. Plutão Mercury also held a grand fire trine to Chiron and Plutão Ceres and Plutão Neptune. Other aspects Included Plutão East Point on Plutão Jupiter square
Mercury and Plutão Chiron and quincunx Neptune. This T-square in
T.i
7Wr SO 4a
a?* "2 B 12 \ ... Tmtcmf Mercúrio ?5
7onm
SHindard nmo
MN55 0W39 TroacM
NATAL CHART
rtochtf
Od 1925 Crn
ion*
rrocxat
Pmwmm MAY 1979
Tfmlcme
Od
925 0m
lorn OOS^nOAro TMn*
0W39 Tropcai
Dractod
1979
OlAfrf nng 160 I3> \ Margaret Thatcher
May 3. 1979 H 91 Example Charts 1_. 181 cardinal signs In fixed houses Is a classic picture of a power
struggle, which Thatcher won. but I'm not sure how many
astrologers would have predicted the outcome. Plutão Ascendant
opposed Plutão Pallas to reinforce the change In personal political
action.
Transiting Saturn at the time was In 7 Virgo, making Thatcher
an example of Grant Lewi's theory that Individuals reach a peak
of power as Saturn reaches their MCs. However. T Saturn was
octlle-trloctlle the progressed cardinal T-square described above
and square the East Point axis, signaling the continuous power
struggles to come. Solar Arc Saturn was In 7 Capricorn trine T
Saturn and on the midpoint of two angles, the East Point and Plutão PS 24 •>2 V'? - Innef nnn
Umtchef
Oct 13. 1925 Qrn
SUnOa/T)
62WS5 OWjS Trnoc*
NATAL CHART
mm^im Thatchm
Oct
325
3^
SUndafd in©
2ooe
&2N55 0W39 rope* Plutão -ogreMtl NOV 990
Tnatehvr
Oct '3 i
Sanoarts "Kne
Zone
SPN55 0W39 ifopcat
O^cxeo
990
H ^s. (MfBt nng
\v
/o
M
X
/ 31«
• 1 2S0\ 50 "S,B Júpiter ^10
19
X.
S., M " a
JH V.
vV
^
39
tsX
XX
n* Júpiter ^
X^
»e
" Netuno '
X
45/
?E "
J '3
®
»
V.
rrX
*05
3ft V.
Margaret Thatcher
November 22f 1990 u -26- 182 Antivertex, holding semisextiles to both. Perhaps that was a hint
of Thatcher's continued success in putting into effect her conservative program to reduce taxes and social programs,
increased the disparity between the rich and the poor. which The network of aspects centered on Plutão Mercury when Thatcher
first became Prime Minister is fasclnatlngbecausewhen Thatcher's Plutão Sun moved into the same degree she was forced to resign on
November 22. 1990. She had been reelected twice and had held
power for eleven and a half years—the longest period of any Prime
Minister of England in this century. Her Plutão Moon when she left the
post was in 18 Capricorn trioctile her MC, square her Sun, and
quincunx Plutão Pallas. Plutão Venus opposed Ceres, one of our keys to
work. Thatcher's Plutão Ascendant in London opposed Vesta, our
primary Virgo asteroid. Plutão Juno squared Mars as she battled for her
principles. Thatcher was given a title afterwards, in appreciation
of her assistance to the elite of England. She has written a book
and done lecture tours in the U.S. The "Iron Lady." as she was
known for years, is still speaking out for her convictions, living up
to that Saturn on the Ascendant. Massachusetts Miracle? Our last Saturn-MC male leader is Michael Dukakis, who campaigned for the presidency in 1988 and lost to George Bush. As
already mentioned. Bentsen was the Vice Presidential candidate
with Dukakis, so both members of that ticket had the power
signature. Dukakis was born on November 3. 1933 at 5:50 PM
EST in Boston, Massachusetts.
Mondale's Saturn and MC in Sagittarius fit his minister father.
Aquarius was there for Dukakis, whose father was an obstetrician. You will remember that the Gauquelin research found
Saturn in the ninth house for famous doctors and scientists. Plutão Saturn was on the MC for a number of years for Dukakis, but it
had moved beyond it before he ran for a national office. He earlier
had served in the Massachusetts House of Representatives for
eight years while Saturn was conjunct his MC. During this period,
he showed his liberal potential, sponsoring legislation for the Example Charts 183 ' Vênus 18
10 24
T 07
H
03 11 43 n
25 20 20
T
44 29 b H 24
£ 02g 33R 47 19
10 09
T
47 45 1026
04 29 10 11 44
O 27
Cf 18 12 00
30 03
22 "U 53 o 11 29
I
44
19 04:
zs> 30 05
24
o:':;
ZD
45
45 u
25 11 11
to m>
53 55 •n
18 if
11
-TV
20 39
44 11 oc. 43
10 np 18 Michael Dukakis
Source: Fran McEvoy quotes hospital records
[Lois] Rodden-ISAR Database
protection of consumers and the environment, including the first
no-fault insurance law.
Dukakis was elected governor of Massachusetts on November
5. 1974 and took over the office on January 2. 1975. Most
astrologers allow a wider orb of up to three degrees for transits,
while progressions and directions are limited to one-degree orbs.
T Satum was in 18 Cancer for the election, with a quincunx to
Mars and his tenth house Pallas, a yod pointing to a major change
of activity. As another of those fascinating repetitions of patterns,
when Dukakis lost the presidential election in November 1988. his •(£ 184 The Book of Saturn 71 TO
«»
A, o 0 Gêmeos ?|H T6an MIcfM OkikaU*
No 3. 13X1 im son Qi
Zona SOOSVtMnlTm
42NJf 7tVtf3 TTTMCM
NAT#L CKAKT
MR « \ o22 \
\v'3/S? NM 3, t«m 17b son Oft
Zm* TtWI
«3rc
KJV 1974
I7h
Zone 5 00923
fimt
42H31 71W3
^0««dtoNo» &. 1974 ■"wiV e .
29\fc T. Saturno IBS Michael Dukakis Ml" November 5, 1974 Plutão Ascendant In Washington D.C. was in the same 18 Cancer
degree, holding a yod to Mars in 18 Sagittarius and Plutão Venus in 18
Aquarius. How much was it the cosmos and how much was it his
own nature saying "You can handle the governorship, but the
presidency is an overreach"?
Other aspects when Dukakis won the Massachusetts governorship were mixed, as usual. Among others were Plutão Sun sextlle/
trine the lunar nodes and Plutão East Point trine Pallas while Plutão MC was
trine Pluto. At the same time. Plutão Moon squared its Plutão nodes, Plutão MC
was octlle Saturn, and Plutão Ascendant was octlle Chiron. The aspect
mixture fits the situation: enough confidence and skill to win the
office and enough challenges in the office to give him a hard time.
Dukakis had Plutão Jupiter sextlle Mars from Just after he began his Example Charts 1 185 career In the state legislature through his single term as Governor.
His career to that point had tilted toward the liberal side and he
was widely admired. When he became governor, he found the state
In a financial crisis, and he alienated many of his liberal supporters by cutting services and raising taxes to restore the state to
financial solvency.
The aspects In 1988, as In 1974. were mixed, but they did not
seem Insurmountable. There were several progressed quincunxes.
Including Plutão Sun to the Ascendant. Plutão Mercury to Pluto. Plutão Pallas to Plutão Vesta, Plutão Ceres to the Sun, though It was also sextlle Saturn. Plutão Ascendant, which was conjunct Pluto, was also quincunx the
north lunar node, and Plutão Uranus was holding a long quincunx to
Juno In addition to a long square to Pluto. As we have seen, the
quincunx can be present when the politician wins and moves Into 10.
o9
««*»
V29
■■
'a* 28o on >
2* i
2 5 Bw 1 > « B«0 <5*0 J3n /
I ' r.1) rng
3. 1833 vm SOn 08
7oo# 5 00 Sfcr*lflrt
7iw 3 repeal
NATAL CHART
NCH 3. *933 iTTvSOn 0»
Zone S.X
T«ne
421921 Tiw 3 TajpCJK
prc^**ioMCN 11968 ll/ Júpiter J| 7 / ?1
» 3 / jo No- 3L 1833 tThSOr 0t
Zone SjOO
t«t«
i7fO\ /1W3 f20 Gêmeos fl «s
Michael rhiknkis
November 1, 1988 7
— / 186
/
a new Job and home, or when he loses and is separated from his
goal. Dukakis also had harmony aspects, including a grand trine
between Plutão Mars, Plutão Vesta, and Plutão Chiron. Plutão Chiron was in a long
conjunction with the Moon which brought it into the configuration, though Mars had moved beyond the one-degree orb to the
Moon which is allowed in progressions and directions. Plutão Juno
squared a tight natal Vesta-Neptune conjunction, but it was
sextile the MC. It was indeed a mixed picture.
If we simply concentrated on the various positions of Saturn,
we would see T Saturn on the eighth house cusp with an octile to Plutão Saturn and a quincunx to the Moon. That is not a positive
augury. But D Saturn was just under 6 Aries, coming to a sextile
to the Ascendant. The outcome still seems uncertain using traditional astrological factors and techniques.
I was told to omit the new asteroids when writing this book, but
perhaps a brief look is permissible in this last example chart. Few
astrologers are aware that there are now over 5,000 of these small
planets whose orbits have been calculated and who have been
given a variety of names. Of the hundreds with which I have
worked so far. the names have fit the situation when the asteroids
were added to horoscopes. It is impossible to work with the
asteroids and to still believe in chance. The personal name
asteroids have been among the most amazing when they consistently appear in prominent positions in the charts of people with
those names, but the asteroids named for mythical figures and
geographical area's have also been meaningful.
We can start by noting that when Michael Dukakis was born,
Michel, the French version of his first name, was conjunct his Sun
within less than one degree. Plutão Michel opposed his Chiron when he
was separated from his goal of becoming president. It was also
octile his natal George in 16 Libra 53. the first name of his
opponent for the office. Plutão George and Plutão Herberta, two names of
Bush, were conjunct and both opposed the natal East Point of
Dukakis, one of the keys to his basic identity. Plutão Georgia, another
version of George, was in 24 Libra conjunct natal Herberta, again
Joining two names of his opponent, and they squared Pluto and Plutão Ascendant and opposed Uranus. Natal Georgia was on Barbara,
Bush's wife's name, and the Plutão MC of Dukakis opposed both of
them. How does the universe manage that? What are the statis- Example Charts 187 tical odds that two political opponents would have their personal
names all involved in conflict aspects at the time they are in a
contest? Remember, we are looking at the sky one day after birth
for each year of life—symbolism piled on symbolism. All aspects
mentioned are exact within one degree.
There is more. The asteroid Washingtonia had an "la" added
to it to "feminize" it — a policy no longer followed — but it stands
for our nation's capital which was the power goal for both Dukakis
and Bush. (Herberta and Georgia also were named for men, but
the asteroid name was "feminized" because they had "ordinary"
orbits. Only asteroids with unusual orbits could be given "masculine" names prior to recent protests by feminists which produced
a change in the policy.)
Dukakis had Plutão Washingtonia on his MC square his natal Sun
and Michel. His Plutão Mars was on his natal America in the ninth
house as he fought for the trust of the country, but Plutão America was
square natal Moon and Plutão Chiron as the people dashed his hopes.
It was also quincunx Plutão Victoria. I am watching Ganesa. which was
named for the Hindu god with the head of an elephant, to see
whether it will "work" for the Republican Party. Dukakis had Plutão Ganesa on his eighth house cusp, and the Republicans as the
Party of the rich always outspend the Democrats.
There is always more that might be said, but time and space
run out in this corner of the cosmos. If we needed any more
evidence that the universe is meaningful and that the sky offers
us symbolic ways to decipher the meaning, these tiny asteroids
would provide it. The physical universe studied by materialistic
science is a part of it — perhaps equivalent to what you could see
of a city by looking through a keyhole. Every religion has its own
keyhole, too. And every school of astrology is diligently pursuing
Its individual insights through its own keyhole. But the cosmos is
an "and." not an "either-or." Perhaps each of us is a bubble of selfconsciousness rooted In the sea of universal consciousness which
is totally connected and open. Perhaps we are all participating,
connected parts of the Absolute as it seeks to manifest as yet
unrealized potentials. CHARTER NINE ASTROLOGY AND HEALTH A basic concept being discussed in this book is the view that
astrology Is a psychological system, that the nature of ultimate
reality is more like mind than matter. Obviously, life as we
experience It In this physical world Is a mixture of consciousness
(Including the subconscious) and physical forces which are theoretically interchangeable energy/matter. It is pointless to argue
which comes first, the chicken or the egg. In the physical world,
our experience is circular. Our bodies, our emotions, our Ideas,
our beliefs, and our actions are in a constant state of flux in the
process of living, interacting with and influencing each other.
Modern science in recent years has been amassing evidence
for the "mind-body" connection, demonstrating the degree to
which our emotions affect our body functions. Hans Selye demonstrated the effects of stress, Includlngboth physical and emotional
stress, showinghow it could lead to the breakdown of the Immune
system. The relatively new field of psychoncurolmmunology Is
exploring the connections between emotions and body reactions.
Yet. many, perhaps most, medical doctors still function as if the
body was a machine which they have to repair when it stops
functioning properly. Fortunately, an Increasing number, often
calling themselves "holistic" doctors, are open to complementary 190 methods of healing, and are recognizing that there is a person in
the body who is playing a vital role in determining its state of
health or illness.
One of these modern MDs is Christiane Northrup in Maine,
who publishes a monthly newsletter called "Women's Health." She
says flatly that toxic emotions are frequently the cause of the
bodily symptoms we call illness and that more positive emotions
hold the key to sudden and inexplicable remissions of illness. Dr.
Northrup has also written a book called Women'sBodies. Women's
Wisdom offering her ideas on how to create physical and emotional
health.
Andrew Weil, MD is a professor at the University of Arizona
Medical School in Tucson. He is the author of several books and
a firm believer in the power of the mind to influence the body. Dr.
Weil's latest book is called Spontaneous Healing and is devoted to
ways to enhance our bodies' natural ability to maintain health and
to heal themselves.
Martin Rush, MD is a psychiatrist in Ohio who called his book
Decoding the Secret Language of Your Body. He describes the "many ways our bodies send us messages" with our symptoms,
starting with whispers, moving to louder calls, and finally to screams with more serious illnesses.
Henry Dreher is not an MD. but he has been studying and
writing about health and medicine for years. His book, The
Immune Power Personality, describes a variety of research that
provides evidence for seven personality traits which can be
developed to help us stay healthy. His seven traits have considerable overlap, but each is based on a body of research carried out
by a different individual or a group of individuals.
Many more references could be cited, including the quarterly
iournal Advances that is produced by the Institute for the Advancement of Health, which has been publishing studies on mindbody interrelationships since its inception in 1984. The Institute
was originally spearheaded and funded by Eileen Rockefeller Growald. but more recently it was taken over by the Fetzer
Foundation in Kalamazoo, Michigan.
The clinical psychologist Fawrence Le Shan, Ph.D. has published several books about his work, especially concerning the role Astrology and Health 191 ft of the personality in getting and recovering from cancer. The use
of mental visualization as an aid in recovering from cancer was
publicized by Carl Simonton. MD and his former wife Stephanie.
Lawrence Dossey. MD has documented the healing effects of
prayer in a recent book. The use of biofeedback for the healing of
both psychological and physical problems is expanding in many
areas, spearheaded by Dr. Elmer Green, who directed the research department of the Menninger Clinic in Topeka. Kansas
until his recent retirement. The evidence is monumental, yet the
pervasive belief that ultimate reality is meaningless energy/
matter, that consciousness is only an "epiphenomenon" produced
by the physical brain, still prevents most people from making full
use of their potential mind-power. Dr. Deepak Chopra has become
a media star in recent years with his books, cassette tapes,
magazine and TV interviews, all challenging the pervasive materialism which sees people as helpless victims subject to "bad luck"
or "bad genes" when they are ill. and dependent on a medical
mechanic to fix their ailing bodies.
Of course, the metaphysicians have been telling us for over
one hundred years that our minds create our bodies and our lives.
Mary Baker Eddy, who founded Christian Science, the Fillmores,
who founded Unity. Ernest Holmes, who founded Religious Science. Norman Vincent Peale. who stayed in a traditional
Christian denomination but popularized the "power of positive
thinking," and countless others have emphasized the power of the
mind. But there is a major problem with much of the metaphysical
preaching. The standard approach is almost entirely focused on
"negative thinking", which is blamed for every variety of life
problem from illness to unfulfilling relationships to poverty. In my
experience, emotions rather than thoughts are the power that
creates life. Repeating mantrams like Coue's "every day in every
way I am gettingbetter and better" may help if the individual starts
feeling more positive. But if the subconscious feelings are unchanged. the life will remain unchanged. In fact, it may get worse
if people add guilt to the rest of their destructive emotions, being
assured by the metaphysical gurus that they would not have
problems if they Just changed their "thinking."
A helpful metaphor pictures our thoughts as similar to the
rudder in a boat. The rudder can help to steer the boat, but the 192 The Book of Saturn boat's power comes from an engine, or oars pulled by a person, or
the wind in the sails. The emotions are the power, and the intellect
can influence them if we can move the angle of the rudder or of the
sails or of the oars. If the subconscious emotional habits are too
set to be altered by the intellect, we are not in control of the boat.
Our emotional habits are the basis of our character and they
create our destiny. I believe that these emotional habits evolved
during past experiences, that they are operating from the beginning of each new life, and that they are symbolized in the patterns
In the horoscope, the map of the sky at birth. To the extent that
we can change our emotional habits, and only to that extent, can
we change our destiny, ourphysical and psychological health and
the events in our lives.
The subconscious aspect of the mind, which is most of it,
controls our bodies and our lives. It keeps us breathing while we
sleep, digests our food, repairs minor damage like bruises, cuts,
and burns to the skin, copes with marauding germs and bacteria,
etc. Obviously, our bodies need adequate nutrition, exercise, rest,
shelter, etc., to continue to function. Given those physical necessities, I think that most illness stems from negative emotions.
These can be fear, anger, guilt, depression, self-pity, resentment,
etc., etc. If we consciously acknowledge the painful feelings,
assure the subconscious side of the mind that we can and will deal
with the problem, do what is within our power to change the
situation, and then can trust that a Higher Power will help what
is beyond our personal power, bodily symptoms will usually clear
spontaneously. I truly believe that the body can be self-healing if
its physical necessities are provided and Its manager, the subconscious, is reasonably happy and basically confident about the
future. The confidence should Include some faith in one's personal
ability to handle things and some faith in a Higher Power which
will help when we have done the best we can.
Fire is the element of such faith. Mars and the Sun and their
signs and houses symbolize our personal self-confidence that we
have the right and the power to be ourselves. Jupiter and its signs
and houses symbolize our faith in a power beyond human beings.
If we put our faith in a fragment of life: money, a Job. another
human (such as a parent or a mate or a child or a friend), or even
in a "narrow" exclusive religious dogma that masquerades as Astrology and Health 1 93 ft Final Truth, it is a kind of Idolatry. The substitute for the Absolute
will let us down. Often, we will lose our idol to force us to find a
bigger God. The Absolute Is beyond our comprehension at this
stage of life. All we can know with certainty is that it must be more
life-enhancing than life-destructive, for otherwise everything
would already be destroyed. So we can trust "IT" to enhance our
lives after we have done our best. Confidence, faith, hope are
symbolized in astrology by fire plus Letter Twelve, and they are the
keys to the immune system. When they are blocked by negative
emotions as listed above, fear, depression, self-pity, inadequacy,
guilt, anger, resentment, etc., we shut down the immune system
and the recuperative power of life itself.
Conscious positive thoughts can actually make matters worse
when they become a form of denial of the subconscious miserable
feelings that are intensifying the problems. The subconscious
uses body symptoms to get our attention, to get us to deal with the
destructive emotions. The body symptom can be a whisper or a
scream as Dr. Rush suggests, but it Is saying "I am not happy. Do
something." When we consciously deny the painful feelings,
chanting that they are unreal, error, etc.. without dealing with the
feelings or the life situations, the subconscious gets more desperate and the symptoms often get worse. Babies and small children
have not yet developed the conscious awareness to be able to do
anything about their situation, so they need help, and serious
physical problems also call for medical assistance. But activity
which builds one's self-esteem and strengthens one's faith in
general can help to start us on the road to improved health.
Happiness and health are partners, reinforcing each other.
I am not a medical doctor, and I do not make physical diagnoses from a horoscope. I think that many details are possible with each of the psychological principles in astrology, so
when astrologers are trying to specify details, whether in the body
or in the life events, they are guessing from many possibilities. If
the astrologer's psychic ability is functioning well at that time
and/or with that client, the guesses may be quite accurate. But
1 have seen many examples of inaccurate guesses which needlessly alarmed and misled the client. Basically, 1 think it is bad
psychology, bad metaphysics, and bad astrology to tell people they
are going to be sick. I stay with the psychological issues shown In 194 The Book of Saturn the horoscope, with the belief that if we successfully integrate the
emotional conflicts which we all have, we are not likely to be sick.
Integration involves staying conscious of conflicts and looking for
ways to compromise so no part of us is totally blocked and denied.
What astrology can do is to move from the life detail back to
the psychological principle which lies behind it. So, if the client
has a problem with part of the body and provides this information
to the astrologer, it is often possible to clarify the emotional
roots of the problem. Then the client can let the MD or alternative
healer work with the physical level and the client can use the
psychological insight to work on that level, and hopefully also to
draw on spiritual resources as well.
Traditional astrology spelled out the general outline of correlations between the physical body and the twelve sides of life.
Everyone has seen the diagram of the "grand man of the zodiac"
with Aries at the head and Pisces at the feet. This ancient insight
seems to be accurate, but it is obviously only a small part of the
picture. The physical body is complex almost beyond imagining,
and we need research to support and clarify even the limited
number of correlations which we have between body areas and
psychological principles. The need for caution is obvious when we
examine the conflicting claims made by different schools of
astrology. Western astrology, up to and including Vedic astrology
in India, uses four elements and classes two as "positive" and two
as "negative." These words are not to be construed as "good" and
"bad", though there is a tilt in that direction in light of our cultural
bias which favors males, with fire and air called masculine and
positive and earth and water called feminine and negative. Chinese astrology uses five elements, omitting air and including wood
and metal. When you analyze the association of the major body
organs with the elements, there is almost an exact reversal
between the two systems. The organs called positive in China are
mostly connected with zodiacal signs called negative in the west.
If the correlations were exactly reversed, it would Just be a matter
of semantics, but there are some discrepancies, so it is not
possible to exactly match the two systems. Obviously, such major
issues will only be settled by systematic research.
The principles presented in this chapter are from western
astrology and should not be mixed with theories from Chinese or Astrology and Health 195 ft other oriental astrology. The concepts have not been validated by
research. They are based on anecdotal experience and logic. They
should not be used to attempt physical diagnosis from a
horoscope, but only to move from known physical symptoms
to theoretical emotions which maybe contributing to problems
on any level of the life.
Individuals seeking to improve their health should work
on all levels, including the physical level with diet. rest, exercise,
and medical help when needed, along with dealing with the emotional habits and the spiritual beliefs. We need to first become
conscious of the emotions, and then to try to change the painful
habits. Self-pity is the quickest way I know to become a victim! It
shuts down the fire. We need to become conscious of our subconscious beliefs about the nature of life and the Absolute, and to
change fear into faith. Changing subconscious habits and firmly
held beliefs is not easy! We can read about the research of
parapsychology which demolishes the dogma of materialism. Astrology shows us a world of meaning, not chance. Associating
with people who have faith can help. Emotions are contagious. We
are connected at the subconscious level, open to all emotions
which resonate with our own. So if we are feeling fear, we are
reinforced by being connected to fear everywhere and everywhen.
Time and space are the parameters in which we live in the physical
world, but they are quite different in the subconscious Whole.
As has been written repeatedly. 1 think the sky shows the
cosmic order but it does not create it. I think we are born where
our habits fit the state of the cosmos, we do what comes naturally,
get the consequences, and eventually learn to change the emotional habits which are inviting unpleasant consequences. The
horoscope just helps us to become consciously aware of what in
us is producing our lives, so we can use the rudder to steer the
boat. When the mirror in the sky is highlighting Saturn, we know
it is time for feedback on how we have been handling the rules of
the game.
We can react with fear of our report card and attract more fear
from the universe and believe that Saturn is doing something to
us. Sensitive people do experience an increase of the relevant
emotion as they resonate with its expression everywhere and
everywhen. The mistake is in believing that Saturn is causing or 196 even Just influencing our experience. The clock offers an alternate
form of Information to the experience of a growling stomach to
confirm that It Is lunch time. The clock does not make us hungry.
Hunger Is part of our own Internal rhythm.
Alternately, Instead of reacting with fear when Saturn is
prominent In current patterns In the sky. we can react with a
realistic analysis of what personal habits and past actions have
permitted the current consequences in the life. If we have been
ignoring the rules, Ignorance does not excuse us. If we have been
fighting the rules, they are bigger than our personal wills. If we
havebeen trytngto run away, therulesare there, wherever we run.
As long as we live in this physical world, we have to deal with them
realistically. When we do that, we get great results! An important
reason for offering this chapter In this book is that dealing with
one's physical body Is a significant part of handling the rules and
responsibilities which Saturn represents. Thus, we are presenting
some practical guidelines for assisting health maintenance. Good
health. In turn, allows a person to do more of what s/he wants to
do.
We can only change our own attitudes and actions. We
can't change anyone else. So there will be many times when we
can't change outer circumstances In our lives, but we can change
our attitudes. Our experience is always based on our evaluation
of what happens. Different Individuals can have what seem to
others to be Identical events In their lives, but their Inner
experiences and reactions can be totally different. The vital,
paramount Importance of our beliefs Is partly due to the fact that
our evaluations are determined by our beliefs. Our belief system
or world view determines what we consider real versus imaginary,
what we rate as Important, what we class as ethical or moral, what
we see as desirable and as possible.
The most striking healings from supposedly Incurable illnesses are usually seen when an Individual has a religious
conversion experience which truly changes the basic beliefs. Faith
may not move mountains without the aid of some muscles, but it
can heal the body. Just accepting our own humanness and the
humanness of others so we stop expecting more perfection than
is possible can be Incredibly healing. Consciously acknowledging
frustrations but also making sure that every day we do some Astrology and Health 197 ft things just for pleasure can be truly healing. Liking ourselves and
our lives along with faith in the Infinite Whole of which we are a
part helps to keep our immune systems fully functional.
We can change past emotional habits if we keep substituting
the optimistic potentials of evolving life to replace the pain of the
past. Pain is a warning signal. It calls for attention and changing
what we are doing. We learn through pain, but if we simply go on
suffering without changing our attitudes and actions, we have
flunked the lesson. We need to look for what we can do and do it. Psychological
Physical - Astrological - Associations Letter One in our astrological alphabet includes Mars, all factors
in or ruling the first house, and all factors in Aries. Psychologically, Letter One shows our sense of our personal identity at birth,
our sense of our right and our power to be ourselves and to do what
we want. Physical associations include a major role in the immune
system which resists attacks from pollution, bacteria, viruses,
etc. Low energy is one of the first signs that we are blocking
ourselves, whether we feel we can't do what we want due to lack
of personal power or due to our conscience and the rights of other
people. Alternately, we may feel we have to do activities we don't
want to do. r'"' ' w ? 'V Usually, the Mars principle will be in conflict with other drives
in the nature such as the desire for pleasant relationships with
other people, or practical limits in job opportunities and the need
to pay the bills, or responsibilities for a family, etc. Life always calls
for compromise between our different and inherently conflicting
desires. No one can do everything he or she desires at all times.
Those who try. like Charles Stewart, are classed as psychopaths
and eventually they hit the limits of personal will and power in
some form. (Stewart murdered his wife to collect on her insurance
and tried to blame a black man for the murder.)
Other physical problems associated with the Mars principle
include anything which breaks the skin and leads to bloodshed,
from minor cuts to major surgery. Mars is also associated with 198 The Bootof Saturn burns and fever, including inflammation anywhere in the body.
Any diagnostic term which ends in "itis" such as appendicitis is
partly connected to our right and power to do what we want.
Formerly, doctors tried to reduce any elevation in the temperature
of patients until they realized the higher-than-normal temperature was an effort by the body to fight off infections. It should only
be lowered when it is so high that it becomes life-threatening.
Mars is also associated with iron, so anemia points to a blocked Mars. With its association with the head, headaches are
common reactions to a blocked Mars. Blocked sinuses and other
symptoms of colds include Mars and when fluid is involved, we
know that one of our water desires is also implicated. The latter
could be Letter Four if home and family issues are the problem, or
Letter Eight if peer relationships are primary, or Letter Twelve if
lack of faith in a Higher Power is the source of the blockage.
Aneurysms. which are blood clots which block arteries or veins,
and strokes when cells break, and hemorrhage internally are also
probably the Mars principle in conflict with one of the water or
earth desires for security.
If we assign the five visible planets to the five traditional
senses. Mars would logically be connected to taste, which requires
immediate contact and is theoretically subject to one's control in
deciding to take something into the mouth. Mars rules the
muscles, so muscle problems call for us to work to develop our
physical strength. Accidents are frequently connected to Letter
One. Minor accidents may be due to an excess of Mars overconfldence. Major accidents more typically let us escape from having
to do something we did not want to do but felt we had to force
ourselves to do. Violence generally involves the Mars principle.
When we are the subject of violence, attacked by others, it is
usually a sign that we are failing to use our own power in constructive ways.
Mars was feared in the ancient world, which saw the destructive consequences when power was abused and which failed to
realize that Mars representedone'spersonal rights and power and
was destructive only when blocked or manifested excessively. If we
sit down and stop using our muscles in our later years, we lose our
self-confidence along with our physical strength and open ourselves to many illnesses which are not the inevitable result of aging Astrology and Health 199 fe but are an abandonment of our Mars action. No one can do
everything they want, but we had better do some things that we
want. Letter Two includes Venus, all factors in or ruling the signs in the
second house, and all factors in Taurus. There are far fewer
problems associated with Letter Two than with Letter One. Venus
Is the pleasure principle. As Letter Two, It Indicates our capacity
to enjoy the material world even when it is not perfect. Think of
Ferdinand sitting In the field smelling the flowers. Of course. If you
put a fire planet in Taurus or conjunct Venus, or a fine planet or
sign in the second house, the combination will be much more
energetic.
Taurus rules the throat in the grand man of the zodiac, and as
the key to our pleasure, Venus is also associated with sugar, so it
is implicated in diabetes. I think that Venus is also a key to the
skin, but this Is an area of controversy In astrology, with some
astrologers connecting the skin to Cancer and some to Capricorn.
We make contact with others with the skin, so the Libra side of
Venus is a logical association, and it will be discussed again when
we look at Libra. If we assign the five visible planets to the five
traditional senses, Venus seems closer to the sense of touch, with
the Taurus love of texture.
The first two sides of life are totally focused on personal
desires, with the connotation of youth, naivete, and a kind of
spontaneous immediacy. By Letter Three, we are starting to take
the needs
ourselves. and rights of others into account, seeing beyond Though physical problems can be due to excesses, most are
due to inner conflicts between different desires. We can assume
that throat problems signal a lack of pleasure in the life, but
something has to be blocking the pleasure. Often, sore throats are
due to drainage from the sinuses, signaling some sort of Mars
block when we can't do what we want to do. The inhibition is
usually a water issue, but it can also involve earth since both
elements seek security. Infections always Involve a water principle
when negative emotions have been denied recognition and resolution. So the Letter Two problems mostly just point to a denial of 200 The Book of Saturn pleasure, but other factors will provide the key to the reason for
the denial. Overweight is possible with Letter Two, but since its
basic desire is pleasure, usually the individual will avoid serious
obesity, which leads to major discomfort. Letter Three includes Mercury, all factors in or ruling the signs
in the third house, and all factors in Gemini. The basic desire here
is the development of the conscious side of the mind, the ability
to learn and to communicate. We develop these skills by observing
life and interacting with people around us who are peers, including siblings, other collateral relatives who are not authority
figures, and neighbors. The basic drive of Letter Three is insatiable
curiosity, which is satisfied through activity involving eye-mindhand coordination. Of the five traditional senses, vision fits best
here. We are learning here to be detached, objective, with air.
space, between us and the world so we are spectators and
commentators. Perspective is an air word, the capacity to see both
the good and the bad, to gain conscious understanding, to talk
about the situation, and then to accept it without having to do
anything about it.
Physically, this side of life is associated with the lungs for
breathing and speech, with the nervous system which conveys
information from the senses to the mind and instructions back
from the mind to the muscles, and with the arms and hands which
are used to investigate the world around us. Problems can include
breathing difficulty such as asthma, emphysema, and tuberculosis. These normally are indicated by conflict between some form
of Letter Three and one of the water sides of life. The water need
for security or simply subconscious habits from the past are the
most common blocks to the air ability to take things lightly as a
spectator who is separated from possible threats literally by space
and metaphorically by understanding which provides the ability
to handle things. Difficulty in breathing is sometimes correlated
with holding back on speech for fear of alienating others or saying
something inaccurate.
Problems with the nervous system are likely to have a Letter
Three component, but can include much more. Electricity carries
the information along the nerves, which brings Uranus into the
picture. It is carried in the myelin sheath, a fatty outer layer of the Astrology and Health 201 ft nerves, and fat brings in Jupiter. When the nerve impulse has to
cross the space between one nerve and the next, it is carried across
this synapse by a fluid, which brings in a water principle— probably Letter Four, which is very involved in running the body.
Mercury. Uranus, and Jupiter are all associated with intelligence
and the Moon is the major key to the personal subconscious.
Most Mercury problems can be helped by developing conscious awareness and understanding of the situation and developing the detachment of a broad perspective. It is always possible
to have problems due to excesses in one area of life, but more often,
the Mercury motto is helpful: "If It is not going to be important in
one hundred years, don't worry about it." A relatively new psychotherapy technique (called EMDR or Eye Movement Desensltlzation and Reprocessing) developed in California has been found to
be helpful for work with post-traumatic stress disorder. Francine
Shapiro is the woman who developed the system. The technique
works, but the therapists mostly don't know why it works. The
traditional technique for such problems calls for the former victim
of rape or war trauma or whatever to repeatedly visualize the
experience. Theoretically, eventually the traumatic memories
would diminish in intensity, but this does not always happen. The
new action added to such re-experiencing of the past trauma
involves the therapist moving his or her fingers in front of the client
while the latter follows the moving hand with the eyes. Somehow,
this simple action seemed to lessen the emotional charge of the
painful memories. Francine Shapiro has just published a handbook for clinicians. Eye Movement Desensitization and Reprocessing: Basic Principles and Procedures (Guilford Press. 1996). Note, the hand and the eyes are both Mercury. Somehow, this action
helps clients to gain more objectivity and perspective, to distance
themselves from the emotional pain and to start to let it go. Letter Four includes the Moon, all factors in or ruling the signs
in the fourth house, and all factors in Cancer. Letter Four
symbolizes our emotional security needs, our baby side which we
never totally outgrow and our capacity to be a parent and nurture
others. It includes the home and family, both the family we are
born into and one of the parents, and the family we produce
ourselves as adults. Letter Five is our ability to procreate offspring, 2(2 as one form of creativity, but Letter Four is our ability to take care
of them after we get them.
As a key to one's personal subconscious mind, Letter Four is
involved in many body functions, including the stomach and the
breasts of women which provide food for their infants. Digestion
starts in the stomach, though it continues through Letters Six.
Seven, and Eight. These are all part of the interpersonal area
where we are learning what is ours and what is not ours in
relationships with other people. In a metaphorically similar way,
the digestive process discriminates and retains what is personally
useful, rightfully ours, in our food, and it relinquishes what is not
appropriately ours so it is discarded as waste.
Water symbolizes the subconscious side of the mind, as has
been said repeatedly, so it is the repository of habits from the past.
It is also the psychic element open to. connecting us to. the Whole,
so there is always a sense of vulnerability with water. Its role is to
absorb and assimilate the results of the experiences of the other
three elements. Assimilated experiences become habits, responses
carried out automatically at the subconscious level without the
need for conscious attention and decision. Habits free us to let us
explore new options, to keep learning and growing while routine
subsistence activity is handled by the subconscious.
Since the water instinct is always to hold on and hold in. to
maintain the familiar past, it is often in conflict with the fire and
air urges to let go and to move on. Constructive, life-enhancing
habits are highly valuable, as Indicated, to permit new growth. But
it is also possible for the subconscious to become mired in painful,
self-defeating emotional habits. When we repress our negative
emotions, which means we ignore them and keep them out of
conscious awareness, the subconscious gets our attention with
body symptoms. One physical result can be the production of
tumors, encapsulated fluid. These may be benign where minor
issues are involved or malignant with more intense, destructive
emotions. Becoming conscious of the emotional pain is a positive
first step toward healing, but it is also necessary to take action to
deal with the life problems and then to replace the self-defeating
attitudes with more constructive emotional habits. Lawrence LeShan and others have helped people with supposedly terminal
cancer to recover by first uncovering the pain but then focusing on Astrology and Health 203 ft positive things that were within the client's power, rather than just
dwelling on what was making them miserable as is sometimes
done in psychotherapy. Excitement, zest, enthusiasm carried into
action can rekindle and release the blocked fire.
Serious obesity is often a Letter Four problem. When one's
emotional security is threatened, the last security may be our
ability to eat and prevent starvation. Letter Two eats for pleasure
which is lost with serious overweight, so the tendency is to stop
short of extreme excesses. Food may be temporarily reassuring,
but it cannot provide total security, so there is no natural stopping
place for Letter Four. Lack of exercise is also usually involved in
obesity. Both Letters Two and Four tend to be more passive or
indolent unless, of course, they are connected to fire or to the work
ethic of Letters Six and Ten. There is increasing evidence that the
currently popular low fat, high carbohydrate diet only helps people who are physically active. Many very heavy people have
developed insulin resistance so their bodies release excessive
insulin when they eat even "healthy" carbohydrates such as
grains and potatoes. As long as there is insulin in the system, it
will not burn fat. If inadequate protein is being eaten with a very
low calorie diet and the person is mostly sedentary, the body will
burn the muscles rather than the stored fat. Since it is the muscles
which are able to burn the fat. the consequences leave them worse
oif than they were before the diet. When they eat mostly vegetables
as their carbohydrates, avoiding the foods which used to be called
starches, and they eat more protein and fat, their bodies learn to
burn fat so they not only burn up the fat being eaten but also the
stored fat. and they can lose weight relatively easily without being
hungry. Since everyone is an individual, some experimentation
may be needed to find the food mix which works best, but the
current belief in "one diet fits all" is not working, as the numbers
of overweight people in the U.S. keep increasing.
I have seen some cases of serious illness In people who were
unable to let themselves be dependent. They had to be sick to let
themselves be cared for. Ulcers used to be a male illness when men
carried the total responsibility for the security of their families and
could not let themselves acknowledge their own emotional needs.
In recent years, the majority of ulcer cases are occurring among
women who are forced to carry responsibility with little support 204 from others. The true believers In materialism, who think that
illness is solely due to physical causes, have been rejoicing since
a bacterium was discovered as the cause of many cases of ulcers.
However, this does not exonerate the emotions, since they enhance or impair the immune system which is supposed to handle
such threats as bacteria, viruses, parasites, etc. Life is interdependent. If we lack a support system from a family, we need to
build friendships, and sometimes pets are helpful. Studies have
shown that people with pets live longer and stay more healthy
than those who are isolated. Letter Five includes the Sun. all factors in or ruling the signs in
the fifth house, and all factors in Leo. Letter Five represents our
ego. our self-esteem. our need to do more than we have done before
and to be admired for it. This includes loving and being loved,
procreating children we hope to be proud of. persuadingothers to
do what we want, winning applause, etc.
Physically. Letter Five is connected to the heart, the biggest
muscle in the body and the only one which has to burn fat because
carbohydrates do not provide the sustained energy it requires. In
the past, most men had heart problems when their career
ambitions were not satisfied. Fewer women had heart problems,
and they tended to be associated with frustrations in their love
relationships. It is possible that more men are currently lacking
in love as their wives have had to go to work to help support the
family, and more women may have shifted their ambitions into
their careers. It is also possible that reduced exercise is a factor,
as many more people are in sedentary careers, with few left on the
farm and machines taking over much of the heavy labor. It is likely
that diet is also a major factor in the increased heart problems
which developed in this century. The current scapegoat is saturated fat. but we ate much more fat meat and cream and butter in
the last century. Some modern nutritionists are accumulating
evidence that the harmful fat is the hydrogenated vegetable oils
with their transfatty acids. Margarine may be far more harmful
than butter. These oils are chemically treated to be able to stay on
the shelf without getting rancid, and the great increase in heart
problems coincided with their coming into general use in the U.S.
At least there is some agreement that monounsaturated olive oil Astrology and Health 205 ft is probably the most healthy form of fat. There are some essential
fatty acids which are necessary to assimilate vitamins A and E.
There are essential amino acids which we get in protein. There are
no essential carbohydrates, though we need the vitamins found in
vegetables and fruits.
Though diet and exercise may be a major part of the picture.
1 would also always look at the self-esteem needs of anyone with
heart problems. As with Mars, which is associated with the rest of
our muscles, exercise increases our muscles and with them, our
strength and our confidence in our ability to cope with the world.
When we feel good about ourselves, we can still love and enjoy
others but have less need for their approval. Letter Six includes Mercury as a ruler of Virgo as well as Gemini,
and 1 think that the asteroid Vesta is the "ultimate Virgo." Also part
of the picture are all factors in or ruling the signs in the sixth house
and all factors in Virgo. The psychological drive of Letter Six is the
urge to do something worth doing and to do it well. This includes
being able to function effectively in a job and in the body, so health
is general is part of Letter Six. Money is part of the Taurus pleasure. The Virgo goal Is a sense of accomplishment, being able
to handle details, to take things apart and put them together so
they work better, to get tangible results.
In the body. Virgo is associated with most of the intestines
where we take our food apart, select what is functional for us. and
discard what we can't use. A basic component of the work ethic is
the critical attitude that can spot flaws and figure out how to do
it better. One of the main dangers with Letter Six is displacement,
looking for flaws in everything our life touches and thinking we
should be able to fix it all. This attitude can be quite destructive
in personal relationships, and too much self-criticism can be very
hard on the health. We need to notice our assets, not just our
flaws. I have seen cases of dlvertlculltis. an inflammation of the
intestines, which were connected to the effort to do everything
perfectly. The intestines recovered when the individual was able
to accept human limits and not feel responsible for everything in
their lives. We can do one or two things really well to satisfy our
Virgo/Vesta drive, but trying to do everything well Is hard on both
the health and the people around us. 206 The Book of Saturn The asteroid Ceres seems to be partly Virgo and partly Cancer.
It offers clues to one's experiences with an original mother-figure
and also the ability to mother others, so it is the nurturing side of
Virgo which does its job to help people. Vesta, in contrast, seeks
to do a good Job for the sake of doing a good j oh. If other people get
in the way. the attitude maybe that the Job is more important than
the people. Both Ceres and Vesta are sometimes clues to health
issues, but I have seen this much more often with Vesta. Both
asteroids can also indicate the capacity and the urge to be healers.
Many health problems as well as accidents are related to work
frustrations. When we are in Jobs which deny our personal needs
and aspirations, but security needs prevent Just walking off the
Job, illness is a way to get out of it without personal guilt and
sometimes with financial aid from the society. It is a painful way
to quit a Job, but, of course, no one does this consciously, deliberately. If we get frustrated enough, the subconscious says "I
can fix that if you are not going to do anything about it." Any weak
link in the body can be used by the subconscious to escape the
misery of a hated job. Letter Seven includes Venus as a ruler of Libra as well as Taurus,
and the asteroid Pallas seems to be mostly like Libra. Also part of
the picture are all factors in and rulers of the signs in the seventh
house and all factors in Libra. The primary drive of Libra is the
need for close, lasting peer relationships. This includes marriage
but is not limited to that. It can be expressed also through
business associates and counseling relationships. Letter Seven is
typically emphasized in lawyers and politicians, in people in personnel work, labor arbitration, etc.. associated with a strong
desire for harmony, balance, fair play and social Justice. Talent in
thegraphicartsisalsocommon. I have sometimes seen Pallas and
other forms of Letter Seven associated with problems in seeing
patterns, in dyslexia, mirror vision, left-right handed confusion,
etc.
The Venus association with pleasure is shared with Taurus,
but in Libra the pleasure is sought from human relationships
rather than from the physical world. The ability of the body to
handle sugar remains Venusian. so diabetes is one possible
problem stemming from relationship conflicts. When other forms Astrology and Health 207 ft of pleasure are denied, there is a danger of eating more sweets as
a substitute. 1 think the skin is also associated with Venus. The
most common time for skin problems is in the teens when young
people are starting dating and afraid ofbeing rejected. The anxiety
produces excess hormones which cannot all be eliminated through
the kidneys and some of them escape through the skin. The
kidneys are traditionally associated with Libra. They continue the
digestive process which is largely done by the Virgo intestines as
we discriminate between what is ours and what is not ours and
release the latter. The kidneys extract the last needed fluid from
our food as its unused part is on its way out of the system.
Life is always a juggling act. Protein is essential to feed our
Mars muscles, but too much protein is hard on the Venus kidneys.
We are constantly trying to balance the seesaw of our personal
needs versus the rights and needs of others. Compromise remains
the name of the game. Letter Seven needs other people, but
"healthy" competition as well as cooperation can provide an outlet.
Competition is "healthy" when we know it is a game: when we can
win sometimes, lose sometimes, and keep on playing with mutual
pleasure for the opponents. Individuals with a major emphasis on
Letters Seven and Eight are usually helped by having a variety of
peer relationships, including some which are cooperative, some
which are competitive, and some in which they help other people.
It is important to avoid displacing the competitive instinct into
relationships which should be cooperative, in effect, fighting
members of our own team. Letter Eight involves Pluto as its primary ruler, with Mars
remaining a traditional co-ruler. 1 think that the asteroid Juno is
another key to Letter Eight, along with all factors in or ruling the
signs in the eighth house plus all factors in Scorpio. Like Letter
Seven. Letter Eight deals with close, lasting peer relationships.
Where the one-seven polarity in astrology describes the confrontation between personal will and the wills of others expressed in
open speech and action, the elements air and fire, the two-eight
polarity describes the ability to share money, possessions, and
sensuality with a mate. Both polarities deal with power, but the
fixed quality is associated with enduring self-will, so compromise
may be harder. 208 As fixed water. Letter Eight is especially intense, driven by the
compulsion to go to whatever has been defined as the end. I
consider this side of life to be one of the most difficult of the twelve,
with its combination of the need to be in control of oneself but also
the need for a mate. It has the water urge to absorb and assimilate,
but is theoretically supposed to allow equality in peer relationships. Where Taurus is free to indulge the appetites. Scorpio is
seeking to master them. If we handle Letter Eight successfully, we
achieve self-insight partly through the mirror of the mate and we
achieve self-masterypartly out of respect for the rights of the mate.
At the physical level. Letter Eight represents the last stage in
the digestive process, the bowels and the bladder. It may also be
involved in the lower colon. As previously Indicated, research is
badly needed to clarify many of our astrological associations at the
physical level. One obvious health problem connected to Letter
Eight is constipation, which can lead to hemorrhoids and surgery.
A primary emotional and physical challenge for Letter Eight
involves learning when is enough and how to let go. As discussed
with Letter Four, when negative emotions are repressed, they can
lead to pus in the system, whether in the form of cysts or tumors
or infections of all kinds. Metaphorically, the blocked, festering
emotions are like the Dead Sea. Without an outlet, the emotions
become poisonous and deadly.
It is possible that sexual organs are also connected to Letter
Eight. Where Letter Five describes sex as an expression of love and
for procreation, though sometimes abused for personal power and
self-esteem. Letter Eight includes sex for shared pleasure with a
mate. We may share money, possessions, and many other forms
of pleasure, but sex is one of the most intense of these experiences.
Individuals who have not developed sufficient self-confidence to
share pleasure with others and who lack empathy, the ability to
feel with others, may express the Letter Eight desires in destructive ways. As had been said repeatedly, life is a balancing act. All
of the Letter Seven alternatives are also possible here: "healthy"
competition, cooperation, and helping others. Depth psychotherapy is especially connected to Letter Eight and is recommended for any physical problems which involve the digestive
system in general and/or the sex organs. Astrology and Health 209 ft It seems strongly possible that one of our newer illnesses,
AIDS. is a Letter Eight phenomenon. A study by Lois Rodden of
planetary aspects in over two hundred individuals diagnosed with
AIDS found many more conflict aspects to Pluto than to any other
planet. This seems appropriate since the HIV infection is transmitted much of the time through sex. However, additional research may also discover a Letter Twelve component, since the use
of contaminated needles by drug addicts is another frequent
source of the infection. As previously indicated, infections in
general are associated with the water principle in astrology. More
air. conscious awareness and detachment, and more fire, genuine
self-liking, with a variety of ways to actively enjoy life, might help. Letter Nine includes Jupiter, all factors in or ruling the signs in
the ninth house, and all factors in Sagittarius. In my experience,
the small planet (or comet?) Chiron also carries the meaning of
Jupiter. Chiron can be expressed as the Letter Nine search for
Truth or as the Letter Twelve mystic who can be an artist, a savior,
or a victim. With Letter Nine, we are dealing with the belief system
which directs our lives. Whether we look to science, to philosophy,
to conventional religion, to metaphysics, or create our own unique
world view, our faith determines what we trust, where and how we
look for meaning, our value hierarchy, choices, and goals.
Though the thighs are traditionally given to Jupiter, its most
important physical association is with the liver. The liver is an
incredibly complex chemical factory in the body which transmutes potentially poisonous chemicals into forms which the body
can use or into harmless forms which can be eliminated. The
potentially harmful chemicals may come from outside in our food,
drink, the air we breathe, etc.. or they may be created by the body
in the form of excessive hormones produced by negative emotions.
In either case, the liver copes and can even restore itself when it
is partially destroyed by excesses such as too much alcohol.
Metaphorically, our faith in a benign Higher Power plays the same
role in our lives. It helps us handle the stresses which are an
inevitable part of life.
Despite its primary focus on physical forces, modern science
Is gradually accumulating evidence for the power of faith in
facilitating healing. The medical establishment in England has 210 actually passed laws which permit an MD to refer a patient to a
spiritual healer or another alternate form of healing in which the
patient has faith. Most scientists still see the placebo effect as a
nuisance which interferes with their efforts to test the efficacy of
different drugs or other forms of treatment.
The placebo effect Is simply the result of patients having faith
in the doctor or in the treatment, even though in a double-blind
research study they may be getting a sugar pill. Often, the placebo
effect is as strong as the physical treatment, but the belief in
materialism prevents It being a subject of research. If any physical
treatment produced the results achieved by placebos, It would be
the subject of multiple studies trying to find out what is happening. under what circumstances, and what we can do to strengthen
the effect.
We can gain faith in ourselves by any kind of successful action.
Of course, we have to define what we consider successful to be able
to achieve It. If our expectations are too high, we may never feel
successful. It is much harder to acquire faith In a higher power,
especially if we have been well educated In modern science. Even
if we are Just logical, most of the conventional religions seem
dubious, to put It mildly. How could a universal god be as
parochial, as exclusive, as unloving and even cruel as the one
described in most conventional religions? Astrology, as usually
presented. Is equally Illogical. There are contradictory claims by
different systems, but also there are Just so many ways to say the
same thing, and so many possible life details which can be
manifested in connection with the same principle. Physical forces
Just don't cut It when we get the message with Mars in one chart,
with Aides In another, with the first house in another, etc. We can
get the message In transits, In secondary and tertiary and minor
progressions. In solar and lunar and planetary returns. In a
variety of arcs of directions, etc. As computers have Increased our
scope In recent years, we have been able to explore still more new
techniques, to demonstrate that no matter how we manipulate the
sky, we still see the same order in a slightly different way.
So. for me, parapsychology research supported early experiences with a psychic mother who demonstrated that materialism
explained only a very limited part of reality. Personal spiritual
experiences were helpful. But astrology especially showed me a Astrology and Health 21 1 fe vaster world than any formal belief system with which I was
familiar, including the standard belief systems of astrology. Truth
is a goal we never reach, but we can know that the Infinite Whole
is more inclusive than any limited human conception. We can
trust it. keep searching for more truth, and enjoy the journey.
As a minor afterthought, the physical sense left for Jupiter is
the sense of smell. Like hearing, which belongs to Saturn, odors
come from a distance, so they fit the larger, transpersonal area of
life. Sight also involves distance, but we have more personal
control of our vision through our ability to voluntarily close our
eyes. Scent and hearing cannot be shut out without extra effort.
One other small clue exists in the strong interrelationship between smell and taste, which interact and reinforce each other as
Mars and Jupiter aspects intensify each other's fire. Of course, as
with the nervous system, it is quite possible that the senses may
involve several different primary principles rather than being limited to one. Letter Ten. the primary subject of this book, includes Saturn, all
factors in and ruling the signs in the tenth house, and all factors
in Capricorn. As readers know by now. Letter Ten indicates the
rules of the game of life in this physical world. When we know the
necessary rules and live within them voluntarily, we are successful. When we ignore or fight or try to run away from the rules,
eventually we get the consequences and they are usually painful.
At the physical level, Letter Ten is connected to all of the
crystallized parts of the body, teeth and bones, including the sense
of hearing through the bones of the inner ear. In the grand man
of the zodiac, Saturn is especially related to the knees. It is also
associated with falls. When we overreach and try to do more than
we can do. we fall (fail). We are metaphorically brought to our
knees. Many physical problems are associated with this principle,
especially those which become more common in one's later years.
With osteoporosis in our bones and cavities in our teeth, we lose
crystallization where we need it. Bones and teeth crumble or
break. With gout, arthritis, rheumatism, stones in the body, etc.,
we get crystals where we do not want them, in the Joints, muscles,
or organs such as the kidneys and gall bladder. Arteriosclerosis
may be involved, or any other form of obstruction which interferes 212 with normal flexibility and flow. We need some capacity for rigid
structure. An internal backbone is essential for large animals
living in an air environment, in contrast to large invertebrates
which can live in the sea. But we are constantly balancing rigid
strength against flexibility.
The prototype of this issue is pictured in the confrontation
between Mars and Saturn. It is now known that muscle action
( Mars lis a primary source of bone strength ( Saturn Jwhich helps
to prevent osteoporosis and the many varieties of arthritic/ rheumatoid problems. Many back problems stem from muscles
which are too weak to properly hold the spinal bones in place.
Personal will and power have to work cooperatively with the limits
of personal will to survive in this physical world. What a lack of
understanding it demonstrates when the planets which symbolize
these two essential parts of life are feared as malefics. But because
beliefs are so hard to change, astrologers who have bought into the
traditional beliefs may never be able to grasp this view of the
cosmos. For most people, their belief system is the foundation of
their world. They react to a threat to their beliefs as they react to
an earthquake—with terror. If their personal self-esteem has been
invested in the traditional beliefs, they may react with outrage. In
the end, it may be easier for professional psychologists who have
managed to see beyond materialism to understand and value
astrology as a psychological system.
The obvious physical antidote to these "old-age" problems is
tostayactive. Since our bodies, emotions, intellects, and spiritual
essences are totally intertwined and interacting, improvement in
any area is likely to bring improvement in the others. As we
strengthen our muscles with physical activity, we strengthen our
emotional self-confidence and our physical competence. As we
learn intellectually to understand the laws of the physical world
and work with them, we also gain in self-confidence and effectiveness in the world. As we open to guidance from the Infinite, we are
encouraged to do what will benefit us and others and will help us
reach our full potential. Letter Eleven includes Uranus, and Saturn is still considered a
co-ruler of this part of life. Also included are all factors in and
ruling the signs in the eleventh house and all factors in Aquarius. Astrology and Health 213 ft The primary urge of Letter Eleven is to resist any limits, to go
beyond all limits. Since Saturn is the key to realistic limits, its
rulership of Aquarius seems strange to the astrologers who fear
Saturn and love Aquarius as the sign most associated with astrology. But the obvious answer is that once we have internalized the necessary limits of Saturn in the form of practical knowledge and a conscience, we are free to do whatever we want.
And, when Letter Eleven is properly expressed, we want the same
freedom for everyone that we want for ourselves.
Aquarius is related to the ankles in the grand man of the
zodiac, but its more significant association is probably to electricity. Not knowing about electricity, the ancient world called Uranus
the water-bearer, but he was correctly seen as a sky god and
Aquarius as an air sign. The wavy lines which symbolize Aquarius
are now interpreted as moving electricity. As mentioned in the
discussion of Letter Three, the nervous system transports its
information with electricity. I do not know of any systematic
research in the area, but I would expect epilepsy to be involved
with Letter Eleven, among other principles related to the mind and
the brain. In view of its passionate pursuit of freedom. Letter
Eleven may also be connected to body systems involving free
circulation. Blockages may stem from an unresolved conflict
between Letter Ten and Letter Eleven. In the limited number of
cases of paralysis I have seen, the charts of the individuals had
such conflicts. As one of the three sides of life which demand
freedom, Letter Eleven can also be involved in accidents when we
insist on doing what we please, sometimes against our better
Judgment. More serious accidents are normally managed by the
subconscious to get us out of some kind of bind. But when Uranus
builds on the solid base of Saturn, the sky is not a limit. We can
ride a rocket into space. Letter Twelve includes Neptune as well as Jupiter, its traditional
ruler, plus all factors in or ruling the signs in the twelfth house and
all factors in Pisces. This last side of life as symbolized by astrology
seeks to bring it all together. It represents the mystic's hunger for
infinite love and beauty and oneness with the Whole. This desire
may lead into artistic expression, or into efforts to heal the world,
to make it more ideal, or we may become victims if we simply wish 214 The Book of Satuim the world were more ideal without doing anything to make it
happen.
Neptune owns the feet in the grand man of the zodiac, but it
can be involved in many more problems in the body. Like all the
water sides of life, there is the potential for cysts, tumors, and
infections, which, with Letter Twelve, are connected to a lack of
faith in a Higher Power at the subconscious level. It is also
implicated in allergies, which are due to being overly sensitive. As
indicated earlier, water is the psychic element, since we are open
to the cosmos through the subconscious. Psychic ability is a form
of sensitivity which can be painful when overdone. Things which
are harmless to others can be poison to someone who is overly
sensitive. Letter Twelve is also associated with the immune
system, probably the lymph system among others. Letter Six, the
polar partner of Letter Twelve, shows our capacity to take things
apart, to discriminate. Letter Twelve puts it all together and
believes that it all is or should be perfect.
Astrologers who expect analysis and discrimination everywhere and all the time may have trouble handling Letter Twelve.
They often write it off as deception, self-deception, confusion, and
see only its victim potential. It is true that Letter Twelve is
implicated in many forms of escapism, including addictions to
drugs and alcohol, psychoses, and chronic illness as a way of
escaping from the world or in those who have simply given up. But
there is a place for everything. Letter Twelve is less effective on the
job unless it is a job which requires empathy and compassion,
where it is splendid. It is not a good idea to cross a busy street while
in the state of samadhi. But the potential of Letter Twelve to heal
bodies and relationships and the world is pulling at us as we move
through the Piscean Age. For over two thousand years, humanity
has been seeking to develop the empathy and compassion, the
ability to feel what others are feeling and to care, which could
make this physical world into paradise. Obviously, we are a long
way from the goal of Letter Twelve as too many leaders worship
competition and greed and promote the law of the jungle. But we
have eternity. We are participating parts of the Infinite Whole,
sharing Its evolution to reach as yet unimaginable potentials. Astrology and Health 215 fe HEALING WITH
THE HORSOCOPE by Maritha Pottenger
THE BASICS
The evidence from research is fairly clear at this point. To remain
healthiest throughout our lives, we need pure food, water, and
air. Just as importantly, we need love (supportive relationships
with others)—to both give and receive love. We need adequate
exercise, sleep, relaxation, and challenging activities (such as
work). We need faith or a sense nfmeaning and purpose. Healthy
functioning starts from these basics and builds.
For General Vitality/Recuperative Strength: build Letters
1. 5, and Mercúrio (fire). Thus, astrology reflects the paramount Importance of physical exercise (Letter 1-buildlngthemuscles)—now
known to be the best overall curative for many conditions and the
best way to retard aging. Astrology reflects the vital significance of
faith, hope, and a positive attitude (Letter Mercúrio ). The "placebo
effect" (belief in the efficacy of a substance that does 'nothing" in
reality) is powerful! People who have a more positive attitude live
longer and healthier lives. Astrology shows us how truly essential
positive self-esteem is (Letter 5; the ability to love oneself and
others, to feel proud of who we are). Many lifestyle difficulties
which threaten people's health (domestic violence, overeating,
smoking, drinking) have all or part of their roots in low selfesteem. So. keep the basics in your life and feed your fire! ■^_21 6 The Book of Saturn To Strengthen
Letter 1 Physical Mental body building
sports, exercise
movement identifying
personal
desires
analyze anger Emotional Spiritual assertiveness
Spiritual Warrior
training
Self-directed path
saying "no" to
Personal
impositions
philosophy
pioneering,
courageous acts To Balance (too much) Letter 1: Build Letters Júpiter , 7, and 10 (or 6,8).
To Strengthen
Letter 2 indulging
appetites
e. Vênus ., backrubs,
food, hot tubs... thinking/talking enjoying beauty,
about pleasures,
relaxing,
resources
accepting
life, being
comfortable prosperity
consciousness,
increasing
self-worth To Balance (too much) Letter 2: Build Letters 5, 8, and 11 (or 7, Mercúrio ).
To Strengthen
Letter 3 flexibility
exercises
stretches
anything with
ringers reading; classes
communication
mental exercises humor,
cultivating
lightheartedness
casual "airy"
attitude opening up to
many
different
experiences
Religious
Science To Balance (too much) Letters Build Letters 6, Mercúrio , and 12 (or 8, 10).
To Strengthen
Letter Júpiter hugs, carresses
nourishing food
deep, "belly"
breaths reparenting
literature
analyzing one's
family patterns asking for small faith in Universe's
favors
nurturing/
loving pets
caretaking
home-centered Goddess religions
activities To Balance (too much) Letter Júpiter Build Letters 1, 7, and 10 (or Mercúrio , 11).
To Strengthen
Letter 5 exciting sports,
games
healthy heart diet,
exercise. getting/giving
compliments
list noteworthy
acts visualizing
charades, drama
generosity, gifts
connection
Type B behavior to infinite energy
religious
spectacles To Balance (too much) Letters: Build Letters 2, 8, and 11 (or 10, 12).
To Strengthen
Letter 6 pure food, air,
analysis, repairs
water handicrafts,
class on
models
organizing
fixing anything
making lists feeling
competent
feeling healthy,
fit; noticing
improvements To Balance (too much) Letter 6: Build Letters 3, Mercúrio , and 12 (or 11,1). visualizing
Universe
as efficient, right
Science of Mind Astrology and Health To Strengthen
Letter 7 217 fl> Physical Mental Emotional Spiritual balance beam
polarity therapy
graceful
movement mediator
training
relationship
analysis
art classes cooperative
ventures
practicing
empathy
enjoying
aesthetics Universal Beauty
Taoist philosophy
affirming sharing To Balance (too much) Letter 7: Build Letters 1, Júpiter , and 10 (or 2, 12).
To Strengthen
Letter 8 endurance
training
Iron Man/Woman
making love research
detective work
looking at
Shadow depth psychotherapy
sex therapy,
grief therapy
releasing,
forgiving (self/
others) Tantric
yoga Cathartic
philosophies
Kahuna rituals To Balance (too much) Letter 8: Build Letters 2, 5, and 11 (or 1, 3).
To Strengthen
Letter Mercúrio trying many
hiking, marathons values clarification taking adventurthigh exercises
philosophical
ous trips; fighting
different
faithArust circle
discussions
for truth/justice churches, spiritual
risking for
paths, beliefs.
greater gain To Balance (too much) Letter Mercúrio : Build Letters 3, 6, 12 (or 2, Júpiter ).
To Strengthen
Letter 10 calcium,
bone-building
clarifying
real limits
sensible back
care; proper rest,
diet, etc. traditional paths traditional Father
exercising
religions,
note tangible
expertise,
accomplishments
structured
authority
beliefs
apprenticeships practice internal
Reality Therapy locus of control To Balance (too much) Letter 10: Build Letters 1, Júpiter , and 7 (or 3, 5).
To Strengthen
Letter 11 yoga (flexibility)
enhance
circulation
freestyle dancing invention
(paper play)
brainstorming
networking unusual beliefs
faith in future
exotic religions acts of rebellion
humanitarian acts
appreciating
individuality To Balance (too much) Letter 11. Build Letters 2. 5, and 8 (or Júpiter and 6)
To Strengthen
Letter 12 dancing, move to
music right brain
exercises
graceful sports
with/near/in/by
water transcendence
through art
guided imagery
dream journal Cosmic
consciousness
feeling one
with Nature
compassion,
healing To Balance (too much) Letter 12: Build Letters 3, 6, and Mercúrio (or 5, 7). Cosmic consciousness
meditation
Ecstatic religious
experiences CHAPTER TEN WHERE GO FROM DO WE HERE? As we approach the end of both a century and a millennium, the
pace of change and its accompanying emotional intensity are
escalating. Many individuals are threatened and responding by
clinging to and trying to defend familiar dogmas. Some of the
dogmas are classed as religion and some are called science, but
concepts are still dogmas if they are believed to be final truth and
reality and thus beyond question.
The June 8. 1996 issue of Science News has an article which
illustrates the point. Author Janet Raloffin an article called "When
Science and Beliefs Collide" describes a study by Raymond Eve,
a social psychologist at the University of Texas at Arlington. Eve
and his coworkers administered questionnaires to two different
groups of people who were both classed as "believers." One group
attended a creationism fair In the summer of 1995 and the other
group was made up of Wlccans (defined as white witches), pagans,
and adherents of other goddess sects who attended a magical-arts
fair.
Only a minority of the creationists were fundamentalist Christians. Their common thread seemed to be respect for tradition and
authority. Naturally, a preponderant majority of over eighty percent rejected the scientific claim that the earth is at least four
billion years old. But Eve was apparently surprised to find that 220 The Book of Saturn about sixty percent of the Wiccan-pagans also rejected the age of
the earth, though they did not call themselves creationists. In the
areas of traditional family values and social Issues, the two groups
were almost polar opposites. The Wlccans were classed as postmodernists, which included a deep respect for nature, a
rejection of Christianity and other patriarchal religions, and a
tendency to see "reality" as Individual, personal, and subjective.
The Implication, though not clearly stated. Is that the Wiccanpagans rejected the view of reality as objective, universal, and
materialistic as it is defined by western science. Many of the
Wiccan-pagans polled by Eve were very well educated, so he held
that their attitudes could not be ascribed to ignorance. Eve's
conclusion was that they were actually more anti-science than the
creationists in holding, for example, "that astrology accurately
predicts personality and behavior." p. 360
Do you see a hint of scientific dogma in such a conclusion?
Science has rejected astrology, mostly without examining it.
Science defines truth as what science says is true. So anyone who
questions any of the statements of science is an anti-science
believer, denying "truth."
The day is coming, and I think it is coming soon, when the
evidence from astrological research will be very hard for science to
ignore. Sara Klein carried out a research project for her Ph.D. in
psychology at a California Institute, and got stunning, significant
statistical results. She obtained the birth dates and the accident
dates of over 1.000 individuals who applied for workman's compensation following work-related accidents which kept them off
the Job for three months or more. The accidents happened
significantly often within a few days of the birthdate. or three, six
or nine months after the birthdate. Astrologically. the transiting
Sun was conjunct, square, or opposite the natal Sun. with odds
in the millions against this occurring by chance. Some of the chi
squares had eight and nine zeros, which is unheard of in research
dealing with human beings.
Ever since Sara completed her degree in 1992. she and I have
been trying to get additional data to replicate her study. Though
we think of the United States as a scientifically advanced country,
we have not found anyone in an official position who had the
courage to give us more data. There is no reason to worry about Where Do We Go From Here? 221 ft privacy, since all we need is the date of birth and the date of the
accident, and, if possible, the sex of the injured worker. But the
power of the religious fundamentalists and the dogmatic materialistic scientists, plus perhaps the threat of law suits in our
litigious society for anything outside of conventional activities,
has kept even people who were open to astrology from risking any
association with such a project. After nearly four years of effort, we
have finally found a source of data in a western European country
where the authorities are less afraid to investigate a heretical idea.
Note that astrology is a heresy, a major threat, to both fundamentalist western religions and official science. Heresy, the refusal to
believe what your "group" pronounces to be the truth, gets you
excommunicated from the group. The Wiccan-pagans and eastern
religions have no problem with astrology. Their world-views are
big enough to include the possibility that meaning is an inherent
part of the cosmos.
The first very preliminary results are in from the new data
which we obtained from Sweden. The dates of 2,865 serious workrelated accidents were checked against the blrthdates of the
victims, and they did NOT support the results observed in the
California data. One of my sons. Mark Pottenger, wrote a computer program to test a variety of orbs: whole signs. 15 degrees. 10
degrees. 5 degrees, and 1 degree. He checked the whole group, all
the males, and all the females. He also removed the Individuals
born on a date when the Sun might have changed signs and the
accidents on those cuspal dates, and analyzed the smaller groups
in the same way. The resulting chl-squares were totally nonsignificant.
Of course, the work has barely begun. We will be checking
aspects from all of the transiting planets at the time of the
accidents to the birth charts of the victims. In over 2400 accidents,
we have the time of the accident. In the other approximately 400
we will not be able to use the Moon's position. We do not have the
birth time or place of the accident victims, but we can still do a lot
with what we have. This will, of course, take time, but if any results
are available before this book goes to the printer, we will include
them.
My current thinking is that the different results In these two
studies indicate the Importance of cultural differences. The Sun 222 The Book of Saturn symbolizes ego, self-esteem, self-confidence, etc. in any country,
but cultures vary widely in the way they encourage or disparage
a full expression of these feelings.
California, the "golden" state, is particularly associated with
the Sun principle, from the days of the gold rush to the heyday of
Hollywood. Sweden is noted for its social safety net, for cradle to
grave protection of its citizens, but also for pervasive depression
and ahigh number of suicides. We may find very different patterns
emphasizing Moon-Saturn for the Swedish victims rather than
the ego-fire observed in California.
As an example of such cultural differences, a Hindu astrologer
who moved to California kept being surprised when women failed
to marry during periods when there were aspects in their charts
which would have indicated marriage in India. After some years,
he realized that the emphasis on personal independence in
California meant that individuals needed much stronger aspects
showing a much more intense desire for marriage before it was
likely to happen.
Another interesting discrepancy between the California and
Swedish figures was the tendency in Sweden for older individual
to have a larger number of the critical accidents when the serious
accidents were analyzed as a percentage of the total accidents for
the different age groups. In California, the age seemed irrelevant.
Since coordination and general fitness do tend to decline in the
later years, and healing tends to take longer, it seems logical to
expect the results seen in Sweden. One wonders whether some of
the claims by younger workers in California might have been
fraudulent. Also. California does not have cradle to grave protection. Individuals have to have enough fire self-confidence to file a
claim to receive help. The preceding are tentative and very
preliminary ideas. Only much more research will settle some of the
questions.
Although highly significant results in the Swedish data would
have been very exciting, I was not actually surprised by what we
found. When the California data produced such extreme results,
I was actually puzzled. If such a simple pattern as T Sun conjunct,
square, or opposite N Sun for accidents had actually been a
universal one, it seemed likely to me that astrologers would have
noticed it centuries ago. Sara Klein's search of the astrological Where Do We Go From Here? 223 ft literature did not find it. Life and humans are more complex. The
psychological climates in different cultures at different times are
part of the picture, highlighting some of the life drives and downplaying others. And. in the end, we are all individuals with
the potential for learning and growth.
As Eve discovered in his Texas study, some educated people
have found that astrology is a fact of life. He apparently knows
nothing of the research which has already been done by the
Gauquelins and others. Eventually, we will produce the evidence
needed to clarify the controversies, to support the valuable
insights and to discard a lot of overly simplistic theories. It will be
fascinating to watch the reactions of materialistic "scientists"
when they have to face major results in astrology research. Most
will, of course, ignore them or denounce them as fraud when the
statistics are too overwhelming for the results to be called coincidence. Most people are too attached to their foundation beliefs
about the world to be able to change. Naturally, the same can be
said of most astrologers, who are also human. Astrology would
have demonstrated its validity long ago if it were really physical
forces producing specific events, permitting precise, detailed
predictions. I think that it is because astrology is a psychological
system, because it shows a "state of mind" which can be manifested in many different details, that it has proved so hard to
"prove." It shows "issues" in the life, not details, and this makes
it truly helpful because when we understand the emotional
desires/drives which form our basic characters, we can seek to
satisfy them in more effective ways. We can change the details in
our lives.
We can change the details if we can change our basic
emotional reactions! The evidence of research in parapsychology
supports the theory that at the subconscious level of the mind, we
are all connected. Consider as a theory to be tested the possibility
that ultimate reality is made of emotion (desire/aversion) and
information. Emotion is the driving power. Information can influence and direct it to a limited extent. When we experience anxiety
during a Saturn aspect, or pleasure when Venus is prominent, or
energy with Mars, or optimism with Jupiter, or whatever, it might
be that the sky is just a mirror, letting us see our likely emotional
state at that time because we were born when we matched the 224 The Book of Sa turn state of the cosmos so our own evolving habits parallel the evolving
cosmos and are visible in the mirror in the sky. And. since at that
subconscious level, we are connected as participating parts of the
evolving whole, any emotion we feel connects us to the same
emotion everywhere and everywhen. The materialistic assumption is that Saturn or whatever "made" us feel that way, and we do
feel influenced. But what if the emotion is really our own nature
being expressed and the "Influence" is really our resonance with
that same emotion everywhere and everywhen??? What if what we
receive from the cosmos is not an influence affecting an innocent
victim, but an echo reinforcing our own habits?
The only way to check the accuracy of a theory is to test it. You
can test this theory by doing something that will change your
emotional state and then seeing what happens. It is vital that
emotions be really changed, not Just consciously denied, repressed and ignored! Saying mantrams may help, but it is rarely
enough. We usually have to do something that lets us identify
ourselves in new ways. Habits don't Just go away even when we
have recognized that they are producing painful results. We have
to replace them with new habits.
I have been experimenting with this for years, but everyone
has to find his or her own reality. I am in agreement with the
Wiccan-pagans. I think we each live in our personal subjective
reality, experiencing the results of our emotional habits. Astrology
can help us understand our emotional desires/drives if we are
willing to test that idea. If we prefer to blame the planets (or our
parents or our society or other manifestations of the Whole which
are outside of our control), so be it. life is growth and I trust it. We
are learning to manifest new and greater potentials. Hopefully, we
can also learn to enjoy the Journey. NOTES
1 The Astrological Ages are based on a "wobble" in the Earth's
movements which results in the equinoxes and solstices
turning in front of the background of the constellations or
"fixed" stars. At the spring and fall equinoxes, the day and
night are equally long. At one solstice, the day reaches its
greatest length and the night is shortest, and the reverse is
true at the other solstice. In the western or tropical zodiac, the
four cardinal signs start at these turning points in the year
when the relative lengths of day and night change. The Sun is
at zero Aries for the spring equinox in the northern hemisphere and the tropical or seasonal zodiac signs are 30-degree
divisions of the Earth's path (the ecliptic) which start at that
point. The movement of zero Aries (and the rest of the zodiac)
in front of the constellations is called the "Precession of the
Equinoxes," and it takes about 26,000 years for the complete
circuit. The period during which zero Aries is passing in front
of each of the constellations or groups of stars is called the
"Age" of that constellation. Different astrologers have suggested very different dates for the end of our current Piscean
Age and the beginning of the coming Aquarian Age, but that
Is an argument for another time. 2 Astrology works with four elements — fire, earth, air and
water, which are discussed in detail on page 17. 3 All of the planets have nodes where their orbits intersect the
plane of the Earth's orbit, which is like an imaginary floor
extended to infinity. North nodes are located where planets or
the Moon cross into the northern hemisphere: south nodes
where they return to the southern hemisphere. The nodes
carry the meaning of the planet which forms them. The Moon's
nodes are similar in meaning to two more Moons in the chart,
showing where we seek emotional security. At the nodes of
Mars, we tend to be personally identified and active. Most
individuals who are playing power roles In the world have
prominent Saturn and/or Pluto nodes, and the rest of the
planetary nodes can be similarly read as another form of the
astrological alphabet — the twelve sides of life. 226 Júpiter The Book of Saturn The nickname of "dwad" refers to dwadasamsas which are
divisions of each zodiacal sign into twelve equal sections of two
and one half degrees each. The dwads carry a subtle overtone
of the twelve signs, like a whole zodiac, within each sign. The
system I have found most reliable starts each sign with the
dwad of that sign, and the rest of the zodiacal signs follow in
order. For example, zero to two and a half Gemini is the Gemini
dwad. The Cancer dwad is from two and a half Gemini to five
Gemini. The Leo dwad is from five Gemini to seven and a half
Gemini, etc. 5 There are many systems of "Directions", but all of them add the
same amount to every factor in the chart: all planets, angles,
nodes, or whatever is being used. The most commonly used
system of Directions moves all factors the distance traveled by
the Secondary Progressed Sun. which is called the "solar arc."
The Sun is slightly faster in the winter and slower in he
summer, but its movement is approximately one degree a day,
which is equal to a year in the life of an individual in this
system. For a forty-year-old individual, everything in the chart
will have moved about forty degrees.
For additional information,
Directions, and Rectification. 6 see my book Progressions, There are several systems of "Progressions', but the most
commonly used one equates one day in the sky with one year
of life. So. for the potentials at the age of forty, we look at the
patterns in the sky forty days after birth. The progressed Sun
will be about forty degrees later than the natal Sun, and my
preferred method for the MC is to progress it the same distance
as the Sun, but every other factor in the chart will have its own
unique motion.
For additional information,
Directions, and Rectification. see my book Progressions, References 227 REFERENCES
Dobyns. Zipporah. The Asteroid Ephemeris. TIA Publications.
Dobyns. Zipporah. Expanding Astrology's Universe, ACS. 1973. 1985. Dobyns, Zipporah, The Node Book, TIA Publications. 1973
Dobyns, Zipporah, Planets on the Move, ACS Publications.
Dobyns. Zipporah. Progressions, Directions,
TIA Publications. 1975. 1994. and Rectification, Dreher. Henry. The Immune Power Persona/ify .Dutton, NY, 1995. Friedman, Howard S. PhD. The Self-Healing Personality,
Henry Holt & Co. NY, 1991.
Northrup.Christiane MD. Women's Bodies,
Bantam Books. 1994. Women's Wisdom. Pottenger, Maritha. Complete Horoscope Interpretation,
ACS Publications. 1986.
Pottenger. Maritha, Easy Astrology Guide, ACS Publications. 1996. Pottenger, Maritha, Encounter Astrology, TIA Publications, 1978.
Pottenger Maritha. Healing with the Horoscope, ACS Publications.
1982.
Pottenger. Maritha. Your Starway to Love (2nd edition),
ACS Publications. 1996.
Rodden. Lois, American Book of Charts (out of print), ACS Publications. 1980. (Reprinted as Astro-Data Gêmeos by AFA. 1988)
Rodden, Lois. Profiles of Women, AFA. 1979 Rush, Martin MD, Decoding the Secret Language of Your Body,
Simon & Schuster. NY, 1994.
Trager. James, The Women's Chronology, Henry Holt & Co, NY,
1994.
Weil. Andrew MD, Spontaneous Healing. A\{red A. Knopf. NY, 1995. 228 9th yam® *
' Júpiter t
I
UJp .<?■ ■s «»
K
i
c &
«■*
%r n
8i^ Intormatfon
i btack & white chan
MonS'i-Day-Year
Birthplace
(C rty- Stale C ou m ry)
^
Rirfh tiniA / D oowra
ijc: li
•C
to .i-sr
.X
I
A®
O'
/
4to #:
w ■/ Gêmeos ^^ J
/>u,e lV"
to'V 4th
IC Keywords for Signs
Aries: assertive, brave, first, impetuous, energetic, self-oriented. Taurus: comfortable, deliberate, dependable, placid, possessive, sensual. Gemini: fuent, versatile, curious, intermittent, clever, nimble. Cancer; nurturing, warm, dependent, sympathetic, protective, securityoriented. Leo: creative, risk-taking, charismatic, fun-loving, generous, exciting. Virgo: work-oriented, painstaking, efficient, pragmatic, exacting,
discreet. Libra: cooperative, diplomatic, fence-sitting, competitive, aesthetic. Scorpio: penetrating, intense, resourceful, powerful, compulsive. Sagittarius: benevolent, optimistic, extravagant, enthusiastic, idealistic. Capricorn: responsible, formal, traditional, authoritative, career-oriented. Aquarius: unique, rebellious, futuristic, independent, inventive,
objective. Pisces: compassionate, mystical, illusory, sensitive, spiritual, dreamy. Astr oKeys Aspea 229 Symbol Fraction of Circle Conjunction cf 1/1 0° Square Quadratura 1/ Júpiter 90° Trine A 1/3 120° 1/2 180° Opposition Degrees Sextile * 1/6 60° Sesquiquadrate (tri-octile) 0 3/8 135° Semisquare (octile) z 1/8 45° Semisextile V 1/12 30° Quincunx (or Inconjunct) A 5/12 150° Keywords for Aspects
conjunction
sextile
square
trine
quincunx
opposition is (are) tied to/mixed with
supportts), aids, assists
conflict(s) or compete(s) with (Z and Vênus similar)
reinforcets), amplifies, exaggerates, harmonizes
seem(s) at odds with/feels incompatible with
one side could be overdone at the expense of the other
or projected, seesaw swings
Astrological Alphabet Letter Planet Glyph House Sign Glyph Quality Element 1 Mars 1 Aries T Cardinal 2
3 Júpiter 5
6 Venus
Mercury
Moon
Sun
Mercury
Ceres
Vesta
Venus
Pallas
Pluto
Juno
Jupiter
Chiron
Saturn
Uranus
Neptune cf Mercúrio tJ
D
O
tJ
?
49
?
^ or Plutão t
U
£ Saturno * 2
3 Júpiter 5
6 Taurus
Gemmi
Cancer
Leo
Virgo d
E
S Sol HP Fixed
Mutable
Cardinal
Fixed
Mutable Fire
Earth
Air
Water
Fire
Earth 7 Libra -/~V- Cardinal Air 6 Scorpio HI Fixed Water Mercúrio Sagittarius Z Mutable Fire 10
11
12 Capricorn
Aquarius
Pisces H Cardinal
Fixed
Mutable Earth
Air
Water 7
8 Mercúrio 10
11
12 ^ 230 The Book of Saturn PLANETS
O self-esteem, life force/vitality, creativity, risk-taking instincts, pride,
star quality, fun-loving spirit, inner child, drive for excitement, need for
recreation, speculative side, sexual passion, need to shine Sun; Moon; emotions, security needs, caretaking instincts, dependency needs,
drive to nurture, vulnerabilities, homing instincts, receptivity, moods,
habit patterns, women (including mother) Mercury: urge to communicate, thinking, listening/talking, capacity to learn,
adaptability/flexibility, information-gathering skills, casual contacts,
logic, awareness, dexterity, perception Venus: desirefor pleasure, sensuality, urgefor comfort/ease, need for tangible
beauty, drive for stability/predictability, sweetness, affection, relating
needs, material assets Mars; assertion, self-expression, independence, personal power, desires,
spontaneous instincts, immediate needs, anger, sexual drive, early
identity, doing one's thing Jupiter: ideals and goals, beliefs, values, morality/ethics, faith, optimism,
quest for the truth, philosophy/religion, drive for expanded horizons,
high expectations, seeking the best/highest Saturn: reality quotient; authority instincts, practicality, capacity to deal with
limits, career drives, sense of responsibility, discipline/effort, status
ambitions, urge to solidify/contract, wisdom of experience
* Uranus: Neptune; Pluto: individuality, freedom drives, inventiveness, originality, humanitarian
instincts, detachment, pull toward the future, eccentricity, innovation,
sudden changes
quest for Oneness/Union/transcendence, idealism, quest for infinite
love and beauty, intuition, savior/victim potentials, compassion,
imagination/fantasy, mysticism, escapism E or f intensity, drive for self-mastery, intimacy instincts, sexual needs, drive
for transformation, elimination/completion urges, resentment/
forgiveness, probing, complicated motives, compulsions Ascendant; A personal identity, personal action, appearance, physical body, natural
self-expression Midheaven: M sense of authority, career aspirations, power drives and power figures,
status As troKeys 231 Lua )■ EXTRA BODIES
Halley's Comet: ^ limelight, high focus, rise to power and fall
Chiron: j drive for knowledge, ideals, maverick, truth-seeking, teacher/healer THE "BIG FOUR" ASTEROIDS
Ceres; ? earth mother, productivity, health, growing things, health issues,
mother figure Juno: i marriage, beauty, intimacy, shared resources, giving and receiving Pallas: Mercúrio perception skills, equality, justice, balance, competition, visual
aesthetics Vesta: -$■ responsibility, efficiency, tunnel vision, alienation, capable, health
issues, concentration Also by ACS Publications
All About Astrology Series of booklets
The American Alias, Expanded Fifth Edition (Shanks)
The American Ephemeris for the 20th Century [Noon or Midnight] 1900 to 2000, Rev. 5th Ed.
The American Ephemeris for the 21st Century [Noon or Midnight] 2001-2050, Rev. 2nd Ed.
The American Heliocentric Ephemeris 1901-2000
The American Heliocentric Ephemeris 2001-2025
The American Midpoint Ephemeris 1996-2000
The American Sidereal Ephemeris 1976-2000.2nd Edition
The American Sidereal Ephemeris 2001-2025
Asteroid Goddesses (George & Bloch)
Astro-Alchemy (Negus)
Astrological Insights into Personality (Lundsicd)
Astrology for the Light Side of the Brain (Rogers-Gallagher)
Basic Astrology: A Guide for Teachers & Students (Negus)
Basic Astrology: A Workbook for Students (Negus)
The Book of Jupiter (Waram)
The Book of Neptune (Waram)
The Book of Pluto (Forrest)
The Book of Uranus (Negus)
The Changing Sky (Forrest)
Complete Horoscope Interpretation (Pottenger)
Cosmic Combinations (Negus)
Dial Detective (Simms)
Easy Tarot Guide (Masino)
Easy Astrology Guide (Pottenger)
Expanding Astrology's Universe (Dobyns)
Finding our Way Through the Dark (George)
Future Signs (Simms)
Hands Thai Heal (Burns)
Healing with the Horoscope (Pottenger)
The inner Sky (Forrest)
The International Atlas, Revised Founh Edition (Shanks)
The Michelsen Book of Tables (Michelsen)
Midpoints (Munkasey)
New Insights into Astrology (Press)
The Night Speaks (Forrest)
The Onl> Way to... Learn Astrology, Vols. I-VI (March & McEvers)
Volume I - Basic Principles
Volume Gêmeos - Math & Interpretation Techniques
Volume III - Horoscope Analysis
Volume IV- Learn About Tomorrow: Current Patterns
Volume V - Learn About Relationships: Synastry Techniques
Volume VI - Leam About Horary and Electional Astrology
Planetary Heredity (M. Gauquelin)
Plan s on the Move (Dohynsi'Poitenger)
Psychology of the Planets (F. Gauquelin)
Spirit Guides: We Are Not Alone (Bclhayes)
Tables of Planetary Phenomena (Michelsen)
Twelve Wings of the Eagle (Simms)
Your Magical Child (Simms)
Your Siarway to Love (Pottenger), 2nd Bdiiion The planets have more CTirtprex meanings
than a few simple keywords and phrases. The Book
of Uranus
by Joan Negus
I hi rci ci-.l volume in the
I'lanns series t overs ihr
complex and creative planet
L'ranus Joan Menus describes
the dichotomic of I ranus
Irccdom and individuality,
humanity and passion to help vou create a positive
m.mireviaiion ofits qualities in your life
256 pages BBU-BB&
J 15.95
The Book
of Neptune
by Marilyn Warani
beautifully woven lapotry
) of warm compassion,
acceptance, inspiration and wisdom [Hat touches the heart of
Neptune. Marilyn Waxam lakes
you through Neptune in signs,
houses and in aspect to the other planets.
256 pages BI21X BBS
$15.95 The Book
of Pluto
by Steven Forrest
Sle\cn Forres i lackb-s this
planet nf inirnsitv with
his usual wit, wisdom and
compassion. He inlerprcis
Pluio i lirough house, sign, and
aspect w ilh great sensitivity, incredible honclv and his wonderfully literate stvlc. It's
a rich collection of insights1
352 pages Bl55X-BBS
S1S.9S
The Book
of Jupiter
by Marilyn Waram
arilyn Waram provides a
]V$esh, provocative look at
jupitcr, the largest of planets.
Through scientific study. Marilyn shows us the train of "luckypeople and how creating one's
own luck or good fortune in your life is possible.
320 pages B 1 50X-BBS....-,
SI 5.95 Astrology for the Light Side of the Brain
by Kim Rogers-Gallagher
" Astrology for the LightSide of the Brainoffcn the most
refreshing approach to learning astrology I've ever encountered ...I'd put it ar the top of the list to recommend..."
- New Age Retailer
224 pages B157X BBS
$12.95 Easy Astrology Guide:
How to Read Your Horoscope
by Maritha Pottenger (formerly titled Astro Essentials)
Bring more joy inro your life! This book will show you
how to use your hidden strengths.
352 pages BEAG BBS
$14.95 Future Signs:
How to Make Astrological Predictions
by Maria Kay Simras
Take charge of your future and learn how to find the silver
linings of dark clouds.
240 pages BPS-BBS
$14.95 Your Starway to Love:
Better Romance with Astrology
by Maritha Pottenger
Everything you need to know to enjoy your relationships
more. A do-it-yourself worksheet designed for anyone!
352 pages B153X-BBS
$14.95 Success with Saturn All astrologers would benefit from absorbing this book's wisdom.
"In the Book of Saturn Zip Dobyns methodically and lucidly
delineates Saturn's sign and house placements and aspects
with other planets. Zip writes with unwavering clarity and
insight about this most important planet, offering potent interpretations of fascinating charts and demonstrating a sensible,
precise, psychological approach to the celestial art. The book
embodies the best virtues of Saturn: it is thorough, solidly
grounded in tangible evidence, yet always maintains a playful
attitude."
Greg Bogart, Ph.D.. author of Therapeutic Astrology
"Who better to write a book on Saturn than one of astrology's
most respected elder stateswomen? With clear examples drawn
from her forty years of counseling experience. Dobyns demonstrates the many ways Saturn can manifest in the birth chart.
You will find no grim descriptions or dire predictions here.
Always her emphasis is upon freedom, responsibility, and the
potential for integration. This hopeful, essentially optimistic
approach to Saturn fills a much needed gap in the field and
should be required reading for every serious student of astrology."
Glenn Perry, Ph.D.. astrologer, teacher, psychotherapist Zipporah Dohvns. Ph.D. in Clinical Psvchology, hj>
studied and worked with astrology for almost 40 years.
She is on the Advisor) Board of the National Council
for Geocosmic Research, hasvvriucn a number of books,
spoken all over the world, and appeared on TV 10 represent astrology. She has a u ide astrological practice and
wrnes regularly in The Mutable Dilemma.