Published in 2009 by
IBIS PRESS
an imprint of Nicolas-Hays, Inc. Plutão . O. Box 540206 • Lake Worth, FL 33454-0206
www.nicolashays.com
Distributed to the trade by Red Wheel/Weiser, LLC
65 Parker St., Unit 7 • Newburyport, MA 01950-4600
www.redwheelweiser.com
Copyright © 2009 Tracy Marks
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced or
transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic or mechanical,
including photocopying, recording, or by any information storage and
retrieval system, without permission in writing from Nicolas-Hays, Inc.
Reviewers may quote brief passages.
Special thanks to David Perloff, to Yvonne Paglia of Ibis Press, and to
Stephen Arroyo of CRCS Publications, which published the previous
edition of this book.
Quotations by Liv Ullman are reprinted from Changing (© 1976, 1977 by
Liv Ullman), with permission from Alfred A. Knopf, Inc.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data available on
reequest.
ISBN 978-0-89254-142-3
VG
Cover and text design by Kathryn Sky-Peck
Cover photograph by Marcelo Teson is a detail of the astronomical clock
in
St. Mark's Square in Venice, Italy. Used by permission.
Printed in the United States of America 12 11 10 09 08 07 06
7654321
www.redwheelweiser.com
www.redwheelweiser.com/newsletter CONTENTS
Preface
Introduction
Principles of Interpretation
A Preliminary Note
Part I:
Techniques of Chart Synthesis & Interpretation
Using the Synthesis Worksheet
Synthesis Worksheets
1 The Chart as a Whole
2 Determining Planetary Strength
3 Aspects and Other Chart Variables Júpiter Preliminary Synthesis
5 Additional Considerations
6 How to Synthesize
Part Gêmeos :
Practice In Chart Synthesis
Introduction to Chart Synthesis
Charts A–E with Synthesis Worksheets
7 Author's Answers
8 Example Interpretation (Chart E)
Part III:
The Process of Astrological Counseling & Interpretation Mercúrio Astrology as a Counseling Tool
10 The Astrological Counseling Process Afterword
Appendix One: Planetary Keywords
Appendix Two: Astrology Client Interview Form
Bibliography
About the Author PREFACE TO THE THIRD EDITION
This book is the third edition, revised and updated, of a book I originally
wrote and published in 1979, entitled The Art of Chart Synthesis. My aim
then, as now, was to present a system which I had developed for analyzing
and synthesizing the birthchart. In 1986, after returning to graduate school
and completing my initial training as a counselor, I republished The Art of
Chart Synthesis, now retitled The Art of Chart Interpretation, including in
the new edition two chapters on the counseling and interpersonal
dimensions of astrological interpretation.
During this time period, I benefited not only from my psychotherapeutic
training, but also experienced four years of intensive heartopening
psychotherapy with a psychosynthesis-trained psychologist. My experience
as a client, which began with a Jupiter/Saturn conjunction on my Sun,
completely altered not only my personal relationships, but also my
approach to astrology.
Since 1986, I have continued to maintain two separate counseling
practices, one as a licensed mental health counselor, and another as an
astrologer. Although my understanding and methods have continued to
develop, in my astrology practice I still rely, to a large extent, on the system
of interpretation which I presented in the last edition of The Art of Chart
Interpretation. For that reason, I have only made a few alterations to the
first two sections of this book, and have added an appendix of planetary
keywords.
The primary additions to The Art of Chart Interpretation are to the third
section, on the process of astrological counseling. Here, I have considerably
expanded material on three different subjects—initial contact with the
client, preparing a session, and conducting a session. Rather than tell you
exactly how to do astrological counseling, I present my own process, so that
you may adapt what you find useful to your own personality and
experience. I do, however, provide guidelines and suggestions for creating a
safe environment, responding to the needs of your clients, and
constructively presenting astrological information. If you are not a trained counselor, you will want to focus on the
interpretative process itself, and avoid stirring up emotional issues which
you are not prepared to handle. However, understanding the approach of a
counseling-oriented astrologer, and being prepared to deal with the
sometimes difficult interpersonal dimension of a session, will help you
improve your skills as an astrologer and your capacity to benefit the friends
and clients with whom you conduct astrological sessions.
—TRACY MARKS
Arlington, Massachusetts
June 12, 2008 INTRODUCTION
The dilemma that most of us face, after we have learned the meanings of
the planets, signs, houses and aspects, and have begun to delineate the bits
and pieces of the chart, is how to view the chart as a whole and determine
its primary characteristics. The vast array of planets and aspects so easily
becomes a dense jungle of twisted vines which prevents us from
discovering the trail that leads out of the undergrowth, to the central
meaning and purpose of the chart itself. Only by becoming so familiar with
each of the multifaceted parts of the chart that interpreting the details
becomes automatic, and only by consciously focusing upon the overall
pattern and the chart's most outstanding characteristics, can we begin to
master the art of interpretation and synthesis rather than lose ourselves in
the tangle of hundreds of interrelated variables.
Many of us, when we begin interpreting charts, feel that we must cover
everything—every planet, sign, house, and aspect. If we don't, we fear that
we may be neglecting something important, or failing to give a complete
picture of the influences operating at birth. But in covering everything, we
often end up covering nothing, because we fill our minds and our clients'
minds with so many minute details that all that remains for all concerned
when the reading is finished is a foggy blur.
Some of us may approach a chart by interpreting it house by house,
beginning with the first house and moving counterclockwise around the
wheel. Others may begin with the Sun and consider every planet in turn—
Moon, Mercury, Venus, etc. Still others may attempt to transform chaos into
order by considering each area of life important to the client—love, work,
home and family, etc., and interpreting all the planets, signs and houses
associated with it.
These systems of interpretation may work for some astrologers and some
clients. But they lack an essential element necessary to giving a meaningful
reading—attention to priorities, to the central meanings of the chart above
and beyond its multifaceted characteristics. Without this focus, the most
prominent issues of the chart are likely to be lost in an array of minor
issues. Without this focus, clients have nothing to grab onto to help them relate all that is told to them in a meaningful and unified way; as a result,
they forget most of it or consider it in only a superficial manner. Covering
everything does not help clients to assimilate everything; most often, it
overwhelms and confuses them, so that they are less sure of their identity
and direction when they leave the room than when they entered.
If we want our clients to emerge with clearer mental pictures of
themselves, including the understanding of their predominant strengths and
talents, and the weaknesses and conflicts which can become strengths and
talents once they develop the desire and resolution to transform them, we
must aim for quality and depth of insight in our readings rather than
quantity and breadth of scope. After we have spent at least an hour on the
most distinctive characteristics of a chart, we can always: 1) consider
several of the minor characteristics; 2) give a comprehensive delineation of
one of the areas of life (most frequently love or work) which is the client's
primary concern now; and 3) answer questions which were not answered
during the initial interpretation.
Consider a color wheel. How vivid each color is when viewed separately,
but spin the wheel and notice that as the speed increases, each individual
color becomes less distinct. At high speed, all that can be seen is white.
Only by stopping the color wheel and viewing each primary color one by
one again can we experience and appreciate each shade and hue in all of its
infinite richness. Similarly, only by paying attention to the five to ten most
distinctive characteristics of the chart, by studying and interpreting each of
these in depth, and by relating them to each other, can we develop and
communicate a clear picture of the natal chart rather than a whizzing blur of
planets, signs, and houses.
Consider now a newspaper article. A reporter presents the details of a
story in descending order, the most important information first, then the
next important, and finally the least important, so that it may be cut if there
isn't enough space for the complete article in the paper. Readers may glance
at the first sentence or two and distill the essence of the article; they are
oriented from the very beginning. The rest of the article elaborates upon the
first few sentences, filling in more information as it goes on, and does not
for a moment lose the central focus, which gives all the details coherence
and order.
If we want to give coherent readings, we can learn from the newspaper
article. We must determine what is most important in the chart and what is least important. We must develop the ability to focus upon the essentials of
the chart and allow the inessentials to be dealt with only when the most
significant information has been presented as clearly and completely as
possible. But unlike the news writer, we will dialogue with our audience;
we will want to make sure that our clients understand what we are saying.
Therefore, we will explore each facet of the chart that we deem important in
the utmost depth—imparting all that we know about that characteristic,
astrologically and personally. We will listen to our clients and let them
relate what we are saying to their own lives, so that they assimilate its
meaning and ramifications in their own way and are able to distill a grain or
two of wisdom from the exploration.
This book is primarily concerned with interpreting the most outstanding
features of a chart. It is not a comprehensive manual on chart interpretation.
It does not interpret the meanings of the planets in signs, houses or aspects,
nor does it tell all there is to know about patterns, planets on angles, the
phases of the Moon, etc. When only the bare essentials are presented,
astrology texts will be recommended which deal with that particular topic in
more depth.
The purpose of this book is to provide a valid and comprehensible
method of synthesizing the natal chart. This method depends upon the use,
at least initially, of a worksheet for determining the essential characteristics
of a chart. In the beginning stages of chart interpretation, only a system, an
organized method, can help us to create order out of chaos and to penetrate
to the central issues of an individual's chart and personality. After we have
used the worksheet five or six times, the process of synthesis will become
quick and automatic, and the form itself will no longer be necessary.
The example section of this book includes several charts of famous
people, which we can use to practice our synthesizing abilities. They are
also “guessing games” for us to play, for the charts are unidentified. In the
section following the charts and worksheets, we will discover the identity of
each chart, as well as the author's opinion of the central features of each
one, and a sample interpretation.
The final portion of this book addresses the interactive dimensions of
chart interpretation, which require some understanding of the counseling
process, and awareness of the needs and feelings of the person whose chart
we are interpreting. If we are concerned not merely with imparting
information, but also with helping the other person to integrate and utilize the material we are presenting, then we need to assess our own interpreting
and counseling process. It is important to learn to express our knowledge in
a way that benefits another person, and to develop the skills necessary to
facilitate his or her own growth process. We may not only want to present
“what is” in terms of personality dynamics, we may also want to give
constructive guidance and help our client or friend translate insight into
action. PRINCIPLES OF INTERPRETATION
1. We can express our planets, signs, houses, and aspects positively or
negatively. Whether they become destructive energies impeding our
happiness and growth or constructive energies promoting our
happiness and our growth depends not upon their placement in our
natal charts but upon our willingness to develop our self-awareness
and to exert the effort necessary to transform a negative into a positive.
Our charts are not static or closed. We can direct our planetary
energies rather than be directed by them. We can transform them by
developing a center in ourselves—through meditation, selfobservation, and astrological/ psychological understanding, and by
acting from that center, with full awareness of all facets of our
personalities. People whose planets balance or stimulate ours in some
needed way, as well as transits and progressions, can also open new
possibilities within us and help us to unfold the potential of our charts.
2. An aspect between two planets is a pathway of energy. Whether it is a
conjunction or opposition, a square or a trine, it can operate
advantageously in our lives. Squares and oppositions present more
problems than trines or sextiles, but they also provide the alchemical
fuel, the motivation necessary for self-transformation. A conscious
attempt to express a positive blend of the planets involved in a square
or opposition aspect may eventually overcome the conflicts that the
aspect may generate. However, we must be willing to experience an
aspect's negative manifestations and learn from them, in order to move
beyond the negative and experience the positive manifestations.
3. We create our own realities according to our beliefs and expectations.
If we expect a planet to be malefic, it will be malefic. But to expect it
to be benefic is not enough; we must also use it beneficially.
Probably the most important message I have for you who are reading this
book, particularly those of you whose lives are troubled and whose charts
are afflicted, is this: Your lives are in your own hands. Your charts, like
your lives, are open-ended, and like magic circles, are capable of
transformation. You have such immense possibilities, and whatever possibilities you follow, every experience, no matter how difficult, can be a
source of growth, strength and fulfillment. You can turn your conflicts into
joys, your squares into trines.
Astrology can help you to attune yourself to your inner vision. It can help
you to discover ways in which you can translate that vision into concrete
terms. But it is up to you, and it will always be up to you, to remain in touch
with that vision, to follow it, and to live by its illumination.
—reprinted from
The Directory of New England Astrologers,
edited by Tracy Marks A PRELIMINARY NOTE
When calculating and interpreting a chart, the author recommends that you:
1. Use the Koch house system. During the last twenty years of my
astrological practice, I have found that the impact of the transits and
progressions entering a house most coincides with Koch house cusps,
and least coincides with Placidus house cusps.
2. Consider planets in the last five degrees of a house to be influencing
the next house.
3. Allow an 8-degree orb for conjunctions, squares, oppositions and
trines, and a Júpiter -degree orb for sextiles and inconjuncts, adding 2
degrees to the orb if the Sun or Moon is involved and Júpiter degrees for
Sun/Moon aspects. These orbs may be increased slightly if the aspect
is part of an aspect configuration, if planets are also in parallel or in
mutual reception, or if they are both approaching each other (e. Vênus .,
Jupiter 16 Leo retrograde square Mercury at 7 Taurus direct). Júpiter . Consider the conjunction to be the strongest aspect, followed by the
opposition, square, trine, sextile, inconjunct and semi-square.
5. Determine aspects to the ascendant and midheaven, allowing a Júpiter degree orb (6 for conjunctions).
6. Use a 14-point scale for counting elements and modes. See sections
A1 through A4. An acceptable alternative is a 12-point scale, which
gives ½ count to Uranus, Neptune, Pluto, and the M.C.
7. Consider Saturn the ruler of Capricorn, Pluto of Scorpio, Mars of
Aries, and Jupiter of Sagittarius.
8. Draw colored lines across the chart to indicate aspects; these will help
you to perceive the patterns operating in the chart. You might, for
example, circle conjunctions in purple, and draw green lines for
sextiles, blue for trines, red for squares, and black for oppositions. Mercúrio . Set up your charts on an open wheel (see charts in practice section)
rather than one bound by a closed circle. This will help you to
remember that the horoscope is not a fixed diagram of the psyche, but
is open to the influences of transits, progressions, the planets of the
significant people in your life, and your own free will. PART I TECHNIQUES OF CHART SYNTHESIS &
INTERPRETATION USING THE SYNTHESIS WORKSHEET
If there is any principle that we should keep in mind as we develop the art
of chart synthesis, it is this: Start with the characteristics that are most
extreme, most powerful, most outstanding, and let the rest of the chart
interpretation take shape around them. Then we can be assured that
although we may neglect to cover a wide variety of characteristics and
issues when we are giving a reading, that we will not, by any means,
neglect to cover those which are vital and which will continue to be vital
throughout this person's life. By the end of the reading, our client will
probably have deepened his/her insight in regard to one or more of these
issues and will have gained enough clarity of understanding that he/she will
remember these issues, reflect upon them, and perhaps even develop the
desire and resolution necessary to work with them and turn them all into
advantages and accomplishments.
What is the nature of this worksheet? Basically, it is a list of
characteristics to look for as we first examine a chart. Not everything that
many astrologers consider important is included on it; some traditional and
modem techniques are emphasized, while others, which do not really seem
to merit the attention paid to them, are ignored. But the worksheet,
nonetheless, will enable us to list the fifteen or twenty most important
characteristics of any chart, and then to reduce these to the five to eight that
should most demand our attention. We can best prepare to give a reading by
filling out the worksheet for a chart, and then by spending twenty to thirty
minutes reflecting upon the issues that we have determined are the most
significant. The process of note taking may be helpful in reaching a clear
understanding of the chart and presenting it to our client in an intelligible
manner. A: THE CHART AS A WHOLE
1. PREDOMINANT ELEMENT (p. 19)
How many? Circle if more than 5 of 14.
2. WEAKEST ELEMENT (p. 22)
How many? Circle if 0 or 1 of 14.
3. PREDOMINANT MODE (p. 24)
How many? Circle if more than 6 of 14. Júpiter . WEAKEST MODE (p. 25)
How many? Circle if 0, 1 of 14, or 2 of 14.
5. PLANETARY PATTERN (p. 27)
Circle if pattern is clearly defined.
6. ASPECT CONFIGURATIONS (p. 31)
Circle answer.
7. SUN/MOON SIGNS & RELATIONSHIP (p. 40)
Note aspect or phase. Circle if in major aspect.
8. ASCENDANT/MIDHEAVEN SIGNS (p. 45)
Circle ascendant. Mercúrio . NUMBER OF RETROGRADE PLANETS (p. 46)
Circle if 0 or more than 3. B: DETERMINING PLANETARY STRENGTH
1. SUN SIGN & HOUSE (p. 51)
Circle answer.
2. MOON SIGN & HOUSE (p. 52)
Circle answer.
3. SUN RULER: ITS SIGN & HOUSE (p. 52) Júpiter . ASCENDANT RULER: ITS SIGN & HOUSE (p. 53)
5. PLANET IN OWN SIGN (p. 53)
Circle answer.
6. PLANET IN OWN HOUSE (p. 53)
Circle answer.
7. PLANET RISING (p. 54) Circle if less than 2 degrees above or 6 degrees below ascendant.
8. PLANET ON MIDHEAVEN (p. 54)
Circle if less than 2 degrees before or 6 degrees after midheaven. Mercúrio . PLANET ON NADIR (p. 55)
Circle if less than 1 degree before or 2 degrees after nadir.
10. PLANET DESCENDING (p. 55)
Circle if less than 1 degree before or 2 degrees after descendant.
11. STATIONARY PLANET (p. 56)
Circle answer.
12. SOLE DISPOSITOR (p. 56)
13. MOST ASPECTED PLANET (p. 57)
How many aspects?
14. UNASPECTED PLANETS (p. 58)
Circle answer.
15. OTHER FOCAL PLANETS (p. 58)
Circle answer. C: ASPECTS & OTHER CHART VARIABLES
1. PREDOMINANT TYPE OF ASPECT (p. 61)
How many?
2. ABSENCE OF A TYPE OF ASPECT (p. 62)
3. CONJUNCTIONS WITHIN 3 DEGREES (p. 63)
Indicate orb. Circle if less than 14 degrees. Júpiter . OTHER MAJOR ASPECTS WITHIN 1½ DEGREES (p. 63)
Indicate orb. Circle if less than 1 degree.
5. IMPORTANT MINOR ASPECTS (p. 64)
Note those which are exact.
6. PARALLELS REINFORCING ASPECTS (p. 66)
7. MUTUAL RECEPTIONS (p. 67)
Circle answer.
8. LUNAR NODES (p. 67)
Indicate sign & house. Circle answer.
List major aspects within 2 degrees. D: PRELIMINARY SYNTHESIS
1. STRONGEST PLANETS (p. 69)
How many counts? Circle if more than Júpiter .
2. STRONGEST SIGNS (p. 69)
How many counts? Circle if more than Júpiter .
3. STRONGEST HOUSES (p. 70)
How many counts? Circle if more than Júpiter . Júpiter . STRONGEST ASPECT (p. 70)
Circle if less than 30 minutes. E. ADDITIONAL CONSIDERATIONS (p. 71)
F. PRIMARY CHARACTERISTICS OF THIS CHART
1.
2.
3. Júpiter .
5.
6.
7.
8. Chapter One THE CHART AS A WHOLE
The first step in interpreting a chart involves considering the chart as a
whole and assessing its overall patterns, as well as the balances or
imbalances which exist among the primary astrological variables. A1. Predominant Element
(How many? Circle the number if more than 5 out of 14 possible points.)
The fire signs are Aries, Leo and Sagittarius; the earth signs, Taurus, Virgo
and Capricorn; the air signs, Gemini, Libra and Aquarius; and the water
signs. Cancer, Scorpio, and Pisces.
To determine the predominant element in any chart, add up the number
of fire, earth, air and water signs which contain planets, as well as the signs
of the ascendant and the mid-heaven. Using a 14-point scale, count the Sun
and Moon signs as 2, the signs of the other planets as 1, and the signs of the
ascendant and midheaven as 1. If a planet is between 29 degrees of one sign
and 0 degrees of the next sign and direct, or between 0–1 degrees of a sign
and retrograde, it is under the influence of both, and its count should be
divided between the two signs in question.
Consider the element count in a chart with the planet and angle positions
as shown in table 1 on page 20.
A well-balanced chart would have 3 to Júpiter counts each of fire, earth, air
and water signs. Five counts of any element is an emphasis; six or more
counts is an extreme emphasis. In the example given here, the predominant
element air is moderately strong.
Table 1. Sample chart showing element count The following keywords should help you to interpret the emphasized
elements in a chart. Insert “very” before each of these keywords when there
are 5 counts of a particular element; insert “extremely” if there are 6 or
more counts. People with 6 or more fire signs may also be dominating, fast-paced, and
inclined to invest all of themselves into their activities. They may have difficulty perceiving other people as separate individuals, with their own
valid needs and desires. People with 6 or more earth signs will be concerned with concrete details
and tangible results. They will operate most frequently in the world of their
senses, attuned to their immediate environment, to their physical bodies,
and to sensory comforts and pleasures. People with 6 or more air signs usually live in their minds, restlessly
seeking knowledge and sharing their thoughts with other people. Somewhat
impersonal, they nevertheless thrive on communication and social
interaction. People with 6 or more water signs frequently lose themselves in their
feelings or the feelings of other people, and have difficulty maintaining
their separateness. Their extreme sensitivity often leads them to withdraw
into themselves. Often quite psychic, they respond with great compassion to
the needs of other people. A2. Weakest Element
(How many? Circle if 0 or 1 of 14.)
If a chart has 0 or 1 of an element, or if all the counts of one element are
those of outer planets, the individual in question may be markedly deficient
in the characteristics of that element. Two counts of an element indicates a
minor deficiency. Sometimes, other variables in a chart can at least partially
compensate for this deficiency.
Compensations for 0 or 1 fire counts include: Mars in a fire sign
(particularly Aries); Mars in a focal position (conjunct an angle, at the end
of a t-square or at the handle of a bucket); Mars in, or to some extent ruling
a fire house (particularly the 1st house); Mars conjunct Sun, Jupiter or
Moon; Jupiter in Sagittarius; or a cardinal emphasis.
Compensations for 0 or 1 earth counts include: Saturn in an earth sign
(particularly Capricorn); a focal Saturn (conjunct an angle, at the end of a tsquare or at the handle of a bucket); Saturn in, or to some extent ruling an
earth house (particularly the 10th house); Saturn conjunct Sun, Mercury or
Mars; Mercury in Virgo; Venus in Taurus; or an emphasis on fixed signs.
Compensations for 0 or 1 air include: Mercury in an air sign (particularly
Gemini); a focal Mercury (conjunct an angle, at the end of a t-square or at
the handle of a bucket); Mercury in, or to some extent ruling an air house
(particularly the 3rd house); Mercury in Virgo; Mercury conjunct Sun;
Uranus or Venus; Venus in Libra; or a mutable emphasis.
Compensations for 0 or 1 water include: Moon in, or to some extent
ruling a water house (particularly the 4th house); a focal Moon (conjunct an
angle, at the end of a t-square or at the handle of a bucket); Moon conjunct
Sun, Neptune or Pluto; or an emphasis on mutable signs.
These compensations should be taken into account when assessing the
importance of a particular deficiency in a chart. Such compensations may
not substitute for a lack of an element; they may simply increase the desire
to express that element, without giving the natural ability to function
accordingly. Nevertheless, because people who are weak in an element have
not developed most of that element's characteristics, they usually are aware
of their lack and strive to overcome it. Initially, their attempts to
compensate for an inherent lack may lead them to appear as if the element
in question is strong in their charts. However, because they usually strive to attune to its energy and incorporate it into their lives, they may try too hard,
and express the element in an unnatural manner. Although they struggle to become self-expressive and assertive, these
people alternate between withholding themselves and expressing
themselves in an overly dramatic manner. They may become mired in a
hectic schedule of impersonal activities or may, in contrast, become overly
preoccupied with their personal experience. Because they are not often
aware of or enthusiastic about new possibilities, they may look to others for
inspiration and motivation. They often feel passive and detached or
uninvolved; they seek deeper personal and emotional involvement in life. These people often develop skills which have no practical application, flit
from job to job, or bounce checks and borrow money freely. Or, in contrast,
they overemphasize the practical by becoming secretaries or accountants, or
being overly particular about budgeting, everyday details, and order.
Because they do not feel grounded, they frequently seek security by
adhering to a highly structured system of thought or by following an
organized but rigid routine. They may hold onto a job or relationship too
long because of the stability and security it provides. These people often hunger for social interaction. Although very concerned
with communication, they frequently feel out of contact or misunderstood;
they may prefer to express themselves through non-verbal or written
channels rather than the spoken word. Distrustful of the intellect, they learn
primarily from experience. Nevertheless, they are endlessly conceptualizing
and clarifying their thinking. Because they lack objectivity, they may gain
understanding of themselves only through receiving feedback from other
people. These people frequently turn to spiritual realms or universal truths in an
attempt to find meaning in their lives, or to fill the emotional vacuum which
their personal relationships are unable to fill. Their difficulty remaining in
touch with and expressing their feelings may lead them to form
relationships with overly emotional people or to become addicted to
excitement and intensity. Because they may feel disconnected emotionally,
they struggle to respond empathically to other people's feelings, and may
attempt to prove that they are sensitive by engaging in nurturing activities
(such as cooking a meal) or by acting overly concerned or solicitous. A3. Predominant Mode
(How many? Circle if more than 6.)
The modes or qualities, consisting of cardinal, fixed and mutable signs, are
not as important as the elements, but do reveal significant personality
characteristics. The cardinal signs are Aries, Cancer, Libra and Capricorn;
the fixed signs, Taurus, Leo, Scorpio and Aquarius; and the mutable signs,
Gemini, Virgo, Sagittarius and Pisces.
Using the 14-point scale, count the modes in a chart the same way you
counted the elements. The example in section A1 yields 3½ cardinal, 7
fixed and 3½ mutable according to this system. Because Júpiter -5 cardinal signs
is average, 6 strong and 7 or more very strong, this chart has a very strong
fixed emphasis.
The following keywords should help you to interpret the emphasized
modes in a chart. Insert “very” before each of these keywords when there
are 6 counts of a particular mode; insert “overly” when there are 7 or more
counts. You will notice that in some ways cardinal signs are similar to fire
signs, fixed to earth, and mutable to both air and water. People with 7 or more cardinal signs would rather be overly active than
bored. Although very concerned with their activities and projects, they also
focus their attention on the crucial areas of life—home and family, love and
profession, and are intent upon meeting challenges and resolving crises.
Much depends upon whether Aries, Cancer, Libra or Capricorn dominates
the chart. People with 7 or more fixed signs focus their attention on their values and
goals, and the satisfaction of their desires. Slow to start, they are nevertheless powerhouses once they determine their course of action. They
resist changing direction, and refuse to be pushed, pulled or pressured. People with 7 or more mutable signs are concerned with personal
relationships, and thrive on variety and change. More inclined to flow with
the current than swim against the tide, they adapt themselves readily to the
people and circumstances of their lives. Frequently, however, they do not
know what they want or where they want to go. A4. Weakest Mode
(How many? Circle if 0, 1 or 2.)
Because the average number of counts for a mode on the 14-point scale is
4⅔, people rarely have 0 or even 1 of a cardinal, fixed or mutable sign. We
would therefore consider a count of 0, 1, or 2 as a marked deficiency. As
with elements, people who are very weak in a particular mode are usually
aware of their lack and strive to overcome it. Often, too, they have built-in
compensations in their charts. These compensations, however, may have to
be very strong or very numerous to make up for an extreme deficiency.
Compensations for 0, 1, or 2 cardinal signs include: Mars in a cardinal
sign (particularly Aries); a focal Mars (conjunct an angle, etc.); Mars in or
(to some extent) ruling a cardinal (angular) house; Mars conjunct Sun,
Moon or Saturn; Sun or Moon in Aries; Saturn in Capricorn; a
predominance of fire signs; or a bucket pattern.
Compensations for 0, 1, or 2 fixed signs include: Sun in a fixed sign; Sun
conjunct Pluto, Saturn, Uranus, the ascendant or the midheaven; Sun in or,
to some extent, ruling a fixed (succedent) house; a predominance of earth
signs; or a locomotive pattern.
Compensations for 0, 1, or 2 mutable signs include: Mercury in a
mutable sign (particularly Gemini or Virgo); a focal Mercury (conjunct an
angle, etc.); Mercury in or, to some extent, ruling a mutable (cadent) house;
Mercury conjunct Sun, Moon, Jupiter or Neptune; a predominance of air or
water signs; or a splash pattern.
The following keywords can be used as a guide in interpreting the lack of
a mode in a chart:
LACK OF CARDINAL: These people can easily enjoy observing and
simply “being” without necessarily “doing.” But if they have 0 or only 1
cardinal sign, they may feel driven to prove themselves through activity or
may substitute an emotionally intense inner life for active involvement in
external challenges.
LACK OF FIXED: These people may have difficulty completing what they
have begun and developing structure and stability in their lifestyles. They
may, as a result, become obsessed with organizing or finishing, and may test their willpower by committing themselves to overlydemanding projects
or goals.
LACK OF MUTABLE: These people usually know what they want.
Frequently unwilling to compromise, they may insist that other people be
adaptable and accommodate them. Because they have difficulty bending
with circumstances and making personal changes, they often attempt to
force change in their external circumstances, sometimes in dramatic ways. A5. Planetary Pattern
(Circle if pattern is clearly defined.)
Not all charts have planetary patterns, and fewer still have clearly defined
patterns. If the pattern of a chart is not obvious, the pattern is not likely to
be as important in interpretation as the other predominant characteristics of
the chart.
The following definitions and interpretations are sketchy ones. For more
information, the reader may want to consult Marc Edmund Jones' Guide to
Horoscope Interpretation, Dane Rudhyar's First Steps in the Study of a
Birthchart (published as a small book and also as a portion of PersonCentered Astrology) and especially Robert Jansky's Planetary Patterns (see
bibliography). Splash Pattern
DEFINITION—Planets are scattered around the chart, usually with no
more than two planets in any one house, with no more than three empty
houses, and with no empty area larger than two houses or 60 degrees.
INTERPRETATION—The splash personality is quite Gemini-like, with a
variety of interests and abilities and a tendency to scatter his/her energies
rather than focus upon one or two particular areas of life. Bowl or Hemisphere Pattern
DEFINITION—All planets fall within 180 degrees (or a maximum of 190
degrees) and on one side of an opposition, and no more than 60 degrees or
two houses of the occupied portion of the chart are empty.
INTERPRETATION—The bowl personality can function in a selfcontained manner in the houses occupied by planets, but usually focuses
upon achieving in the unoccupied area (particularly in the sign and house
which opposes the midpoint of the bowl). The first planet of the bowl (the
first to have crossed the ascendant, moving clockwise) indicates the
energies most frequently used to fulfill his/her needs. Bucket or Funnel Pattern DEFINITION—The bucket is a bowl pattern with a handle, the handle
being a planet or two closely conjunct planets at least 30 degrees from the
planets within the bowl (but preferably closer to 90 degrees away from
them and opposing a planet near the center of the bowl). INTERPRETATION—The bucket personality channels his/ her energy
through the handle of the bucket. The sign and house position of this
singleton or focal planet usually indicates the kind of energy this person
most frequently expresses and the area of life through which he/she seeks
satisfaction. Locomotive or Open-angle Pattern
DEFINITION—All planets fall within 240 degrees (or a maximum of 250
degrees), with no more than two houses or 60 degrees empty within the
occupied area, and with a trine bridging the unoccupied area.
INTERPRETATION—The locomotive personality is an energetic, selfdriving, determined individual who single-mindedly focuses upon
achieving his/her purpose, which is generally indicated by the midpoint of
the empty trine. The first planet (the first to have crossed the ascendant,
moving clockwise) is the engine; its sign and house position indicates the
energy which fuels his/her drive to incorporate the midpoint of the empty
trine into his life. Seesaw or Hourglass Pattern
DEFINITION—Planets are divided into two groups, at least 60 degrees or
two empty houses apart, with no more than one empty house within each
group, and with at least one opposition.
INTERPRETATION—The seesaw personality is quite Libra-like—
concerned with relationships, aware of alternatives, fluctuating between
different parts of himself, and attempting to maintain balance through
his/her ability to synthesize and compromise. Bundle, Cluster Or Wedge Pattern
DEFINITION—All planets are contained within a trine—120 degrees, or
with orb allowances, a maximum of 130 degrees.
INTERPRETATION—The bundle personality is a self-contained, focused
personality who resourcefully concentrates his/her energy upon a limited
area of life, indicated by the signs and houses occupied by planets. This
individual has little perspective, but has the capacity to develop his/her
resources to the utmost. The first planet often indicates energy which may
be used to achieve in the area of life indicated by the far midpoint of the
bundle. Fan Pattern DEFINITION—All planets but one (or two in close conjunction) are
contained within the trine of a bundle pattern. This singleton or handle is at
least 60 degrees apart from the bundle area and opposes at least one of its
planets.
INTERPRETATION—Rather than directing one's energy outward through
the handle as in a bucket pattern, the fan personality uses the handle planet
as a source of support or nourishment, through which he/she takes in to
satisfy his/her needs. Splay or Tripod Pattern
DEFINITION—Planets are divided into three groups, with each group at
least 60 degrees or two houses apart from another group. In its purest form,
these groups cover no more than 60 degrees each and are connected by a
grand trine.
INTERPRETATION—The splay personality is generally a unique
individual who self-assuredly follows his/her own path. The presence of a
grand trine adds predictability and self-sufficiency in fire, earth, air or water
characteristics. A6. Aspect Configurations
(Circle answer.)
Aspect configurations are even more important than planetary patterns and
deserve at least a book in themselves. Bil Tierney's Dynamics of Aspect
Analysis: New Perceptions in Astrology covers them sufficiently and
explores their potentials for aiding growth and self-transformation. Robert
Jansky's Interpreting the Aspects is also an excellent source on aspect
configurations. The major aspect configurations are: the stellium, the grand
trine, the t-square, the grand cross, and the yod or “finger of God.” The Stellium
DEFINITION—Traditionally, a stellium must involve at least four planets
(or at least five planets if the Sun, Mercury and Venus are included) with
each planet within 8 degrees of the next, and all within the same sign. The
meaning of the stellium, however, holds true for any four planets, even if
three are interior planets or if all are within the same house rather than the
same sign. Other configurations will function like a stellium but with not
quite the same intensity when three rather than four planets are in close
conjunction; four planets are in conjunction but not within the same sign or
house; orbs between two of the planets are slightly greater than eight
degrees; or three planets conjunct a node or angle of the chart. A stellium is
particularly strong if more than four planets are involved within it, or if one
is the Sun or Moon or a planet in its own sign or house.
INTERPRETATION—Positive characteristics of the stellium include:
concentrated energy, focus, genius, talent, self-motivation, sense of
direction and purpose, and singlemindedness. Negative characteristics
include: narrowness, obsession, overemphasis, imbalance, selfcenteredness, difficulty compromising, and lack of objectivity. Planets in a
stellium normally act as a unit, giving extraordinary emphasis to the sign
and/or house in which they are placed. The meaning of the sign/ house
combination should be interpreted before the individual conjunctions
contained within the stellium.
Consider the stellium to be like a close family. If the father loses his job,
everyone in the family is affected. If a daughter wins an award in school, everyone experiences her happiness. In a stellium, those planets which are
closest will most affect each other, but even those which are more distant
will experience the repercussions. Usually, the planet in the middle or
closest to the midpoint of the stellium will be the most sensitive to the
influences of the other planets.
Aspects the stellium makes to other planets or to the angles of the chart
will indicate how the stellium functions in relation to other energies in the
chart. Because transits and progressions create a chain reaction which
triggers all the planets within the stellium, people with stelliums will
experience periods of calm in their lives alternating with periods of intense
upheaval and change.
The Grand Trines
DEFINITION—The grand trine involves three planets, usually in the same
element, in trine to each other-—the first trine the second, the second trine
the third, and the third trine the first. A grand trine is strong if it involves
more than three planets in the same element and weak if it involves more
than one element.
INTERPRETATION—Positive characteristics of a grand trine include: free
energy flow, luck, ease in obtaining benefits and opportunities, selfmotivation, self-sufficiency and talent—all related to one particular
element. Negative characteristics include: laziness, inertia, escapism or
avoidance of challenge, “moving in circles,” bound by habits or past
patterns of behavior, closed, distant, living in “one's own world.”
Grand trines have been best described by Noel Tyl, who refers to them as
“closed circuits of self-sufficiency.” People with grand trines are motivated,
independent and talented when functioning on the level of the element
emphasized by their grand trine, but tend to “get stuck” or to retreat into
that one part of themselves.
People with a grand fire trine will have ceaseless energy and vitality but
will have difficulty slowing down, understanding another person's point of
view, or channelling energy in response to another person's needs. People
with a grand air trine may be intellectually and socially a world to
themselves, able to provide their own mental stimulation, but often unable
to turn off the mind and deal directly with emotional or practical issues.
People with a grand earth trine will be able to apply themselves successfully to a job and will easily attract and manage material resources,
but may become bound by ambition or mundane concerns and closed to
other sources of meaning in life. People with a grand water trine will have
an active emotional life and a high degree of sensitivity, but may be unable
to share their feelings with other people or rise above their feelings and
view themselves objectively. When interpreting a grand trine, consider not only the element which the
grand trine accentuates, but also the nature of the planets and houses
involved in the configuration. If one planet in the grand trine is also a
pivotal planet, linking the grand trine to another aspect configuration, that
planet will be the key to effectively expressing the talents of both configurations. The closest square or opposition to a grand trine is also
important, for it is the spark of motivation which aids a person in applying
his/her fire, earth, air or water talents to other areas of life. A grand trine
with an opposition to one of its planets is called a kite formation; the
opposing planet can lead to increased awareness and is a powerful channel
for the expression of grand trine energies.
The Yod or Finger of God
DEFINITION—The yod consists of two planets in sextile, each inconjunct
(150 degrees) a third planet, located at the far midpoint of the sextile. No
orbs are more than five degrees. The planet which receives both inconjuncts
is the focal or action planet.
INTERPRETATION—The yod configuration calls for emotional or mental
readjustment and regeneration. The focal planet indicates the energies
which must be regenerated; its sign, the way in which they need to be
corrected or re-experienced; and its house, the area of life through which
this transformation will take place. The focal planet is a very sensitive
planet because its inconjuncts (6th and 8th house aspects) create a
subliminal tension which can result in physical or psychological problems.
This planet has been referred to as the mission in life, the finger of God, the
finger of fate, the ultimate destiny, and the celestial pointer. Its negative
manifestations must be cast out, as one casts out devils, and its highest
expression activated. As the far midpoint of the sextile, it is the mediator
which can use the dynamic creative energy and opportunity presented by
the sextile to bring about a new way of being; it is the point of
transmutation in the chart, the alchemical agent which can create an entirely
new pattern of thinking and feeling.
People with yods generally experience turning points in their lives in which
they confront a crisis and resolve it through a change in consciousness,
often experienced as a seemingly fated change in life direction. This
transformation at its best leads to increased spiritual sensitivity and
awareness, the flowing of new energies, the building of an inner center, and
the discovery of a concrete means for expressing one's creativity. Yods with
a planet at the near midpoint of the sextile (30 degrees from each planet in
sextile) are called tetradic yods, and especially call for a transformation
leading to concrete action and the practical expression of creativity. The T-Square
DEFINITION—A t-square involves three or more planets, with at least two
in opposition and squaring a third planet. All three planets generally are
within the same mode—cardinal, fixed or mutable, and no orbs should be
over 10 degrees. A t-square is particularly strong if it involves more than
three planets, if all planets are within a tight orb (less than Júpiter degrees), if one
of its squares is exact (less than 1 degree), or if the focal planet, the planet
receiving both squares, is at the midpoint of the two opposing planets. It is
weak if planets are in signs of different modes, if all orbs are over 6
degrees, or if a planet occurs in the sign opposite the sign of the focal
planet. (This configuration may operate more like a grand cross.) When a
planet squares the nodal axis or one of the main angles of a chart, a
configuration is created which functions in the manner of a weak t-square.
INTERPRETATION—A t-square provides a high degree of motivation and
the ability to achieve, but it may also result in wasted energy or energy
expressed in an unfavorable manner, because the t-square individual is out
of balance. He or she is inclined to lean too much in one direction (like a
three-legged table), overdoing the expression of the focal planet, its sign
and house, and then seeking balance by leaning too heavily in the opposite
direction. But because it involves two squares as well as one opposition, the
t-square requires activity as well as balance. It is the most common
configuration in the charts of successful people; the focal planet is the key
to the talent or accomplishment as well as the key to the source of
frustration, neurosis or overcompensation.
In interpreting the t-square, all of the following are important:
1) The focal planet, its placement by sign, house and aspect, as well as
the house or houses it rules in the natal chart. (These houses will also
experience the tension and motivation of the t-square.) The focal
planet may well be the most dominant planet in the chart, and the
source of a large percentage of an individual's energy. It must be used, and used wisely. The secret of using the t-square effectively is to learn
to express the focal planet in a positive manner, rather than be driven
by its tension to compulsive activity, excess and overcompensation.
2) The nature of the opposition and squares, by planet and house. The
closest of these aspects is a key to the primary source of conflict as
well as the means for resolving that conflict.
3) The empty space—the degree, sign and house opposite the focal
planet. If there are two focal planets in conjunction, the empty degree
will be their far midpoint. The empty area needs to be consciously
developed in a positive manner, so that the t-square individual does not
need to overcompensate for inadequacy here by blindly throwing more
undirected energy into the focal planet. The person must also learn not
to retreat from the tensions of the focal planet by reverting to the most
negative manifestations of the empty space. The Sabian Symbol for the
degree of the empty space is often a key to the quality that needs to be
developed; the placement of the ruler of the sign of the empty space is
frequently a key to how that quality may most easily be expressed.
The three kinds of t-squares are cardinal, fixed and mutable t-squares.
People with cardinal t-squares are the most active and the most inclined to
plunge into crises related to their personal activities, home and family life,
love relationships, or professional commitments. Often Aries-like, unless
the t-square is to Libra, they need to cultivate the positive Libran qualities
—balance, moderation, awareness of other people, perspective, and the
ability to evaluate and compromise.
People with fixed t-squares display considerable strength of will,
concentrated power and determination, particularly in regard to satisfying
their own desires; they build up their energy slowly and then release it in a
powerful manner, like a truck climbing a steep hill and then speeding down
the other side. They usually need to discover constructive outlets for their
intense energy and to develop a sense of values which includes sensitivity
to other people's desires and needs.
People with mutable t-squares are usually over-adaptable, changeable,
restless, versatile, and very much concerned with and influenced by
personal relationships. Like a team of water skiers in formation, they need
to cultivate balance in relationship to other people, often by discovering a sense of purpose or mission which centers them and keeps them from being
pulled in too many directions.
The meaning of a t-square is altered considerably if the focal planet is
retrograde (a rare occurrence) or has turned retrograde by progression; this
planet will operate less overtly than a direct planet and will influence the
emotional, mental and physical well-being more than it will influence
outward behavior. For more information on tsquare configurations, see my
book Planetary Aspects: From Conflict to Cooperation.1
The Grand Cross (Or Cosmic Cross)
DEFINITION—The grand cross consists of at least four planets, four
squares and two oppositions. The first planet squares the second, the second
squares the third, the third squares the fourth, and the fourth squares the
first; oppositions link the first and third planets as well as the second and
fourth planets. Generally, all planets are in signs of the same mode, and
orbs do not exceed 10 degrees.
Weaker variations of the grand cross involve planets in a combination of
two modes (such as cardinal and mutable) or one planet slightly out of orb
(10–12 degrees). Configurations which are created by an opposition in
square to the nodes, ascendant/descendant axis or the midheaven/nadir axis
may function somewhat in the manner of weak grand cross.
INTERPRETATION—Positive characteristics of a grand cross include
inner power and strength, determination, the will to fulfill a purpose,
productivity, concentration and channelling of diverse energies. There may
also be an ability to integrate all dimensions of one's experience and
translate ideals and values into concrete form. Negative characteristics
include stagnation, inertia, scattering of energies, tremendous inner tension,
resignation, the Atlas syndrome (carrying the weight of the world) and selfdefeating behavior.
People with grand crosses generally feel pulled in four directions, and
overburdened by the demands which they, as well as other people, place
upon their time and energy. They live as if trapped in a room with four
locked doors, and frequently try to force each door open by pounding upon
it until they have exhausted themselves. Yet their situation is not hopeless,
for if they position themselves in the middle of the room, they may eventually discover a central staircase which will lead them to the roof and
open air.
These people often feel stuck, paralyzed by the problems in their lives
which seem to be unresolvable, until they turn inward and discover their
own inner center. Then they are able to attain a spiritual or creative state of
consciousness which allows them to rise above their mundane conflicts and
view their life with clarity and objectivity. They need to examine the
polarities in their lives, integrating and synthesizing seemingly
contradictory facets of their experience (signified by the planets, signs and
houses which oppose each other) around a purpose or goal which takes all
parts of themselves into consideration. They need to concentrate their
energy and direct it outward to fulfill the goal they have chosen. Evaluation,
concentration, integration and application are the lessons to be learned from
the grand cross. When interpreting a grand cross, pay attention to the nature of the planets
involved, their mode, and the houses in which they are placed in the chart.
The opposition or square with the smallest orb will be a key to the most
pressing problem in regard to awareness or action, and it must be resolved
if energies are to be collected and focused effectively. Look also to the
closest trine or sextile to planets in the cross, for the planet making the trine
or sextile (and sometimes even a quintile) will be important in helping the
individual to clarify his/her life situation and find a meaningful channel for
his/her scattered energy.
The difficulties presented by a cross are related to the mode in which it
occurs; the resolutions of its conflicts must be through that particular mode,
which indicates a person's talents as well as his/her problems. People with a
cardinal cross need to involve themselves in activities of personal
importance, but because they are over-doers and may scatter themselves in
too many directions in a frantic manner, they have to learn to focus their
energies before plunging into action. People with a fixed cross slowly build up a high degree of inner tension, due to frustrated needs and desires, and
then powerfully explode into forceful and sometimes destructive action;
they are strong-willed, stubborn and can be extremely productive, provided
that they find outlets through which they can constructively release their
pent-up energy. People with a mutable cross are likely to be so easily
influenced by their relationships and external circumstances that they tend,
like a chameleon, to alter themselves to suit their changing environment;
they need to define their identity—their needs, desires, goals, and to act in a
manner that is true to themselves while maintaining a satisfying network of
personal relationships. A7. Sun/Moon Signs & Relationship
(Note aspect or phase. Circle if in major aspect.)
For additional interpretation of the role of the Sun and Moon in the chart,
see section B1.
Because the Sun/Moon relationship symbolizes the relationship between
our parents and the messages which we have internalized from them about
our own role as male or female and about the opposite sex, it indicates the
ease or difficulty we experience in human relationships. It also denotes to a
large extent the degree of harmony which we experience with ourselves,
and how our conscious sense of ourselves, our egos, operate in relation to
our emotional and instinctive natures.
A major aspect between the Sun and Moon creates a powerful energy
flow between consciousness and feelings/ habit patterns; however, if no
major aspect occurs (and orbs may be extended to as much as 12 degrees),
the interplay between the Sun and Moon sign, as well as the Sun and Moon
house, will still be a key to one's internal dynamics.
The Sun/Moon relationship can be summarized as follows:
SUN MOON
the mother and mother
the father and father principle; principle;
the role of men in our lives
the role of women in our
lives
instincts and feelings;
ego; conscious sense of our
awareness of emotions; “I
identity; “I am”
feel”
emotional needs and
self-sufficiency
dependency
self-confidence; pride;
emotional insecurity;
centeredness; inner power
moodiness; fluctuations
control over ourselves and our tendency to adapt ourselves to
environment; strength of will
our environment; passivity
self-centeredness; the drive for responsiveness to others; the
personal satisfaction
need to nurture SUN
the drive to fulfill a purpose
how we integrate our
experience
into a unity of perception
our degree of consciousness of
ourselves
how we focus in the present
moment
the physical and emotional
energies of the heart MOON
the urge to satisfy basic needs
instinctive reactions; the
influcence of habits and
moods
degree to which we are
unconscious of ourselves
the role of our past
experiences and behavior in
our lives
the stomach, and role of food
in our lives When interpreting Sun/Moon aspects, remember that out-of-sign aspects
(such as 28 Gemini square 1 Libra) weaken the meaning of the aspect in
question, and that applying aspects (the faster planet approaching the degree
of the slower planet) are stronger than separating ones. The major
Sun/Moon aspects are as follows:
Sun conjunct Moon (New Moon): New Moon personalities are usually
self-contained, self-absorbed and self-accepting individuals with a firm
sense of their own identity and considerable inner power. Capable of
concentrating their energy and directing their own lives, these people can
act instinctively and spontaneously with little conflict between their
conscious will and their emotional responses. Aware of their feelings and at
ease with them, they are often a world unto themselves; their subjectivity
may make it difficult for them to develop perspective or to perceive other
people's experiences to be as real as their own. Frequently, they focus their
attention upon a narrow sphere of interest, either their home and family life,
or the area of life signified by the house in which the Sun/ Moon
conjunction occurs in their charts. These people usually experience their
mothers and fathers as an undifferentiated unity—so close or so similar in
role or personality traits that they together impart clear and consistent
messages to then-New Moon children.
People who have a Sun/Moon conjunction but were born slightly before
the New Moon (i.e., their Sun is ahead of their Moon by degree) are what
Dane Rudhyar terms “balsamic types.” Often, they are aware of a personal destiny or mission and sacrifice themselves to a purpose which they
perceive as larger than themselves.
Sun square Moon (First Quarter or Last Quarter Moon): These people
experience a high degree of inner tension because their sense of identity and
their will are out of harmony with their feelings, instincts and habit patterns.
They have difficulty acknowledging and accepting their feelings; they react
to their environment in ways which prevent them from satisfying their
desires; and they orient themselves toward goals which, when achieved, are
not emotionally satisfying. Although the enormous amount of stress which
they experience throughout their lives may result in digestive problems or
other internal illnesses, they nevertheless know that inner tension is also a
potent source of motivation. Few people struggle as relentlessly as Sun
square Moon people do to find fulfillment in their activities and to prove to
themselves that they are capable of surmounting all obstacles standing in
the way of their happiness.
People who have a Sun/Moon square in their charts experience many
contradictions within themselves because they have internalized
contradictory patterns of behavior from parents who were in conflict with
each other and whose marital difficulties may have led to divorce. As a
result, they have no models for developing satisfying relationships
themselves. Because they probably identified with one parent and harbored
resentment against the other, they enter into adult relationships with
negative expectations and may unconsciously provoke the very conflicts
which they were intending to avoid. But although their love life and family
life are rarely easy, these people do have the energy necessary to work out
their interpersonal conflicts. As long as they persevere, find constructive
outlets for their frustrated energy, listen to their feelings and integrate them
with their conscious perceptions of themselves and learn from their
mistakes, they may eventually by able to establish relationships which
neither threaten their egos nor deny themselves the intimacy which they so
deeply desire.
Sun sextile or trine Moon: People with a trine or sextile linking their Sun
and Moon are internally consistent and self-accepting. They know what
satisfies them, and their emotional energy and habit patterns aid them in
fulfilling their desires. These people generally have little difficulty
remaining in touch with their feelings and expressing them in a free-flowing manner; their vitality is high and they frequently possess creative talents.
Usually well-adjusted, they are able to maintain a strong sense of their
identity and meet their needs, while at the same time adapting themselves to
their environment.
Usually, these Sun/Moon types experience their parents' relationship as
harmonious. Able to establish comfortable relationships with both of their
parents, they very early develop an ease in personal interactions which
helps them, as adults, to maintain loving relationships. Being a part of a
family is important to them, and they usually want to develop a family life
for themselves which provides them with the same emotional sustenance
they experienced in childhood.
The presence of Sun trine or sextile Moon in any chart can mitigate the
conflicts generated by difficult squares and oppositions. The major problem
of this aspect is that these people may make peace with themselves too
easily. Rarely turning inward to explore their own psychological make-up
and to develop self-awareness, they may drift through their lives displaying
the same comfortable behavior patterns—patterns which neither further
their growth nor provide the deep satisfaction of having successfully
confronted personal challenges.
Sun opposition Moon (Full Moon): Full Moon people, like first or last
quarter types, are at odds with their instinctual and emotional natures. The
tension which they experience, however, needs to be worked out through
personal relationships as well as through a change in consciousness, rather
than through energetic activity.
These people generally experience a low vitality alternating with
extremes of energy and feeling which keep them in a state of constant
oscillation; as a result, they seek balance and moderation in their lives, and
feel compelled to compromise, both in regard to their ambivalent feelings
and desires, and in regard to their relationships. Aware of the division in
themselves, experiencing it as a simultaneous pull in two directions or as a
conflict between what they want to be and what they think they should be,
they often feel alienated from their own internal source of energy and from
the people around them. When they attempt to fulfill the desires of their
Sun, they discover that the instinctual responses of the Moon are the polar
opposite of their conscious aim. When they attempt to satisfy the needs of
their Moon, their Sun (their ego), is threatened, and has difficulty accepting
these needs as valid because they do not accord with the conscious sense of identity and self-esteem. The tension from this inner polarity can deplete
their vital energy, but it can also lead to objectivity, to an awareness of the
ambiguities and alternative ways of being which will eventually help them
learn to synthesize their Sun/Moon qualities and to develop their own
unique means of expressing both in an integrated and harmonious manner.
An effective synthesis of Sun opposition Moon generally occurs after
these people have confronted the vacuum they experience in their lives and
have mobilized their energy to find some form of meaning which
transcends their mundane conflicts. Frequently, the intensity of their quest
generates peak experiences, which may be accompanied by a vision or a
fated sense of mission in life. Afterwards, they may choose to dedicate
themselves to an ideal which their “revelations” have suffused with value,
and they may attempt to manifest that ideal outwardly in their lives.
Full Moon people usually were raised in families in which the parents
were either separated or were extremely opposite in personalities,
complementing each other, but sharing little in common. As a result, these
people internalized dramatically different patterns of behavior; often, they
identified with one of these patterns and began to attract people into their
lives who expressed the other pattern. This tendency generally means that
full moon types project part of their own psychological polarity onto other
people; they feel at odds with other people until they begin to acknowledge
the qualities they are projecting and develop an effective synthesis between
their Sun and Moon. Relationships in which this projection occurs will
bring them into contact with the parts of themselves which they have
disowned and can help them to re-own those parts and end the unsatisfying
drama they repeatedly enact with other people.
Other Sun/Moon Combinations: If the Sun and Moon in a chart are not in
major aspect, a minor aspect may exist between them which describes their
relationship. If no minor aspect exists, a planet aspecting both the Sun and
Moon may be an intermediary between the conscious ego and the
semiconscious emotional and instinctual patterns. People who have neither
a major or minor aspect nor an intermediary planet between their Sun and
Moon may experience more difficulty consciously accepting and integrating
their emotional needs and habit patterns than people who have Sun/Moon
squares and oppositions. Transits and progressions aspecting their Sun and
Moon will usually help them to integrate and fulfill the needs of both parts
of their personality. The Sun/Moon relationship in a chart can be interpreted according to its
aspect and also according to its phase in the Sun/Moon cycle. The most
powerful of the aspects and phases coincide in meaning; they have been
discussed on the preceding pages. The astrology student who is interested in
exploring the meanings of other phases of the Sun/Moon relationship
should consult Dane Rudhyar's The Lunation Cycle, or Busteed, Tiffany,
and Wergin's Phases of the Moon. Most of the information provided in
these books is valuable, but is not essential to understanding the primary
characteristics of the chart. A8. Ascendant/Midheaven
(Circle ascendant.)
The sign of the ascendant, as well as the sign of its ruler and the nature of
any planet rising in the chart, indicates external appearance—the physical
body, dress and mannerisms. All the planets of the chart express themselves
through the filter of the ascending sign, for it is the point at which all the
energies of the chart surface and are revealed to other people. Frequently,
we express the traditional meaning of our ascendant most of our lives, but
we aspire to the higher meanings of the sign, which indicate the way in
which we seek to develop ourselves and the ultimate purpose we attempt to
fulfill through using the energies of our Sun, Moon and other planets.
The Sabian symbol for the degree of our ascendant is usually a
personally meaningful image, evoking in us the aspirations which our
ascending sign indicates. Consulting the Sabian symbols for the degrees
before and after our ascending degree may be an aid in rectifying our charts
and determining whether our given birth time is accurate.
The midheaven of our chart indicates the nature of the profession in
which we are most likely to experience fulfillment, as well as our desire for
achievement, success and status. It denotes the influence of our father (or
most public parent) or any other authority figure in our lives. How we relate
to society at large, how we seek to be recognized or to “belong,” and how
we orient ourselves toward concrete goals and bring about our success or
failure in the public sphere are all described by the sign of our midheaven
and the location of its ruler by sign, house and aspect. The midheaven is our
public or professional aspirations rather than our personal and interpersonal
(one-to-one) aspirations. Frequently here, too, the Sabian symbol for its
degree is a key to its manifestation in our lives. A9. Number of Retrograde Planets
(Circle if 0 or more than 3.)
Retrograde planets are functions of the personality which operate in an
inward, indirect, subconscious and delayed manner. They generally indicate
energies which we were not encouraged to express outwardly when we
were young, and which, as a result, we must develop for ourselves, in our
own way and in our own time. Most people have two or three retrograde
planets; zero, one or four retrogrades is unusual but not extraordinary.
People who have no retrogrades develop most of the important life skills at
an early age and rarely need to explore their own psychological process
until one of their planets turns retrograde by progression. People with four
or more retrograde planets usually feel alienated from society and struggle
more than most people to find their “niche” in the world. Turning inward
when very young, they experience a need to define for themselves their own
unique value system, philosophy or aim in life. Complex, reflective and
individualistic, these people usually have to set their own standards and
forge their own paths, even if doing so means eccentricity or isolation.
Regression, inhibition and withdrawal may characterize retrograde
planets, but they also have considerable constructive potential in regard to
self-understanding, self-directed activity and openness to unconscious and
superconscious energies. Students familiar with secondary progressions
should note whether retrograde planets in the natal chart have turned direct
by progression, or direct planets have turned retrograde, because such
changes will have a significant impact upon the personality.
Keywords for each of the retrograde planets are as follows:
MERCURY RETROGRADE:
contemplative, inner-directed mind
self-analytical and self-critical
awareness of psychological subtleties
absentminded, not attuned to external details
literary interests or abilities
teams through absorption self-conscious speech or communication
enjoys own company, not inclined toward small talk or casual
interactions
difficulty translating perceptions into words and making contact
feels misunderstood or disconnected from others
VENUS RETROGRADE:
develops own unique social and aesthetic values
undemonstrative, difficulty communicating affection
self-loving, narcissistic
fearful of intimacy and love
seeking the perfect love, unrealistic ideals
continually developing own value system
ill at ease socially, reclusive, unwilling to play social games
aesthetic sensitivity and talent
nonmaterialistic
tends to form unconventional relationships
MARS RETROGRADE:
inhibited action, lack of outer initiative
noncompetitive, competing only with self
explorer of the psyche, internally directed
solitary or unconventional action
repressed or explosive anger, passive-aggressive
self-destructive, continually battling self
tends to invite aggression
doubts own capabilities, fears risk-taking
alternately self-driving and lethargic sexual inhibitions or compulsions
JUPITER RETROGRADE:
highly philosophical and meditative
psychologically attuned and insightful
outwardly withholding but inwardly expansive
attuned to inner meanings and purpose, self-guiding
nonmaterialistic, seeks inner wealth
develops own attitudes and belief systems
alternately overly optimistic or pessimistic
inward expansion, weight gain or incorporating tendencies
socially reclusive, prefers one's own company
rejects conventional and parental belief systems
SATURN RETROGRADE:
inner stamina and endurance
resistance to personal change, rigidity
overly self-controlled and self-denying
demanding of self, repeatedly tests and “beats” oneself
self-doubting and self-critical, feels inferior
inclined to negativity or depression
unambitious, doubts own capacity for success, fearful
prefers to work alone, solitary
considerable self-motivation and perseverance
difficulty coping with authority, weak father figure
alternately overly defended or undefended
URANUS RETROGRADE:
outwardly conventional but inwardly unconventional experiences alienation from society
psychologically minded, progressive thinking
inwardly rebellious, tends to rebel against self
highly developed intuition, original and inventive
capable of following inner direction
needs internal freedom to follow own path
nervous tension, high level of internal excitation
makes unexpected changes for the sake of change
NEPTUNE RETROGRADE:
vivid imagination, creative inclinations
difficulty translating inspiration into action
lives in a dream world, escapist tendencies
self-deceiving, easily lost in inner chaos
capable of devoting self to an ideal
psychically and physically oversensitive
self-sacrificing or martyr-like temperament
needs quiet and meditative retreats
PLUTO RETROGRADE:
suppressed desire and anger, explosive tendencies
alienated, antisocial, misfit tendencies
self-destructive, turns energy inward
easily loses contact with one's own depths
courageous explorer of the psyche
deep psychological insight and perceptiveness
withdrawn, private, reclusive
compulsive or obsessional temperament capable of powerful, transforming emotional states
endurance, considerable resourcefulness under stress
self-regenerating
For further information about retrograde planets in general and the meaning
of each retrograde planet, see Bil Tierney's Dynamics of Aspect Analysis.
1Ed. Note: Formerly entitled How to Handle Your T-Square, this book is the most thorough
treatment of this configuration available. It covers not only the t-square configuration in natal
charts, but also this pattern formed by transiting and progressed planets. Chapter Two DETERMINING PLANETARY STRENGTH
Planets vary considerably in regard to strength; some influence us more
than others. Those planets which dominate our charts deserve more
attention than those more weakly positioned or aspected. Yet other planets
may be highlighted because of their extraordinarily weak placements. B1. Sun Sign & House
(Circle answer.)
The meaning of the Sun has been discussed in section A7, in relationship to
the Moon. As the center of consciousness, our Sun position indicates how
we integrate the many facets of our experience into a unity of perception.
As our primary energy source, it tells us the nature of our drive toward
personal fulfillment and the means by which we develop the will to satisfy
our desires. Because the Sun is the ego, our conscious awareness of our
personal identity, its position in the chart expresses the kinds of experiences
which contribute to our individuality and our pride and help us to achieve
recognition. In a female's chart, the Sun also represents the animus, the
image of the male, which she may express overtly as well as experience
through her father and through the roles of other important men in her life.
The sign position of the Sun indicates how we seek to express ourselves,
develop ourselves, fulfill ourselves, and assert our will and power to shape
our environment. The house position indicates the area of life in which we
choose to focus the energy of our Sun sign and fulfill the purpose which it
represents. Aspects indicate ego strength and the ease or difficulty we
experience in satisfying our primary drives and gaining control over our
lives. B2. Moon Sign & House
(Circle answer.)
The meaning of the Moon has been discussed in section A7, in relationship
to the Sun. As the emotional energy which fuels the conscious drive of the
Sun or subverts the Sun from achieving its conscious purpose, the Moon
indicates the nature of our instinctual responses to the world around us, as
well as our particular emotional needs and our desires to nurture and be
nurtured. As the feminine principle, the Moon is the mother image which
we carry within our psyches and which corresponds to our perceptions of
our own mothers (or fathers, if the father is the most nurturing parent), as
well as the most important females in our lives. In a woman's chart, the
Moon indicates how she experiences her role as a woman and/or a mother;
it is often as important as the Sun in determining her identity. In a man's
chart, the Moon is the primary indicator of the kind of woman with whom
he is likely to experience emotional satisfaction.
The sign position of the Moon describes how we habitually respond to
other people and to the circumstances of our lives, as well as how we
experience our emotions and seek emotional fulfillment. Its house position
corresponds to the area of life in which we operate most unconsciously,
according to past patterns and instinctive responses; in this house, we need
to be receptive to our feelings and function on an emotional level,
nourishing ourselves and other people and attempting to build a secure base
of operations for ourselves. Aspects to the Moon indicate the ease or
difficulty with which we experience, accept and utilize our feeling and habit
patterns, respond to others, and satisfy our emotional needs. B3. Sun Ruler: Its Sign & House
The ruler of the Sun sign is an important planet in a chart because it
expresses how (sign) and in what area of life (house) we apply the energies
of our natal Sun position. B4. Ascendant Ruler: Its Sign & House
Unless a planet is rising in a chart, the ascendant ruler and its position by
sign, house and aspect is the key to physical appearance, the general health
of the body, and the characteristics of the personality which we most overtly
display. Like the ascending sign and the Sun sign, the ascendant ruler is also
linked to our conscious sense of identity. On a higher level, it indicates the
way in which we seek to fulfill the aspirations indicated by our ascending
sign. B5. Planet In Own Sign
(Circle answer.)
A planet in its own sign, particularly an inner planet, has a dominant
influence in the chart. Because it functions so easily in its own sign, both
the planet and the sign are emphasized. This may not, however, be the best
placement for a planet, in terms of the overall balance of the personality,
because it indicates an extreme way of functioning. Mercury in Gemini, for
example, may indicate considerable verbal ability, a hunger for knowledge
and a wide range of skills, but may also suggest excessive nervousness,
restlessness, scatteredness, talkativeness or superficiality.
Because it is so powerful, a planet in its own sign in our chart is likely to
influence the profession we choose and how we function within that
profession. Consider, for example, the obvious influence of Bob Dylan's
Mercury in Gemini, Rod McKuen's Venus in Taurus, Ingrid Bergman's
Venus in Libra or Moshe Dayan's Mars in Aries. B6. Planet In Own House
(Circle answer.)
A planet in its own house is nearly as significant as a planet in its own sign
because it is “at home” in the area of life which it most influences. Just as
an ambitious, success-oriented person is “at home” on the job or a dedicated
student in school or an aggressive, physically active person on the football
field, so Saturn is “at home” in the 10th house, Jupiter in the 9th house, and
Mars in the 1st house. A planet in its own sign and its own house (e. Vênus .,
Venus in Taurus in the 2nd house) or a planet in its own house and on an
angle (e. Vênus ., Moon on the I.C.) is, of course, especially powerful. B7. Planet Rising
(Circle if less than 2 degrees above or 6 degrees below ascendant.)
A planet rising in the chart is similar in meaning to the ruler of the
ascendant, but usually overrides it in importance because of its angular
placement. Not only does it influence the physical appearance and the
health of the body, but it also, at least as much as the Sun, contributes to our
sense of identity, to the “I am” which is the source of ego strength and
pride. Because the ascendant is the transmitter of the chart, the point at
which we make contact with the outside world and express ourselves
outwardly, a planet on the ascendant provides a channel for our selfexpression and indicates the means by which we seek to make our presence
felt to other people. B8. Planet On Midheaven
(Circle if less than 2 degrees before or 6 degrees after the midheaven.)
A planet on our midheaven or M.C. has an overriding influence upon our
aim in life and our drive to achieve, as well as upon the nature of our
profession or public activities. The nearer a planet is to the M.C., the more
likelihood there is that we will succeed in an endeavor related to the use of
that planetary energy. The orb of a conjunction to the M.C. should extend
further into the 10th house than into the 9th house, because the 9th house is
related more to the desire for exploration and understanding than it is
related to the desire for public achievement and recognition.
In the total population, we can expect that less than 5.5 percent (1 out of
18) of all people will have a planet within one degree of their M.C. In
Jansky's Horoscopes Here and Now, a collection of the charts of one
hundred celebrities of the 20th century, 13 percent (nearly 1 out of 8) have a
planet in this position. Judy Garland's Uranus, John Lennon's Pluto and
Helen Roller's Uranus are all positioned precisely on their M.C.'s. B9. Planet On Nadir
(Circle if less than 1 degree before or 2 degrees after nadir.)
A planet on the nadir or I.C. indicates direct access to the unconscious and
to past experience, as well as an overpowering need for emotional security,
a need which must be fulfilled according to this planet's nature. We need to
express its energies in our private lives, through the interactions we
experience with family members, through the nature of the home base
which we establish, and through the activities in which we engage in our
homes or in other domestic settings.
Although not apparent to people who do not know us intimately, this
planet is nevertheless an important influence upon us. It determines how we
feel “at home” without ourselves, feel rooted in our environment, and are
connected to our personal and collective past. It is also suggestive of the
role of the mother or most nurturing parent in our lives, as well as the
influence of early childhood and of our heredity. Often a channel which
allows us to draw from the collective unconscious and from the experience
of former lives, a planet on our I.C. is a key to how we may nourish and
enrich our inner being and generate the psychic energy which feeds all other
parts of ourselves. B10. Planet Descending
(Circle if less than 1 degree before or 2 degrees after descendant.)
A planet on the descendant denotes a more than average need to form oneto-one relationships, not only in love but also through friendships and
professional activities. The nature of this planet and its sign indicate
qualities in ourselves which we do not easily recognize or express, but
which we look for in the people with whom we form the closest ties. We
need to enter relationships with people who express this planetary energy,
or involve ourselves in relationships characterized by this planetary energy,
because through these kinds of interactions we learn to own the part of
ourselves which we disown or project, and to express it in its most positive
manner. B11. Stationary Planet
(Circle answer.)
A planet is stationary if its speed has decreased to less than one tenth of its
normal motion, and the ephemeris indicates that in the next few days it will
be turning either retrograde or direct. An outer planet may be stationary,
positioned at the same minute of a degree, for as long as a week; an inner
planet will usually be stationary for less than 24 hours.
A stationary planet indicates a powerful focus or concentration of energy
which may dominate all other planetary energies in a chart because of its
compulsive or obsessive nature. A person may easily become stuck in a
pattern of expressing this particular planet in a blind and rigid manner, at
the expense of satisfying other parts of his or her personality; on the other
hand, he or she may use its concentrated energy to achieve in whatever
house it functions in the chart.
Carl Jung had a stationary Mars in Sagittarius in his 11th house and
devoted himself singlemindedly to exploring the collective psyche. (The
author, who has a stationary Mercury in Virgo in the 9th house, conjunct
Venus and Saturn, is obsessed with organizing, clarifying, writing and
publishing the details of her astrological and psychological understanding.
Only the art of synthesis can keep her master of, rather than slave to, the
hundreds of details which comprise a natal chart.) B12. Sole Dispositor
The sole dispositor is a planet in its own sign which disposits the other
planets in a chart. If two planets reside in their own sign, or if a mutual
reception occurs (planet A in planet B's sign, planet B in planet A's sign),
there cannot be a sole dispositor. However, if two planets involved in a
mutual reception disposit all eight other planets in the chart, the mutual
reception may be considered a “mutual dispositor.” (See section C for more
information on mutual receptions.) A planet in its own sign is more
powerful if it is a/so a sole dispositor.
To determine if there is a sole dispositor in a chart, begin with any planet
in the chart and look to the planetary ruler of its sign. Then, in turn, look to
the ruler of that planet's sign, and so on around the chart until you can go no
further. If you reach the planet in its own sign before you have covered all
the planets in the chart, go back to the planets you have not covered and
trace each until you reach either the planet in its own sign, a mutual
reception or a planetary circle such as: Moon in Sagittarius, Jupiter in
Virgo, Mercury in Leo, Sun in Cancer, Moon in Sagittarius. If such a circle
occurs, you will not have a sole dispositor, even if a planet is in its own
sign.
Consider the planetary positions in an example chart which has Jupiter in
Sagittarius. Because Jupiter is in its own sign, it may be a sole dispositor.
But because of the presence of a mutual reception, we discover that it is not: B13. Most Aspected Planet
The most aspected planet in a chart is intensified in importance because of
its many channels of expression. This is particularly true if the planet makes
at least six major aspects. Its links to other planets, signs and houses are
gateways through which its energy can be utilized by other parts of the
personality and in other areas of life besides the house in which it is placed
and the house which it rules. B14. Unaspected Planets
(Circle answer.)
An unaspected planet, a planet which makes no major aspects to other
planets in the chart, is of particular significance because of its lack of
integration with the rest of the chart. Frequently, it operates autonomously
and automatically, in a disconnected and compulsive manner, driving a
person to express its one particular planetary energy without regard for the
other sides of his or her nature. At other times, its expression remains latent,
cut off from the self-image and self-expression.
People with unaspected Mercury may have difficulty making contact or
being understood in oral or written communication. If Venus is unaspected,
they may either lose themselves completely in a love relationship or deny
love altogether in their lives. With Mars unaspected, they may seem to lack
self-assertiveness, anger or sexual desire for long periods of time, and then
burst into a frenzy of aggressive behavior and sexual activity. Those people
who have an unaspected Sun usually must struggle throughout their lives to
remain aware of and draw upon their energy and will; they often feel
disconnected from themselves.
Most people who have an unaspected planet must exert considerable
effort to integrate that planet's energy into their lives. Minor aspects to the
unaspected planet may be a help, as well as aspecting transits and
progressions. Close relationships with people who have planets trine or
sextile their unaspected planet will also aid them in expressing the
unaspected planet in a more beneficial manner. B15. Other Focal Planets
(Circle answer, even if noted in aspect configurations or planetary
patterns in section A.)
In addition to the planets already discussed in section B, a planet should be
considered focal, and therefore emphasized in the chart, if it is:
a) the focal planet of a t-square or yod;
b) the “handle” of a bucket or fan, or the “engine” of a locomotive;
c) the pivotal planet linking two aspect configurations (e. Vênus ., in a chart
with both a t-square and grand trine, the planet that occurs in both
configurations, and is therefore a key to integrating the two).
The central or cutting planet in a bundle or bowl pattern, and the trigger (the
planet making the closest trine or sextile to a t-square or grand cross
configuration) can also be considered focal planets, although they are not as
important as the planets mentioned above. List these only if the natal chart
has few planets in positions of emphasis; otherwise, you will find yourself
giving special importance to too many planets, without any means for
distinguishing between those of primary importance and those of secondary
importance. Chapter Three ASPECTS & OTHER CHART VARIABLES
Apart from assessing the chart as a whole and individual planetary
placements, we need to understand the active dynamics of the personality as
indicated by the interrelationship of the planets and other chart variables.
Aspects in particular indicate how different facets of a personality cooperate
and conflict, interfering with or enhancing the expression of the planets. C1. Predominant Type of Aspect
(How many?)
In many charts, a balance of conjunctions, sextiles, squares, trines and
oppositions occur, perhaps three of each, in which case the predominant
kind of aspect is not important. However, when there is a significantly
larger number of one kind of aspect in relation to any other kind of aspect,
the nature of this aspect is of considerable importance in the life of the
individual in question. He or she will tend to operate in the manner of this
aspect more frequently than in the manner of the four other major aspects.
People who have conjunctions predominating in their charts are highly
focused, able to lose themselves in their own concerns and operate with
little external motivation. They are capable of singleminded concentration,
but may also tend to lose perspective and venture into narrow or blind alley,
benefiting little from the influence of others.
People who have sextiles predominating are generally quite selfexpressive, with creative minds that are able to relate broad realms of
experience. They may, however, need a little spurring in order to develop
their minds and their communication abilities to their best advantage.
Predominating squares indicate people who have experienced many
crises throughout their lives and who are motivated to act in order to
overcome obstacles. They are capable of a high degree of achievement, but
may waste their energy by trying too hard and battling themselves. They
may need to learn to relax occasionally and to use their energy in a more
flowing and self-preserving manner.
A predominance of trines occurs in the charts of people whose lives are
relatively easy and whose talents are many. But because they have not had
to confront many challenges which required them to mobilize their energy
or deepen their awareness, they may easily become stuck in comfortable but
static patterns of behavior and thought. They need to be jolted out of their
complacency and urged to develop themselves.
Finally, a large number of oppositions in natal charts indicate people who
tend toward extremes and contradictions in behavior, but who strive for
balance and for understanding of themselves and their personal
relationships. Seekers of meaning, they are capable of profound insight and
inspiring revelations. However, they may need to learn to focus their energies on their own pursuits, and to re-own the qualities which they
project onto other people. C2. Absence of a Type of Aspect
In addition to the predominant type of aspect in a chart, the absence of a
major aspect also reveals how individuals use their energies. Frequently,
such minor aspects as quintiles, noviles, and semi-sextiles, if activated, can
compensate for a lack of sextiles or trines. Semi-squares, and to some
extent, inconjuncts (which may be felt as a semi-conscious irritation, but
which may not lead to any overt changes in activity or understanding) may
compensate for a lack of squares or oppositions. An absence of
conjunctions is similar to a predominance of oppositions and vice versa;
likewise, an absence of trines and sextiles is similar to a predominance of
squares; an absence of squares, to a predominance of trines and sextiles.
People who have no conjunctions have difficulty focusing their energies
on a particular project or area of life. They are versatile but scattered, and
they need a purpose or goal with which all parts of themselves can identify.
People who lack sextiles frequently are uncomfortable operating in
creative or intellectual realms. They often have to strive consciously to
develop their mental abilities and to express themselves freely through
communication and productive activities.
An absence of squares occurs in the charts of those who prefer to take the
easy path rather than grow through the overcoming of obstacles. These
people need to set up challenges for themselves and to make an effort to
break out of habit patterns which do not further their growth.
Trines are absent in the charts of individuals who are at odds with
themselves or other people and must invest considerable energy into their
relationships and activities in order to find satisfaction. They need to learn
to regenerate their energy and to function in a more moderate and balanced
manner.
Finally, a lack of oppositions indicates people who are in touch with
themselves and are not dependent upon others to express the qualities which
they have not developed. However, because they are so highly subjective
and content with a somewhat simplistic view of themselves and their
personal relationships, they can benefit from deepening their understanding
and broadening their perspective. C3. Conjunctions Within 3 Degrees
(Indicate orb. Circle if less than 1½ degrees.)
The closer an aspect is, the more it influences the personality. Because
conjunctions are the strongest aspects, indicating a blending of two
planetary energies, a close conjunction will be one of the most significant
aspects in a chart. Consider a conjunction within three degrees to be as
important as a sextile, trine, square or opposition with half that orb, and a
conjunction within 1 degree to be even more powerful. C4. Other Major Aspects Within 1½ Degrees
(Indicate orb. Circle if less than 1 degree.)
Because energy patterns indicated by the closest aspects in a chart
predominate over those indicated by aspects of weak orb, we should always
begin our interpretation of aspects by focusing on the more exact ones.
Consider major aspects within 1½ degrees (1 degree for the sextile) to be
close, those within 1 degree (30 minutes for the sextile) to be nearly exact.
A conjunction, square, trine or opposition within 30 minutes will almost
always be one of the five to eight most essential characteristics of a chart,
and if less than 10 minutes, may dominate the chart entirely if the chart
contains few outstanding features.
In listing close aspects, note which ones are applying (the faster moving
planet approaching the same degree of the slower moving planet) and those
which are separating (the faster moving planet departing from the degree of
the slower moving planet). Applying aspects will be more powerful than
separating aspects of the same orb, because by progression they become
more exact after birth.
Close or exact aspects in our natal charts indicate patterns of thinking,
feeling or acting which are so natural to us that they often operate without
our conscious awareness, sometimes defying our belief in our freedom to
direct our planetary energies. These patterns may feel like traps if we fight
them, for they are so much a part of ourselves that they will struggle for
expression, but if we cooperate with them we can channel their expression
to our advantage. An aspect, after all, is an energy link; once such a link
occurs in a chart, the two planets in connection can be expressed in a
multitude of ways and still be true to their basic nature. A square, once we
have learned to translate it into effective action, can bring the benefits of a
trine; an opposition, once understood, can result in the synthesizing blend
and focus of a conjunction; even a trine can be infused with the motivation
of the square once we develop the awareness and the desire to transmute its
energies. C5. Important Minor Aspects
(Note those which are exact.)
If we were to calculate and delineate every minor aspect in a chart, we
would clutter our brains with so many minor considerations that we would
easily lose perspective on the chart's most essential characteristics.
However, certain minor aspects may be worth our attention; their
importance will depend upon their exactitude, as well as the nature of the
major aspects which the chart contains.
Since we normally allow a 1–2 degree orb for most minor aspects, we
should consider minor aspects within 30 minutes to be close ones, and those
within 15 minutes to be at least as important as major aspects with orbs of
two degrees or more.
If a chart has few trines or sextiles, close semi-sextiles, quintiles, and
biquintiles will take on added significance, for they will indicate potential
opportunities and talents; if a chart has few squares or oppositions, the
semi-squares will merit our attention, for they will point to sources of
tension and motivation which can aid the individual in using his/her trines
and sextiles advantageously.
The inconjunct should be considered a minor aspect rather than a major
aspect because it is not based upon the even division of a circle by a
numeral, and it does not seem to influence us as overtly as do the squares,
trines, conjunctions and oppositions. It does, however, merit a larger orb
than the other minor aspects—four degrees normally, and one degree to be
considered exact. The inconjunct (also called the quincunx) and the semisquare are generally the most powerful of the minor aspects; the
sesquiquadrate, quintile, and biquintile are also quite significant.
The most commonly used minor aspects are as follows, in order of
importance: The interpretation of minor aspects is not usually necessary for effective
chart synthesis. Use them only if you have mastered the major aspects, or if
you find the major aspects in a chart to be so weak in orb or so few in
number that only a study of the minor aspects will enable you to grasp the
energy patterns operating within the individual in question. People of high
intelligence and creativity, with esoteric and spiritual leanings may use their
minor aspects at least as frequently as their major aspects. With these
people, the minor aspects may be given greater importance. C6. Parallels
(Note those which reinforce existing aspects.)
Parallels are often overlooked because they represent a dimension of space
which is not discernible on a two-dimensional chart form. Indicating the
distance planets are located north or south of the equator, they are
determined by consulting tables of declination found in most ephemerides.
Because parallels have a one degree orb, a planet 18 degrees north and a
planet 19 degrees north are considered to be in parallel; a planet 7 degrees
south and one 6 degrees south are also in parallel, but one 6 degrees south
and one 6 degrees north are said to be in contraparallel.
Similar to conjunctions, parallels indicate a blending of energies, but
unlike conjunctions they are often latent until one or both planets are
aspected by transits or progressions. Contraparallels operate like weak
oppositions and are also activated by transits and progressions.
Parallels should be considered significant if:
1) they occur between two planets already in conjunction, in which
case they reinforce and strengthen the conjunction.
2) they occur between two planets already linked by another major
aspect, in which case they reinforce the aspect and also denote the
potential for the two energies to be blended harmoniously.
3) they occur between two planets not in major aspect, which are
nevertheless both strongly placed in the chart (perhaps one rising and
the other at the focal position of a t-square).
Parallels by themselves are usually not outstanding features of a natal chart.
List them here only if they give added emphasis to planets or aspects
already noted above. C7. Mutual Receptions
(Circle answer.)
A mutual reception occurs when one planet is located in another planet's
sign, and the second planet is located in the first planet's sign. Frequently
overlooked, the mutual reception has the power and meaning of a
conjunction, with additional advantages that the conjunction doesn't have.
Each planet in a mutual reception is capable of functioning within the sign
and house of the other planet; its influence is not limited to the house in
which it is placed and the house which it rules. This additional avenue of
expression means that a connection is established between the planets, signs
and houses involved in a mutual reception, a connection which allows them
to operate together and which aids in the resolution and harmonious
expression of any squares or oppositions existing between them.
The significance of mutual receptions should not be underestimated.
Frequently, they point to central characteristics of the personality which
may or may not be evident in the rest of the chart. Consider, for example,
Liz Taylor's Moon in Scorpio in the 2nd house and Pluto in Cancer in the
10th house, Bobby Fischer's Mercury in Aquarius in the 8th house and
Uranus in Gemini in the 11th, Carol Burnett's Mercury in Aries in the 1st
house and Mars in Virgo in the 6th, and Edgar Cayce's Venus in Pisces in
the 7th house and Neptune in Taurus in the 9th. Can we deny the
importance of these mutual receptions in their lives? C8. Lunar Nodes
(What sign and house? Circle answer. List major aspects within 2
degrees.)
No interpretation of an astrological chart should be given without noting
and delineating the positions of the Moon's nodes. Not only their sign and
house positions, but also their aspects reveal crucial issues which we must
confront during our lifetimes, if we are to break free from the pull of the
past and fulfill our purpose in this incarnation.
Not only the twelfth house, but also the South Node of the Moon
indicates the strengths and weaknesses which we have brought into this
incarnation. The South Node is our line of least resistance; we tend to
retreat into expressing its sign and house because we feel secure functioning
on that level, and because it is so natural for us to express those energies
and pay attention to that area of our life. We are here to use the talents of
our South Node, but not to escape into them, because doing so leads us to
regress and eventually limits the opportunities open to us. We begin to feel
bound by the past and become frustrated and unsatisfied. Rather, our task in
this lifetime is to learn to use our South Node abilities in order to fulfill the
meaning of the North Node in our chart, according to its placement by sign
and house, and also according to the placement of its dispositor.
Developing our North Node is not usually easy for us, particularly if it
squares or opposes planets in our chart; we feel drawn continually back to
the sign and house of the South Node. But by actively expressing the
energies of the North Node's sign, and by developing our capacity to
operate effectively in the area of life denoted by the North Node's house, we
attract the helping, healing energies of the universe to ourselves. We
awaken the talents and the strengths which we were born to manifest and
experience the immeasurable satisfaction of having fulfilled our personal
life task. For complete information on the lunar nodes see my book The
Astrology of Self-Discovery and The Astrologer's Node Book by Donna Van
Toen.
Note on your worksheet not only the positions by sign and house of the
lunar nodes, but also close aspects which they make to planets in the chart.
Conjunctions to the North Node indicate the planetary energies which we
most need to develop constructively; conjunctions to the South Node indicate planetary energies which are easy for us to express but which we
do not need to emphasize during this lifetime. Any other aspects to the
nodes denote the ease or difficulty which we may experience in utilizing
our South Node to fulfill the meaning of our North Node.
The house placement of the ruler of the sign in which the South Node is
located reveals a secondary area of life upon which we have focused in the
past, and which we now use as a refuge; the house placement of the ruler of
North Node's sign reveals a secondary area of life where we need to apply
the lessons we learn from our North Node. Chapter Four PRELIMINARY SYNTHESIS
The purpose of this section is to help you begin to synthesize some of the
astrological variables discussed so far. D1. Strongest Planets
(How many counts? Circle if more than Júpiter .)
Count the number of times you have listed a planet in sections B3 through
B15; if you have circled a planet, count it double. Add to this number 2
counts for the Sun and 1 for the Moon, to correspond to their importance in
all natal charts. The strongest planet in the chart is likely to be the one
which receives the most counts. More than Júpiter counts per planet will indicate
that it dominates the chart; frequently, two or more planets will be equally
dominant. D2. Strongest Signs
(How many counts? Circle if more than Júpiter .)
This is frequently difficult to determine because of the varying weights of
the planets in each chart. The best method is to count 1 for each sign in
which a planet is placed and also 1 each for the ascendant and midheaven;
add 2 additional counts for the Sun sign, 1 for the Moon sign, and 1 for the
sign of the most dominant planet (determined in D1.) D3. Strongest Houses
(How many counts? Circle if more than Júpiter .)
Use the same system for determining the strongest house or houses as you
did for the strongest signs, adding additional counts for the houses of the
Sun, Moon and most dominant planet. Ignore the ascendant and midheaven. D4. Strongest Aspect
(Circle if less than 30 minutes.)
Note here the most exact aspect in the chart and its orb. Include aspects to
the angles and nodes. If the most exact aspect is a trine or sextile, then note
also the closest square or opposition, which indicates the most dynamic
expression of energy operating within the individual. Chapter Five ADDITIONAL CONSIDERATIONS
There are many other astrological variables that are useful in interpreting a
chart in a thorough and detailed manner, but are not essential in
synthesizing a chart and understanding its primary characteristics. The
following additional considerations, however, may be noteworthy in certain
charts:
1) THE TWELFTH HOUSE COMPLEX (consisting of the planets
positioned in the 12th house, as well as the 12th house ruler) reveals
hidden factors which shape us, providing an added source of strength
or resulting in irrational and often self-destructive behavior. See Your
Secret Self: Illuminating the Mysteries of the Twelfth House (CRCS
Publications, 1989) for further information.
2) SOLAR ECLIPSES occur when the New Moon conjuncts its nodal
axis; LUNAR ECLIPSES, when the Full Moon conjuncts its nodal
axis. Since solar and lunar eclipses each occur approximately twice a
year, we must consult an ephemeris or a table of eclipses in order to
determine whether or not a person born under a New Moon or Full
Moon was born within 24 hours of an eclipse. People with eclipsed
Suns generally experience a weakness of vitality, will and self-esteem,
but are also capable of using their physical energy and developing their
identity in a highly unique manner. People with eclipsed Moons are
usually emotionally unstable and dependent, but they have access to
transformative levels of feeling and intuition which they can, if they
are able, effectively channel into creative activities.
The position of the last solar eclipse before birth usually indicates
an area of life in which we experience continual crises, in which we
feel compelled to test our limits and develop ourselves. See Robert
Jansky's Interpreting the Eclipses for more information.
3) ANGULAR, SUCCEDENT AND CADENT HOUSES are similar
in meaning to cardinal, fixed and mutable signs. A predominance of planets in angular houses (1, Júpiter , 7, and 10) denotes a powerful urge to
mobilize one's energy, initiating activities related to the major issues of
life—identity, home and family, love and marriage, and career. A
predominance in succedent houses (2, 5, 8, and 11) indicates the urge
to satisfy one's personal desires, and the capacity to concentrate energy
and follow through with the tasks at hand. Finally, a predominance of
planets in cadent houses (3, 6, Mercúrio , and 12) suggests an individual who is
concerned with his/her reactions to experience, with conceptualizing
and clarifying his/her personal reality. Júpiter ) THE MOST ELEVATED PLANET, the one closest to the M.C.,
may be significant if few planets are prominent in a chart; this planet
indicates the nature of an individual's aspirations, and how he or she is
likely to achieve.
5) THE EASTERN/WESTERN DIVISION of planets in a chart is
worth noting if a strong imbalance occurs. Seven or more planets in
the eastern (left) hemisphere suggest an individual whose life is in
his/her own hands; seven or more planets in the western (right)
hemisphere indicate a life which is very much influenced by other
people.
6) SUN/MERCURY CONJUNCTIONS deserve special emphasis
when the orb of the conjunction is less than Júpiter degrees. When the orb is
½ to Júpiter degrees. Mercury is considered in “combust.” The individual
with such a conjunction is so mentally overstimulated and so overly
subjective that he or she frequently has difficulty thinking and
communicating clearly. However, when Mercury is within 30 minutes
of the Sun, its power is intensified; the mind is sharpened and the
capacity for genius is evident.
7) THE MIDPOINTS of two planets are the degrees of the zodiac
which are equidistant from both planets. Each pair of planets has both
a near and far midpoint, one located within the shortest distance
between them, and the other, 180 degrees away.
Because dozens of midpoints occur in a chart, only the most
significant ones need to be considered, such as the midpoint degree of
a close square, especially if it conjuncts a natal planet, dividing the
square into semi-squares. Such a planet is energized by the square, and
is a key to using the square constructively. The midpoint degree of a
close oppositions, even if not tenanted by a planet, is likely to be a trigger point for the opposition; if involved in a t-square, it is likely to
be conjunct the focal planet or close to the degree of the empty space
of the t-square.
The Sun/Moon midpoint deserves some attention, since it is a guide
to the process of inner integration. Representing the union of the anima
or animus, it is often viewed as significant in love and marriage.
Similarly, the Venus/Mars midpoint signifies the relationship between
love and sexuality, attraction and action, masculine and feminine.
When a planet in the natal chart occurs at the midpoint of two other
planets in the chart, the combined energy of these two planets
influences how the planet at their midpoint expresses itself. For
example, a woman with Sun in Capricorn at her Venus/Neptune
midpoint may have artistic inclinations, and may be far more romantic
and idealistic in relationships with men than a Sun in Capricorn
woman might be whose Sun is her Mars/Pluto midpoint. The former
might appear to have a Venus/Sun/Neptune conjunction; the latter, a
Mars/Sun/Pluto conjunction. A considerable difference!
I highly recommend considering near and far midpoints which
conjunct planets and angles in the chart within one degree, and noting
in particular how they alter or color the expression of the planet or
angle—especially the Sun, Moon, ascendant, and M.C. Although I am
discussing midpoints in an “additional considerations” chapter rather
than earlier chapters focusing on the primary chart features, I rarely
study a chart without also perusing midpoint configurations.2
8) THE VERTEX/ANTIVERTEX axis is the third major axis of the
chart, and would be at least as obvious to us as the
ascendant/descendant and M.C./I.C. axes if we had three-dimensional
chart forms. Often it is ignored because of its vague interpretation as
“fate.” I believe that conjunctions to this axis by transit and
progressions, and in synastry, correlate with profound experiences
which feel synchronistic or fated, and may relate to the soul's transition
between lifetimes, or our purpose as part of the greater collective.
Whether or not you can clearly interpret the vertex axis, I suggest
paying attention to it. Mercúrio ) THE SABIAN SYMBOLS are usually particularly meaningful to
astrologers and clients who have Neptunian or Piscean inclinations.
Before most readings, I look up the symbol and interpretation for Sun, Moon and Ascendant degrees in Dane Rudhyar's An Astrological
Mandala. (I have not found the symbols and interpretations in other
Sabian symbol or degrees of the zodiac books to be nearly as valid). If
I believe that the client may resonate with them, I later present them in
session, usually without interpretation. The symbol for the ascendant
can be particularly helpful in ascertaining the precise birth time of a
person who only knows the approximate time; often, it literally as well
as metaphorically expresses a significant experience or orientation in a
person's life.
Meditating briefly upon key Sabian symbols may help you penetrate
to the essence of a natal chart. The symbols for the degree of the last
progressed new or full moon and the next progressed new or full moon
have been a keystone of my astrology sessions for decades, because
they help me understand individuals' current life cycles—from what
they are emerging, and in what direction they are evolving.
•••
In addition to the above factors, many other astrological variables may be
considered when interpreting the chart. Personally, I regard some of these
variables to be of minor importance, and others to be of questionable
validity. But since astrologers vary considerably in their opinions about
these features, I encourage you to study and research them, and determine
whether or not to use them yourself.
OF MINOR IMPORTANCE: masculine/feminine signs, exaltation and
detriment, the part of fortune, planetary nodes, fixed stars, asteroids.
OF QUESTIONABLE VALIDITY: quadrants and hemisphere emphasis;
oriental planets; Promethean or Epimethean Mercury, Venus Hesperus or
Lucifer; Arabian parts; decanates; critical degrees.
Although you may find some of these “minor features” valid, I would
suggest not overestimating their importance when interpreting a chart if you
wish to maintain your overall perspective. The relative weight we assign to
different facets of the chart contributes to our understanding of individual
uniqueness. After all, each of us has all of the signs in our chart, but a
person who, for example, has a first house Cancer stellium will manifest
Cancerian qualities in a far more pronounced manner than someone who
has Cancer rising in an empty first house, or who has only Juno in Cancer in the first house. If we give every astrological indicator equal weight, we
can become lost in so much extraneous data that we lose our capacity to
attune to the essential features.
2 Two highly regarded books which interpret midpoint combinations are the classic The
Combination of Stellar Influences by Reinhold Ebertin, and the more contemporary Midpoints:
Unleashing the Power of the Planets by Michael Munkasey. Although not specifically covering
midpoints, Planets in Containment by John Sandbach and Ronn Ballard delineates 990
combinations of three planets, and is quite useful for understanding natal planets which occur at
a planetary midpoint. Chapter Six HOW TO SYNTHESIZE
Determining the Primary Characteristics
Once we have completed steps A through D of the worksheet, we will want
to determine which of the 15, 20, or 25 characteristics we have listed are the
most significant. If a chart has many outstanding features, our worksheet
will be crowded with answers, many of them circled to denote their special
importance. With such a “strong” chart, we will need to be particularly
selective. A planet in its own house or 5 degrees from the midheaven will
not be as important as it would in a chart with few dominant planets.
In order to reduce our list, we must re-assess the answers which we have
circled, grouping together those which are related in meaning, such as 8
earth counts and a grand earth trine. Frequently, we will discover a number
of closely related characteristics, each one reinforcing the other. These will
help us to grasp the chart's overall unity.
If this first step yields only 3, Júpiter , or 5 characteristics, we may then want to
pay attention to the answers which we have not circled. Which ones are the
most obvious in the chart? The most pronounced? The most extreme or
unusual? No one set of guidelines can be applied to each individual chart,
but the following list may be useful in selecting from the worksheet
important characteristics which we have not circled:
a) 2 or 5 counts of an element
b) 3 or 6 counts of a mode
c) Sun ruler or ascendant ruler
d) 3 retrograde planets
e) loosely defined pattern
f) planets in the last 6 degrees of the 9th or 12th house or 6 to 10
degrees into the 10th or 1st house Vênus ) planets in last 3 degrees of the 3rd or 6th house or 2 to Júpiter degrees
into the 4th or 7th house Saturno ) most aspected planet, if more than 5 aspects
i) predominant aspect, if highly emphasized
j) conjunctions within 1½ to 3 degrees orb (especially to Sun or Moon) Urano ) other major aspects within 1½ to 3 degrees orb
l) absence of a type of aspect
If our first step yields more than 8 characteristics, we may then want to
weigh their comparative strengths. In time, as we gain more practice
interpreting charts, our intuition will guide us quickly through these
preliminary steps; but now, at the beginning stage, we will want to
determine which characteristics on our revised list are first priority. We can
do so by omitting all of the following:
a) 1 or 6 counts of an element
b) 2 or 7 counts of a mode
c) very loose aspect configuration (wide orbs)
d) conjunctions 1 to 1½ degrees
e) planet in own house
f) 0 or Júpiter retrograde planets Vênus ) other major aspects over 30 minutes, if one or more aspects with
smaller orbs occurs in the chart Saturno ) ascendant, if sign, ruler and natural house are weak.
If we end up with only 5 factors, or as many as Mercúrio or 10, we should not be
concerned. Each chart is unique, and no rules can take into account all the
problems which may arise in synthesis. For this reason, even if we have an
abundance of circled answers, a few of the answers which we have not
circled may be worth considering if they are notable, such as the most
aspected planet aspecting all Mercúrio other planets or 10 squares in a chart with 15
major aspects. Probably the best way to familiarize ourselves with the
synthesis worksheet is to begin by practicing with our own charts. The Role of Intuition
Although the method of synthesis described here can help us to determine a
chart's primary characteristics, such a rational approach is usually not
sufficient for conducting meaningful readings. Only by drawing upon our
intuition as well as our intellect can we penetrate to the essence of a chart
and interpret it in a vital and relevant manner. As we study a chart, perhaps
even as we calculate it, several of its features may “jump out” at us.
Whether or not these are characteristics we have noted or circled on our
worksheet, we should pay attention to them, for they may lead us to issues
which: 1) are particularly significant to our client, or 2) are also personally
significant to us, which we understand fully and can express insightfully.
When we interpret a chart, we need a lead, a key feature with which to
begin our reading. If our use of the worksheet does not help us to determine
which characteristic is the most dominant and therefore the most
appropriate starting point, then we should allow our intuition to make the
selection. But what if our intuition fails us? What if we do not know how to
draw upon it? Even if we are not naturally intuitive, we can develop our
intuitive abilities. By relaxing and emptying our minds as we look at a
chart, we can gaze at it as we would a mandala or painting, communing
with it as a whole rather than concentrating upon each of its many details. If
we feel our attention pulled in one direction or another, we should go with
the pull, while attempting to keep our personal biases and concerns from
distorting our perception. Eventually, the various patterns in the chart and
their interrelatedness may become obvious, and new insights will emerge
from the depths of our consciousness.
Another way to develop our intuition is to do quick interpretations of a
number of charts, without giving our rational minds time to prepare a
systematic analysis. By allowing ourselves to become quiet and listen to our
first impressions, we can begin to recognize the wisdom of our intuitive
understanding, and begin to consult it on a regular basis. Preparing to Interpret
Once we have determined the primary features of a chart and listened to the
prompting of our intuition, how can we best prepare a reading?
First, we can make sure that we have obtained sufficient background
information (marital status, occupation, etc.) from our client so that we can
view the chart in a valid context.
Second, we can discover what transits and progressions are influencing
the chart now, so that we will know which planets, signs and houses are
activated or are now under stress.
Third, we can note what complexities or contradictions occur in the chart
and attempt to understand them. What if there are 0 water counts, and the
Moon is rising? What if Júpiter planets occur in Gemini, and Mercury and Jupiter
are in Cancer? Most people are complex and even contradictory and may
oscillate between two parts of themselves or attempt to express one part
without the cooperation of another part.
Fourth, we can pay attention to our negative reactions to various
placements or patterns. Why do we have such reactions? How can we
interpret these features in a more constructive manner? Certainly Venus
conjunct Saturn must have some virtues; certainly a Mars/Pluto square, if
channelled effectively, can be a benefit rather than a torment. We should be
particularly wary of our negativity if our client has a high water count or a
very stressed Saturn and is oversensitive or fearful.
Fifth, we may, in certain charts, be able to group the important features
we have selected into two or three larger groups, noting their relationship to
each other. Doing so will help us to summarize at the beginning of our
reading all that we will be covering, thereby orienting not only ourselves
but also our client.
Finally, we can best prepare for a reading by studying or meditating upon
each of the chart's primary characteristics. Only by drawing upon our own
understanding and consulting astrology texts as a last resort, can we begin
to develop our skills as astrologers. If our understanding fails us, and if our
books fail us, we should not be ashamed to admit our confusion to our
clients, giving them the opportunity to clarify to us and to themselves their
own self-understanding. PART Gêmeos PRACTICE IN CHART SYNTHESIS INTRODUCTION TO CHART SYNTHESIS
The aim of this section is to provide an opportunity for you to determine
the primary characteristics of five example charts, using the synthesis
worksheet and comparing your answers to those of the author. The five
charts included here are not representative of the kinds of charts that you
will be interpreting on a regular basis. Because they are charts of famous
people of the twentieth century, people who are notable because of their
talents or because of the unusual circumstances of their lives, most of them
contain extremes of elements or modes and highly emphasized planets,
signs, houses or aspects. Only chart E could be mistaken for the chart of an
“ordinary” person; as a result, the significant features of this chart are
interpreted at length in chapter 8, as a demonstration of how effectively the
principles of synthesis operate in practice.
But why, if most of these charts are not “ordinary” charts, are they given
here as useful examples? The answer to the above question is twofold. First,
these charts are interesting; they are likely to hold your attention and to
motivate you to sharpen your astrological skills as you painstakingly learn a
new method for organizing your interpretations. Second, because the
identities of these people are not revealed until the answer section, you can
make your learning experience more enjoyable and test your knowledge
and intuition by guessing who these contemporary figures are.
A HINT: These exercises in interpretation were all developed for the
original edition of this book, Art of Chart Synthesis, when I chose as
examples well-known public figures or celebrities of the 1970s. All were
born between 1934–1954.
ANOTHER HINT: Charts A and C are male; charts B, D, and E are
female.
Chart A A: THE CHART AS A WHOLE
1. PREDOMINANT ELEMENT (p. 19)
How many? Circle if more than 5 of 14.
2. WEAKEST ELEMENT (p. 22)
How many? Circle if 0 or 1 of 14.
3. PREDOMINANT MODE (p. 24)
How many? Circle if more than 6 of 14. Júpiter . WEAKEST MODE (p. 25)
How many? Circle if 0, 1 of 14, or 2 of 14.
5. PLANETARY PATTERN (p. 27)
Circle if pattern is clearly defined.
6. ASPECT CONFIGURATIONS (p. 31)
Circle answer.
7. SUN/MOON SIGNS & RELATIONSHIP (p. 40)
Note aspect or phase. Circle if in major aspect.
8. ASCENDANT/MIDHEAVEN SIGNS (p. 45)
Circle ascendant. Mercúrio . NUMBER OF RETROGRADE PLANETS (p. 46)
Circle if 0 or more than 3. B: DETERMINING PLANETARY STRENGTH
1. SUN SIGN & HOUSE (p. 51)
Circle answer.
2. MOON SIGN & HOUSE (p. 52)
3. SUN RULER: ITS SIGN & HOUSE (p. 52) Júpiter . ASCENDANT RULER: ITS SIGN & HOUSE (p. 53)
5. PLANET IN OWN SIGN (p. 53)
Circle answer.
6. PLANET IN OWN HOUSE (p. 53)
Circle answer.
7. PLANET RISING (p. 54)
Circle if less than 2 degrees above or 6 degrees below ascendant. 8. PLANET ON MIDHEAVEN (p. 54)
Circle if less than 2 degrees before or 6 degrees after midheaven. Mercúrio . PLANET ON NADIR (p. 55)
Circle if less than 1 degree before or 2 degrees after nadir.
10. PLANET DESCENDING (p. 55)
Circle if less than 1 degree before or 2 degrees after descendant.
11. STATIONARY PLANET (p. 56)
Circle answer.
12. SOLE DISPOSITOR (p. 56)
13. MOST ASPECTED PLANET (p. 57)
How many aspects?
14. UNASPECTED PLANETS (p. 58)
Circle answer.
15. OTHER FOCAL PLANETS (p. 58)
Circle answer. C: ASPECTS & OTHER CHART VARIABLES
1. PREDOMINANT TYPE OF ASPECT (p. 61)
How many?
2. ABSENCE OF A TYPE OF ASPECT (p. 62)
3. CONJUNCTIONS WITHIN 3 DEGREES (p. 63)
Indicate orb. Circle if less than 14 degrees. Júpiter . OTHER MAJOR ASPECTS WITHIN 1½ DEGREES (p. 63)
Indicate orb. Circle if less than 1 degree.
5. IMPORTANT MINOR ASPECTS (p. 64)
Note those which are exact.
6. PARALLELS REINFORCING ASPECTS (p. 66)
7. MUTUAL RECEPTIONS (p. 67)
Circle answer.
8. LUNAR NODES (p. 67)
Indicate sign & house. Circle answer.
List major aspects within 2 degrees. D: PRELIMINARY SYNTHESIS
1. STRONGEST PLANETS (p. 69)
How many counts? Circle if more than Júpiter .
2. STRONGEST SIGNS (p. 69)
How many counts? Circle if more than Júpiter .
3. STRONGEST HOUSES (p. 70)
How many counts? Circle if more than Júpiter . Júpiter . STRONGEST ASPECT (p. 70)
Circle if less than 30 minutes. E. ADDITIONAL CONSIDERATIONS (p. 71)
F. PRIMARY CHARACTERISTICS OF THIS CHART
1.
2.
3. Júpiter .
5.
6.
7.
8. A: THE CHART AS A WHOLE
1. PREDOMINANT ELEMENT (p. 19)
How many? Circle if more than 5 of 14.
2. WEAKEST ELEMENT (p. 22)
How many? Circle if 0 or 1 of 14.
3. PREDOMINANT MODE (p. 24)
How many? Circle if more than 6 of 14. Júpiter . WEAKEST MODE (p. 25)
How many? Circle if 0, 1 of 14, or 2 of 14.
5. PLANETARY PATTERN (p. 27)
Circle if pattern is clearly defined.
6. ASPECT CONFIGURATIONS (p. 31)
Circle answer.
7. SUN/MOON SIGNS & RELATIONSHIP (p. 40)
Note aspect or phase. Circle if in major aspect.
8. ASCENDANT/MIDHEAVEN SIGNS (p. 45)
Circle ascendant. Mercúrio . NUMBER OF RETROGRADE PLANETS (p. 46)
Circle if 0 or more than 3. B: DETERMINING PLANETARY STRENGTH
1. SUN SIGN & HOUSE (p. 51)
Circle answers.
2. MOON SIGN & HOUSE (p. 52)
Circle answer.
3. SUN RULER: ITS SIGN & HOUSE (p. 52) Júpiter . ASCENDANT RULER: ITS SIGN & HOUSE (p. 53)
5. PLANET IN OWN SIGN (p. 53)
Circle answer.
6. PLANET IN OWN HOUSE (p. 53)
Circle answer.
7. PLANET RISING (p. 54) Circle if less than 2 degrees above or 6 degrees below ascendant.
8. PLANET ON MIDHEAVEN (p. 54)
Circle if less than 2 degrees before or 6 degrees after midheaven. Mercúrio . PLANET ON NADIR (p. 55)
Circle if less than 1 degree before or 2 degrees after nadir.
10. PLANET DESCENDING (p. 55)
Circle if less than 1 degree before or 2 degrees after descendant.
11. STATIONARY PLANET (p. 56)
Circle answer.
12. SOLE DISPOSITOR (p. 56)
13. MOST ASPECTED PLANET (p. 57)
How many aspects?
14. UNASPECTED PLANETS (p. 58)
Circle answer.
15. OTHER FOCAL PLANETS (p. 58)
Circle answer. C: ASPECTS & OTHER CHART VARIABLES
1. PREDOMINANT TYPE OF ASPECT (p. 61)
How many?
2. ABSENCE OF A TYPE OF ASPECT (p. 62)
3. CONJUNCTIONS WITHIN 3 DEGREES (p. 63)
Indicate orb. Circle if less than 14 degrees. Júpiter . OTHER MAJOR ASPECTS WITHIN 1½ DEGREES (p. 63)
Indicate orb. Circle if less than 1 degree.
5. IMPORTANT MINOR ASPECTS (p. 64)
Note those which are exact.
6. PARALLELS REINFORCING ASPECTS (p. 66)
7. MUTUAL RECEPTIONS (p. 67)
Circle answer.
8. LUNAR NODES (p. 67)
Indicate sign & house. Circle answer. List major aspects within 2
degrees. D: PRELIMINARY SYNTHESIS
1. STRONGEST PLANETS (p. 69)
How many counts? Circle if more than Júpiter .
2. STRONGEST SIGNS (p. 69)
How many counts? Circle if more than Júpiter .
3. STRONGEST HOUSES (p. 70)
How many counts? Circle if more than Júpiter . Júpiter . STRONGEST ASPECT (p. 70)
Circle if less than 30 minutes. E. ADDITIONAL CONSIDERATIONS (p. 71)
F. PRIMARY CHARACTERISTICS OF THIS CHART
1.
2.
3. Júpiter .
5.
6.
7.
8.
Chart B SYNTHESIS WORKSHEET FOR CHART B
A: THE CHART AS A WHOLE
1. PREDOMINANT ELEMENT (p. 19)
How many? Circle if more than 5 of 14.
2. WEAKEST ELEMENT (p. 22)
How many? Circle if 0 or 1 of 14.
3. PREDOMINANT MODE (p. 24)
How many? Circle if more than 6 of 14. Júpiter . WEAKEST MODE (p. 25) How many? Circle if 0, 1 of 14, or 2 of 14.
5. PLANETARY PATTERN (p. 27)
Circle if pattern is clearly defined.
6. ASPECT CONFIGURATIONS (p. 31)
Circle answer.
7. SUN/MOON SIGNS & RELATIONSHIP (p. 40)
Note aspect or phase. Circle if in major aspect.
8. ASCENDANT/MIDHEAVEN SIGNS (p. 45)
Circle ascendant. Mercúrio . NUMBER OF RETROGRADE PLANETS (p. 46)
Circle if 0 or more than 3.
B: DETERMINING PLANETARY STRENGTH
1. SUN SIGN & HOUSE (p. 51)
Circle answer.
2. MOON SIGN & HOUSE (p. 52)
Circle answer.
3. SUN RULER: ITS SIGN & HOUSE (p. 52) Júpiter . ASCENDANT RULER: ITS SIGN & HOUSE (p. 53)
5. PLANET IN OWN SIGN (p. 53)
Circle answer.
6. PLANET IN OWN HOUSE (p. 53)
Circle answer.
7. PLANET RISING (p. 54)
Circle if less than 2 degrees above or 6 degrees below ascendant.
8. PLANET ON MIDHEAVEN (p. 54)
Circle if less than 2 degrees before or 6 degrees after midheaven. Mercúrio . PLANET ON NADIR (p. 55)
Circle if less than 1 degree before or 2 degrees after nadir.
10. PLANET DESCENDING (p. 55)
Circle if less than 1 degree before or 2 degrees after descendant.
11. STATIONARY PLANET (p. 56)
Circle answer. 12. SOLE DISPOSITOR (p. 56)
13. MOST ASPECTED PLANET (p. 57)
How many aspects?
14. UNASPECTED PLANETS (p. 58)
Circle answer.
15. OTHER FOCAL PLANETS (p. 58)
C: ASPECTS & OTHER CHART VARIABLES
1. PREDOMINANT TYPE OF ASPECT (p. 61)
How many?
2. ABSENCE OF A TYPE OF ASPECT (p. 62)
3. CONJUNCTIONS WITHIN 3 DEGREES (p. 63)
Indicate orb. Circle if less than 14 degrees. Júpiter . OTHER MAJOR ASPECTS WITHIN 1½ DEGREES (p. 63)
Indicate orb. Circle if less than 1 degree.
5. IMPORTANT MINOR ASPECTS (p. 64)
Note those which are exact.
6. PARALLELS REINFORCING ASPECTS (p. 66)
7. MUTUAL RECEPTIONS (p. 67)
Circle answer.
8. LUNAR NODES (p. 67)
Indicate sign & house. Circle answer. List major aspects within 2
degrees.
D: PRELIMINARY SYNTHESIS
1. STRONGEST PLANETS (p. 69)
How many counts? Circle if more than Júpiter .
2. STRONGEST SIGNS (p. 69)
How many counts? Circle if more than Júpiter .
3. STRONGEST HOUSES (p. 70)
How many counts? Circle if more than Júpiter . Júpiter . STRONGEST ASPECT (p. 70)
Circle if less than 30 minutes. E. ADDITIONAL CONSIDERATIONS (p. 71)
F. PRIMARY CHARACTERISTICS OF THIS CHART
1.
2.
3. Júpiter .
5.
6.
7.
8.
CHART C SYNTHESIS WORKSHEET FOR CHART C
A: THE CHART AS A WHOLE
1. PREDOMINANT ELEMENT (p. 19)
How many? Circle if more than 5 of 14.
2. WEAKEST ELEMENT (p. 22)
How many? Circle if 0 or 1 of 14.
3. PREDOMINANT MODE (p. 24)
How many? Circle if more than 6 of 14. Júpiter . WEAKEST MODE (p. 25) How many? Circle if 0, 1 of 14, or 2 of 14.
5. PLANETARY PATTERN (p. 27)
Circle if pattern is clearly defined.
6. ASPECT CONFIGURATIONS (p. 31)
Circle answer.
7. SUN/MOON SIGNS & RELATIONSHIP (p. 40)
Note aspect or phase. Circle if in major aspect.
8. ASCENDANT/MIDHEAVEN SIGNS (p. 45)
Circle ascendant. Mercúrio . NUMBER OF RETROGRADE PLANETS (p. 46)
Circle if 0 or more than 3. B: DETERMINING PLANETARY STRENGTH
1. SUN SIGN & HOUSE (p. 51)
Circle answer.
2. MOON SIGN & HOUSE (p. 52)
Circle answer.
3. SUN RULER: ITS SIGN & HOUSE (p. 52) Júpiter . ASCENDANT RULER: ITS SIGN & HOUSE (p. 53)
5. PLANET IN OWN SIGN (p. 53)
Circle answer.
6. PLANET IN OWN HOUSE (p. 53)
Circle answer.
7. PLANET RISING (p. 54)
Circle if less than 2 degrees above or 6 degrees below ascendant.
8. PLANET ON MIDHEAVEN (p. 54)
Circle if less than 2 degrees before or 6 degrees after midheaven. Mercúrio . PLANET ON NADIR (p. 55)
Circle if less than 1 degree before or 2 degrees after nadir.
10. PLANET DESCENDING (p. 55)
Circle if less than 1 degree before or 2 degrees after descendant.
11. STATIONARY PLANET (p. 56)
Circle answer. 12. SOLE DISPOSITOR (p. 56)
13. MOST ASPECTED PLANET (p. 57)
How many aspects?
14. UNASPECTED PLANETS (p. 58)
Circle answer.
15. OTHER FOCAL PLANETS (p. 58)
Circle answer. C: ASPECTS & OTHER CHART VARIABLES
1. PREDOMINANT TYPE OF ASPECT (p. 61)
How many?
2. ABSENCE OF A TYPE OF ASPECT (p. 62)
3. CONJUNCTIONS WITHIN 3 DEGREES (p. 63)
Indicate orb. Circle if less than 14 degrees. Júpiter . OTHER MAJOR ASPECTS WITHIN 1½ DEGREES (p. 63)
Indicate orb. Circle if less than 1 degree.
5. IMPORTANT MINOR ASPECTS (p. 64)
Note those which are exact.
6. PARALLELS REINFORCING ASPECTS (p. 66)
7. MUTUAL RECEPTIONS (p. 67)
Circle answer.
8. LUNAR NODES (p. 67)
Indicate sign & house. Circle answer. List major aspects within 2
degrees. D: PRELIMINARY SYNTHESIS
1. STRONGEST PLANETS (p. 69)
How many counts? Circle if more than Júpiter .
2. STRONGEST SIGNS (p. 69)
How many counts? Circle if more than Júpiter .
3. STRONGEST HOUSES (p. 70)
How many counts? Circle if more than Júpiter . Júpiter . STRONGEST ASPECT (p. 70) Circle if less than 30 minutes. E. ADDITIONAL CONSIDERATIONS (p. 71)
F. PRIMARY CHARACTERISTICS OF THIS CHART
1.
2.
3. Júpiter .
5.
6.
7.
8.
CHART D SYNTHESIS WORKSHEET FOR CHART D A: THE CHART AS A WHOLE
1. PREDOMINANT ELEMENT (p. 19)
How many? Circle if more than 5 of 14.
2. WEAKEST ELEMENT (p. 22)
How many? Circle if 0 or 1 of 14.
3. PREDOMINANT MODE (p. 24)
How many? Circle if more than 6 of 14. Júpiter . WEAKEST MODE (p. 25)
How many? Circle if 0, 1 of 14, or 2 of 14.
5. PLANETARY PATTERN (p. 27)
Circle if pattern is clearly defined.
6. ASPECT CONFIGURATIONS (p. 31)
Circle answer.
7. SUN/MOON SIGNS & RELATIONSHIP (p. 40)
Note aspect or phase. Circle if in major aspect.
8. ASCENDANT/MIDHEAVEN SIGNS (p. 45)
Circle ascendant. Mercúrio . NUMBER OF RETROGRADE PLANETS (p. 46)
Circle if 0 or more than 3. B: DETERMINING PLANETARY STRENGTH
1. SUN SIGN & HOUSE (p. 51)
Circle answer.
2. MOON SIGN & HOUSE (p. 52)
Circle answer.
3. SUN RULER: ITS SIGN & HOUSE (p. 52) Júpiter . ASCENDANT RULER: ITS SIGN & HOUSE (p. 53)
5. PLANET IN OWN SIGN (p. 53)
Circle answer.
6. PLANET IN OWN HOUSE (p. 53)
Circle answer.
7. PLANET RISING (p. 54)
Circle if less than 2 degrees above or 6 degrees below ascendant.
8. PLANET ON MIDHEAVEN (p. 54)
Circle if less than 2 degrees before or 6 degrees after midheaven. Mercúrio . PLANET ON NADIR (p. 55)
Circle if less than 1 degree before or 2 degrees after nadir.
10. PLANET DESCENDING (p. 55)
Circle if less than 1 degree before or 2 degrees after descendant.
11. STATIONARY PLANET (p. 56) Circle answer.
12. SOLE DISPOSITOR (p. 56)
13. MOST ASPECTED PLANET (p. 57)
How many aspects?
14. UNASPECTED PLANETS (p. 58)
Circle answer.
15. OTHER FOCAL PLANETS (p. 58)
Circle answer. C: ASPECTS & OTHER CHART VARIABLES
1. PREDOMINANT TYPE OF ASPECT (p. 61)
How many?
2. ABSENCE OF A TYPE OF ASPECT (p. 62)
3. CONJUNCTIONS WITHIN 3 DEGREES (p. 63)
Indicate orb. Circle if less than 14 degrees. Júpiter . OTHER MAJOR ASPECTS WITHIN 1½ DEGREES (p. 63)
Indicate orb. Circle if less than 1 degree.
5. IMPORTANT MINOR ASPECTS (p. 64)
Note those which are exact.
6. PARALLELS REINFORCING ASPECTS (p. 66)
7. MUTUAL RECEPTIONS (p. 67)
Circle answer.
8. LUNAR NODES (p. 67)
Indicate sign & house. Circle answer. List major aspects within 2
degrees. D: PRELIMINARY SYNTHESIS
1. STRONGEST PLANETS (p. 69)
How many counts? Circle if more than Júpiter .
2. STRONGEST SIGNS (p. 69)
How many counts? Circle if more than Júpiter .
3. STRONGEST HOUSES (p. 70)
How many counts? Circle if more than Júpiter . Júpiter . STRONGEST ASPECT (p. 70)
Circle if less than 30 minutes. E. ADDITIONAL CONSIDERATIONS (p. 71)
F. PRIMARY CHARACTERISTICS OF THIS CHART
1.
2.
3. Júpiter .
5.
6.
7.
8.
CHART E SYNTHESIS WORKSHEET for Chart E A: THE CHART AS A WHOLE
1. PREDOMINANT ELEMENT (p. 19)
How many? Circle if more than 5 of 14.
2. WEAKEST ELEMENT (p. 22)
How many? Circle if 0 or 1 of 14. 3. PREDOMINANT MODE (p. 24)
How many? Circle if more than 6 of 14. Júpiter . WEAKEST MODE (p. 25)
How many? Circle if 0, 1 of 14, or 2 of 14.
5. PLANETARY PATTERN (p. 27)
Circle if pattern is clearly defined.
6. ASPECT CONFIGURATIONS (p. 31)
Circle answer.
7. SUN/MOON SIGNS & RELATIONSHIP (p. 40)
Note aspect or phase. Circle if in major aspect.
8. ASCENDANT/MIDHEAVEN SIGNS (p. 45)
Circle ascendant. Mercúrio . NUMBER OF RETROGRADE PLANETS (p. 46)
Circle if 0 or more than 3. B: DETERMINING PLANETARY STRENGTH
1. SUN SIGN & HOUSE (p. 51)
Circle answer
2. MOON SIGN & HOUSE (p. 52)
Circle answer.
3. SUN RULER: ITS SIGN & HOUSE (p. 52) Júpiter . ASCENDANT RULER: ITS SIGN & HOUSE (p. 53)
5. PLANET IN OWN SIGN (p. 53)
Circle answer.
6. PLANET IN OWN HOUSE (p. 53)
Circle answer.
7. PLANET RISING (p. 54)
Circle if less than 2 degrees above or 6 degrees below ascendant.
8. PLANET ON MIDHEAVEN (p. 54)
Circle if less than 2 degrees before or 6 degrees after midheaven. Mercúrio . PLANET ON NADIR (p. 55)
Circle if less than 1 degree before or 2 degrees after nadir.
10. PLANET DESCENDING (p. 55) Circle if less than 1 degree before or 2 degrees after descendant.
11. STATIONARY PLANET (p. 56)
Circle answer.
12. SOLE DISPOSITOR (p. 56)
13. MOST ASPECTED PLANET (p. 57)
How many aspects?
14. UNASPECTED PLANETS (p. 58)
Circle answer.
15. OTHER FOCAL PLANETS (p. 58)
Circle answer. C: ASPECTS & OTHER CHART VARIABLES
1. PREDOMINANT TYPE OF ASPECT (p. 61)
How many?
2. ABSENCE OF A TYPE OF ASPECT (p. 62)
3. CONJUNCTIONS WITHIN 3 DEGREES (p. 63)
Indicate orb. Circle if less than 14 degrees. Júpiter . OTHER MAJOR ASPECTS WITHIN 1½ DEGREES (p. 63)
Indicate orb. Circle if less than 1 degree.
5. IMPORTANT MINOR ASPECTS (p. 64)
Note those which are exact.
6. PARALLELS REINFORCING ASPECTS (p. 66)
7. MUTUAL RECEPTIONS (p. 67)
Circle answer.
8. LUNAR NODES (p. 67)
Indicate sign & house. Circle answer. List major aspects within 2
degrees. D: PRELIMINARY SYNTHESIS
1. STRONGEST PLANETS (p. 69)
How many counts? Circle if more than Júpiter .
2. STRONGEST SIGNS (p. 69)
How many counts? Circle if more than Júpiter . 3. STRONGEST HOUSES (p. 70)
How many counts? Circle if more than Júpiter . Júpiter . STRONGEST ASPECT (p. 70)
Circle if less than 30 minutes. E. ADDITIONAL CONSIDERATIONS (p. 71)
F. PRIMARY CHARACTERISTICS OF THIS CHART
1.
2.
3. Júpiter .
5.
6.
7.
8. Chapter Seven AUTHOR'S ANSWERS
Answers listed here were determined by following the rules outlined on the
Synthesis Worksheet and in “A Preliminary Note.”
Chart A
Horoscope of Muhammed Ali, 1/18/42, 6:30 p.m. C.S.T., Louisville,
Kentucky. Source: Horoscope magazine and Robert Jansky's Horoscopes
Here and Now. Note that The American Book of Charts edited by Lois
Rodden gives 1/17/42, 6:35 p.m.
A
1. 6 ½ earth, 5½ air
2. 0 water
3. 10 fixed Júpiter . 1½ mutable
5. locomotive to Sun (despite gap of a wide sextile)
6. t-square to Mars in Taurus in 9th house, grand earth trine and weak
yod to Neptune
7. Sun semi-sextile Moon
8. Leo ascendant, Taurus midheaven Mercúrio . 6 retrograde planets
B
1. Sun in Capricorn in 6th house
2. Moon in Aquarius in 7th house
3. Saturn in Taurus retrograde in 10th house Júpiter . Sun in Capricorn in 6th house
6. Saturn in 10th, Venus in 7th, Mercury late in 6th
10. Venus in Aquarius descending, 1 degree, 7 minutes
13. Saturn, 7 aspects counting trine to Neptune 15. Sun as engine to locomotive. Sun as pivotal to grand trine and tsquare. Mars as focal planet in t-square. Mars as pivotal to yod and tsquare
C
1. 8 squares
2. no sextiles (unless Moon/Mars counted, in yod)
3. Venus conjunct descendant, 1 degree, 7 minutes Júpiter . Mars square Pluto, 1 degree, 12 minutes Uranus square Moon, 1
minute Saturn square Venus, 1 degree, 12 minutes Sun trine Neptune,
1 degree, 29 minutes
5, 6. Ignore. Too many other considerations
7. Venus/Uranus mutual reception (also in square)
8. North Node in Virgo at end of 1st house South Node in Pisces at end
of 7th house Both square Jupiter, 2 degrees, 17 minutes.
D
1. Sun, 7 counts (counting Júpiter for focal planet)
2. Aquarius, Capricorn and Taurus, Júpiter counts
3. 6th house emphasis, 5 counts Júpiter . Moon in Aquarius square Uranus, 1 minute
F
The Primary Characteristics:
Few charts are as strong as Muhammed Ali's. Even being particularly
selective, we will want to focus on more than eight of its features.
1. 10 fixed signs
2. no water signs
3. 6 retrograde planets Júpiter . t-square to Mars in Taurus in 9th house
5. grand earth trine with 6½ earth signs
6. Moon in Aquarius square Uranus, 1 minute
7. pivotal Sun in Capricorn in 6th house, as engine of locomotive pattern
8. Saturn in 10th near M.C. Mercúrio . Venus descending in mutual reception to Uranus
Chart B
Horoscope of Liza Minelli, 3/12/46, 7:58 a.m., Plutão .S.T., Los Angeles,
California. Source: Horoscopes Here and Now.
A
1. 6 water
2. 2 earth (ascendant and midheaven only)
3. Mercúrio cardinal Júpiter . 2 fixed (Pluto and ascendant only)
6. t-square to Mars conjunct Saturn and Moon in Cancer on I.C. We
don't separate a close conjunction if one of its planets is technically
within the orbs of the configuration and the others aren't.
7. Sun trine Moon, 2 degrees, 21 minutes
8. Taurus rising, Capricorn midheaven Mercúrio . Júpiter retrograde planets
B
1. Sun in Pisces in 12th house
2. Moon in Cancer in 4th house
3. Neptune retrograde in Libra in 6th house Júpiter . Venus in Aries in 12th house
5. Moon in Cancer
6. Moon in 4th house Mercúrio . Moon conjunct I.C., 13 minutes Saturn conjunct I.C., 1 degree, 21
minutes Mars conjunct I.C., 3 degrees, 15 minutes
12. Moon, sole dispositor
13. Saturn, Moon and Mars, 6 aspects (counting M.C. axis and
extended orbs in t-square)
15. Mars, focal planet in t-square, linked by conjunction to Saturn and
Moon
C
1. 7 squares, with extended orbs in t-square 2. Mars conjunct Saturn, 1 degree, 54 minutes Saturn conjunct Moon,
1 degree, 8 minutes Moon conjunct I.C., 13 minutes Júpiter . Mercury trine Pluto, 45 minutes Mercury opposition Neptune, 1
degree, 21 minutes
6. Pluto parallel Moon, reinforcing strong Moon
8. North Node in Gemini in 2nd house South Node in Sagittarius in 8th
house North Node trine Jupiter, 2 minutes
D
1. Moon extremely strong, Mercúrio counts
2. Cancer, 5 counts
3. 12th house, 5 counts (Counting Moon as 4th house and Saturn and
Mars each as ½ 4th and ½ 3rd, the 4th house still has only Júpiter counts.) Júpiter . Moon conjunct I.C., 13 minutes
Mercury opposition Neptune, 1 degree, 21 minutes is closest square or
opposition, but Moon/Saturn conjunction, 1 degree, 8 minutes is
stronger.
F.
The Primary Characteristics:
1. Moon in Cancer on I.C., own house, sole dispositor, closely conjunct
Saturn
2. Mercúrio cardinal signs
3. t-square to Mars conjunct Saturn and Moon Júpiter . Sun in Pisces in 12th house, 12th emphasis
5. Sun trine Moon
6. 6 water signs
7. No planets in earth signs
8. North Node in Gemini in 2nd house in exact trine to Jupiter
Chart C
Horoscope of Charles Manson, 11/12/34, Júpiter :40 p.m. E.S.T., Cincinnati,
Ohio. Source: American Astrology.
A 1. 6 water
2. 1 fire (Uranus)
3. Mercúrio fixed Júpiter . 2 mutable
5. seesaw
6. cardinal/fixed grand cross
loose Scorpio stellium in 7th house
7. No Sun/Moon aspect but square by sign
8. Taurus rising, Capricorn M.C. Mercúrio . 2 retrograde planets
B
1. Sun in Scorpio in 7th house
2. Moon in Aquarius late in 10th house
3. Pluto in Cancer retrograde in 4th house Júpiter . Venus in Scorpio in 7th house
6. Venus in 7th house (Mercury is at the end of the 6th but has more
influence upon the 7th.)
10. Jupiter and Mercury within 3 degrees of the descendant
11. Mercury stationary direct
13. Moon, 6 aspects counting conjunction to N. Node
16. pivotal Mercury linking stellium and cross
C
1. 8 squares, counting ascendant but not nodes
2. All major aspects represented, but sextiles and trines extremely weak
3. Sun conjunct Venus, 1 degree, 31 minutes (This conjunction gives
added weight to Venus.)
Mars conjunct Neptune, 34 minutes
Moon conjunct North Node, 2 minutes Júpiter . Mercury square Moon, 1 degree, 1 minute
Moon square ascendant, 1 degree, 6 minutes
5. Mars/Neptune are near midpoint of Pluto/Mercury square, semisquaring both Pluto and Mercury.
6. Sun/Venus and Mars/Neptune conjunctions are reinforced by parallels. 7. No mutual receptions (Since Mars rules Aries, Mercury in Scorpio and
Mars in Virgo are not in mutual reception.)
8. North Node in Aquarius late in 10th house
South Node in Leo late in 4th house
North Node conjunct Moon, 2 minutes
Nodes both square Mercury, 1 degree, 3 minutes
Nodes both square ascendant, 1 degree, Júpiter minutes
D
1. Mercury, Júpiter counts (Venus is 3 counts, but its conjunction to the Sun
strengthens it.)
2. Scorpio, 7 counts
3. 7th house, 7 counts (Mercury as ½ 6th, ½ 7th) Júpiter . Moon conjunct North Node, 2 minutes or Mars conjunct Neptune, 34
minutes
Closest square: Mercury square Moon, 1 degree, 1 minute
E
1. Descendant near Mercury/Jupiter midpoint
2. Last lunar eclipse: 2 Aquarius 48, conjunct Moon
F.
The Primary Characteristics:
1. Mercúrio fixed signs
2. 6 water signs
3. 1 fire sign Júpiter . Scorpio stellium in 7th house, with Sun in Scorpio in 7th
5. cardinal/fixed grand cross
6. few trines and sextiles, all weak
7. seesaw pattern
8. Moon in Aquarius in 10th house conjunct North Node at previous
lunar eclipse point, both squaring ascendant, Mercury and Jupiter Chart D
Horoscope of Patty Hearst, 2/20/84, 6:01 p.m., Plutão .S.T., San Francisco,
California. Source: American Astrology.
A
1. 6 water signs
2. 1 earth sign (ascendant)
3. 7 mutable signs
5. weak splash (open square)
6. mutable t-square to Mercury and Venus in Pisces in 7th house. (The
close Mars/Venus and Mercury/Jupiter squares bring it together.)
weak grand water trine
7. weak Sun inconjunct Moon
8. Virgo rising, Gemini midheaven Mercúrio . 5 retrograde planets
B
1. Sun in Pisces, end of 6th house, influencing 7th
2. Moon in Libra, 2nd house
3. Neptune retrograde in Libra, 2nd house Júpiter . Mercury retrograde in Pisces, 7th house
6. Uranus in 11th, Venus in 7th house
10. Venus 3 degrees after descendant
Sun 2 degrees, 20 minutes before descendant
13. Venus, 6 aspects (extending orbs in t-square)
15. Mercury and Venus, focal planets in t-square
C
1. 8 squares (extending orbs in t-square)
3. Venus conjunct descendant, 3 degrees
Sun conjunct descendant, 2 degrees, 20 minutes Júpiter . Jupiter square Mercury, 31 minutes
Mars square Venus, 1 degree, Júpiter minutes
5. Uranus semi-square ascendant, 16 minutes Pluto semi-square Moon, 14 minutes
Venus inconjunct Moon, 1 degree, 7 minutes (strong 2nd/7th
connections)
6. Sun/Venus parallel reinforces conjunction
Jupiter/Uranus/Pluto parallel unites S.E. quadrant.
7. Neptune in Libra mutual reception Venus in Pisces, linking 2nd and
7th houses
8. North Node in Capricorn in 5th house
South Node in Cancer in 11th house
South Node conjunct Uranus, 3 degrees, 55 minutes
Both nodes square Neptune, 2 degrees, 28 minutes
D
1. Venus, 6 counts
2. Pisces, 6 counts
3. 7th house, Júpiter ½ counts (Sun as ½ 6th, ½ 7th.) Júpiter . Jupiter square Mercury, 31 minutes
F
The Primary Characteristics:
1. 6 water signs and grand water trine
2. 7 mutable signs
3. 1 earth sign (ascendant) Júpiter . Venus in 7th house near descendant in mutual reception to Neptune
5. Sun in Pisces late 6th house inconjunct Moon in Libra in 2nd house
6. mutable t-square to Mercury and Venus in Pisces in 7th house
7. Uranus in 11th house near South Node
8. 5 retrograde planets
Chart E
Horoscope of Liv Ullman, 12/16/38, Tokyo, Japan, rectified for 7:10 p.m.
Sources: The Mercury Hour and Astrology Guide. (Both give 7:20 p.m.)
[Name also spelled Ullmann.] A
1. 6 ½ fire (ascendant as ½ Cancer, ½ Leo)
2. 2 earth
3. 5 ½ fixed (ascendant as ½ Cancer, ½ Leo) Júpiter . Júpiter mutable
7. Sun sextile Moon, 45 minutes
8. Cancer/Leo rising. Aries midheaven Mercúrio . retrograde planets
B
1. Sun in Sagittarius, 5th/6th cusp
2. Moon in Libra, 4th house
3. Jupiter in Aquarius, 8th house Júpiter . two rulers—Sun in Sagittarius on 5th/6th cusp and Moon in Libra in
4th house
6. Moon in 4th house (Sun end of 5th)
7. Pluto rising, 1 degree, 18 minutes
11. Saturn stationary direct
13. Moon and Mercury, 5 aspects
C
1. 6 squares
2. Pluto conjunct ascendant, 1 degree, 18 minutes
3. Sun sextile Moon, 45 minutes Sun square Neptune, 30 minutes Júpiter . two inconjuncts to Jupiter, but no yod
5. Moon/Mars parallel brings them into conjunction.
Uranus/Venus contraparallel reinforces the opposition between Uranus
and Venus.
Sun/Pluto contraparallel reinforces Pluto rising
6. North Node in Scorpio late in 4th house
South Node in Scorpio late in 10th house
South Node conjunct Uranus, 1 degree, 18 minutes
(North Node conjunct Venus, Júpiter degrees, 29 minutes) D
1. Moon, 4½ counts (counting Moon as ½ ruler of ascendant)
2. Sagittarius, Júpiter counts
3. 4th house, Júpiter counts (with 5th house as 3½ counts, counting Sun ½ 5th,
½ 6th) Júpiter . Sun square Neptune, 30 minutes
E
1. Last lunar eclipse 14 Taurus 53, conjunct Uranus
2. Saturn elevated (closest planet to midheaven)
F.
The Primary Characteristics:
1. 6½ fire signs
2. Pluto rising
3. Sun in Sagittarius, 5th/6th cusp Júpiter . Moon in Libra, own house
5. Sun sextile Moon, both rulers of Cancer/Leo ascendant
6. stationary direct Saturn in 9th house near midheaven
7. Sun square Neptune, 30 minutes
8. Uranus conjunct South Node in 10th house Chapter Eight EXAMPLE INTERPRETATION (CHART E)
The following interpretation of the outstanding features of awardwinning
actress Liv Ullman's natal chart is supplemented by a commentary which
provides illustrations from her life, drawn primarily from her autobiography
Changing, but also from Liv Ullman and Ingmar Bergman by Bernie
Garfinkel. 6½ FIRE SIGNS
A count of 6½ fire signs indicates that Liv Ullman is an energetic and selfmotivated individual, enthusiastic and optimistic about life, and willing to
plunge wholeheartedly into new experiences. Highly subjective, she may
have difficulty distancing herself from her intense emotions, but she is
nevertheless capable of expressing herself dramatically, directly and
creatively. SUN IN SAGITTARIUS ON THE 5th/6th HOUSE CUSP
Ullman's Sagittarian Sun is another indicator of her positive and
outreaching approach to life. Her personal freedom is important to her, and
she desires to expand her awareness through travelling and through opening
herself to new experiences. Direct and honest in her self-expression, she is
forever philosophizing about the meaning she distills from her life
circumstances, as she attempts to conceptualize and share with others the
wisdom that she has discovered.
Because her Sun is near the end of the 5th house, it influences both the
5th and 6th houses of her chart. Its 5th house influence suggests a
pronounced desire to develop her creative abilities as fully as possible,
particularly to express her creativity and intuition in meaningful, inspiring
ways, true to the nature of Sagittarius. Capable of being both entertaining
and profoundly philosophical, she enjoys being center stage and giving
generously of herself to people who appreciate her openness, her insight and her talents. This 5th house influence also indicates Ullman's willingness
to open herself to new romantic involvements, taking emotional risks in
love affairs with men who will not threaten her desire for freedom and
continued personal growth. Her understanding of life is deepened through
her romantic experiences, and also through her relationships with children.
Her own child brings out the playful, untrammeled spirit in her; with Lin,
she gives of herself freely, eager to help Lin develop herself and understand
her experiences.
The 6th house influence of Ullman's Sagittarian Sun indicates a desire for
a work situation which allows her considerable freedom, so that she may
express herself according to her own inner direction. She enjoys work
which allows her to travel, expanding her contacts with new people and
places. Although she adores the limelight, she is also capable of functioning
in a subordinate role, fulfilling what she regards as her duties
conscientiously and enthusiastically. Because the 6th house is also the
house of health and Ullman's Sun is co-ruler of her ascendant, she is highly
aware of her physical body, and cares for herself by eating heartily and
taking many long walks in the country.
This combined 5th/6th house Sun actually establishes a connection
between these two areas of Ullman's life. Her leisure time is minimal
because of the demands of her work; her work involves dramatic creative
expression. In her relationships with men and with her own child, she is
extremely aware of her responsibilities and obligations, and desires to be a
helpful, readily available companion.
COMMENTARY: The above interpretation is validated by Ullman's
autobiography, in which she expresses herself honestly and reflectively,
sharing not only the circumstances of her professional life on stage and in
films, but also her understanding of her marriage with Jappe and her five
years with Ingmar Bergman. Her Sagittarian Sun is fully evident when she
says of her theatrical performances, “I look forward to the sense of freedom
that comes in the silence and the laughter from the audience much more
than in the applause afterwards.” Philosophizing further, she adds, “How
good it is to have a life that gives so much freedom, so many choices. I can
be free by my own will, be my own creator and guide. My growth and my
development depend upon what I choose or discard in life. In me are the
seed of future life.” SUN SQUARE NEPTUNE
As the most exact aspect in her chart, the square between her Sun and
Neptune entering the 3rd house indicates that Ullman experiences
considerable insecurity and self-doubt. During her early years, she would
have bolstered her ego in a passive way, fantasizing about future successes
and future romantic relationships. Because of this square, the adult Ullman
may be still inclined to escape from pressures and feelings of inadequacy by
fantasizing and by running away—in a 3rd house manner, through reading,
taking short trips and interacting with a variety of people, and in a 5th/6th
house manner, by immersing herself in her creative work.
This square also indicates a weak father figure, or one who was not fully
there for her when she was young. Because her relationship with him was
based on fantasy, she is inclined to deceive herself in adult relationships
with men, falling in love with her own romantic expectations and then
becoming disillusioned when her idol falls off his pedestal. Nevertheless,
Ullman is quite sensitive to the needs of the people around her. Her own
ideals in regard to her behavior are so high that she feels guilty if she can
not always be loving, compassionate and responsive.
One of the positive dimensions of Ullman's Sun square Neptune is that it
motivates her to express her fantasy and idealism outwardly, fulfilling her
Sun's desire for self-expression through the Neptunian means of the creative
arts. Neptune' may indicate oversensitivity, but is also suggests a highly
developed imagination and deep feelings of empathy and compassion. Not
only can Liv respond sensitively to other people's feelings, but she can also
use her empathy in her acting, immersing herself fully in the emotional
experiences of the characters she plays.
COMMENTARY: Again, Ullman's father died when she was six; she
idealized him, and used to fantasize constantly about strange men being her
father and handsome princes carrying her off in the night. When she first
married, she regarded her husband as her savior and protector; when he
failed to fulfill her expectations, she turned to Bergman, believing him to be
God, making possible for her a dreamlike life on a deserted island. These
two important men in her life were very Neptunian—one a psychiatrist, and
the other a film director.
One of the themes of Ullman's autobiography is her over-sensitivity to
the people she loved. “I see myself as a sieve. Everyone's feelings flow through me,” she wrote. Torn with guilt at not being able to respond always
to both her daughter and to Bergman, she wrote, “I rushed from one to
another, always with a bad conscience, never able to completely give what I
yearned to receive.”
Although Ullman's early years were characterized by shyness, selfdoubt
and feelings of failure, she was able to channel her creativity into theatrical
writing, acting and directing when she was still a schoolgirl; by the age of
20, she had begun her professional career as an actress. Ullman is an
outstanding example of a woman who has, despite her confusion, used her
Sun square Neptune constructively. The emotional chaos of her first love
relationships became a rich source for her to draw upon in her dramatic
roles. (“I wonder if I am having a nervous breakdown,” she once wrote.
“And if so, can I give it artistic expression?”) The disillusionment she
experienced in love deepened her understanding of herself and led her to
develop and express her own identity as an inspiring and talented woman.
“I was brought up to be the person others wanted me to be, so that they
would like me and not be bothered by my presence,” Ullman wrote in
Changing. “When I began to be me, I felt that I had more to give.” MOON IN LIBRA IN THE 4th HOUSE
Ullman's Moon in Libra in its own house is very strongly placed; its Libran
influence indicates that she has a powerful need to form close personal
relationships, but tends to become emotionally dependent upon a partner
who can provide the security which she craves. Quite likeable, charming
and considerate, Ullman wants very much to please and to be liked.
Because discord in personal relationships is very upsetting to her, she has,
at least in the past, attempted to insure harmony by fulfilling other people's
expectations. But placing other people's happiness before her own has left
her unsatisfied and indecisive about what she wants. Fortunately, the Moon
in Libra also indicates that she turns inward when her own equilibrium is
threatened, and that she strives to achieve peace and balance within herself
as well as in her relationships.
The 4th house placement of Ullman's Moon suggests close ties with her
mother, and an urge to function in a mothering role herself within a
domestic setting. It also indicates a quite insistent yearning to be mothered
by someone who will protect her and respond to her emotional needs. Ullman lives in her feelings; they dominate her awareness, contributing to
her sense of inner restlessness, but also grounding her and providing the
psychological fuel which enables her to find fulfillment in many areas of
her life. Because she is also deeply attached to her home and is most secure
there, Ullman desires to retreat from the world frequently, hiding within an
idyllic refuge where she can commune quietly with herself and her loved
ones.
COMMENTARY: When she was a child in a one-parent home, the central
figures of Ullman's life were women—her mother and her grandmother.
When she married, she expected her husband to mother her also. “I was
dependent and happy that he was the stronger and wished to look after me,”
she wrote about Jappe. Even when she left him for Bergman, Ullman said,
“I sought the absolute security, protection. A great need to belong.” With
Bergman, Ullman hoped to establish a domestic paradise. The barrenness
of the island on which they lived disturbed her, but here she could lose
herself completely in their togetherness. “Nothing existed outside
ourselves,” she wrote of this time. And yet she was lonely, longing for more
human contact than Bergman could offer.
When Ullman travelled, she was frequently homesick. Upon returning,
she usually plunged enthusiastically into domestic life, seeking peace of
mind. All too often, the ringing phone brought more responsibilities and
obligations, which led her to exclaim repeatedly, “Where on earth can I go
to be left in peace?”
Ullman's love for her daughter Lin permeates her autobiography, but so
does her guilt that she is being an inadequate mother, and her insecurity
about displeasing the people of her home town who expected her to devote
herself totally to her family. Their reactions to her, as well as those of her
first husband and Bergman influenced her deeply. “I have spent hours
completely involved in what I thought other people wished to see me
doing,” she says of herself. “The fear of hurting, fear of authority, the need
for love have put me in the most hopeless situations. I have suppressed my
own desires and wishes, and ever eager to please, have done what I thought
was expected of me.” Yet Ullman also reveals that soon after Bergman and
she separated, she began to turn to herself rather than look for a protector.
Fully aware of her own feelings and her own power, she experienced inner
security and peace. SUN SEXTILE MOON, CANCER/LEO ASCENDANT
The sextile between the Sun in Sagittarius and the Moon in Libra in
Ullman's chart is particularly significant because her ascendant, on the
Cancer/Leo cusp, is ruled by both the Sun and the Moon. This sextile
indicates that Ullman is attuned to her feelings and able to express them in a
spontaneous and free-flowing manner. Her emotional energy and high
vitality contribute to her ability to invest herself fully in her experiences and
to make productive use of her creative talents.
Because she enjoys expressing herself and gaining new insights, Ullman
finds her life quite fulfilling. A harmonious relationship between her
parents helped her to develop a positive attitude toward men and toward
family life in general; as a result, she is able to open herself emotionally to
the people that she loves, responding sensitively to them and allowing
herself to be nourished by their love for her. The Libra/Sagittarius link
between the Sun and Moon denotes a blend of honesty and diplomacy in
her personal relationships, as well as a desire to give of herself generously
and to expand her understanding of human dynamics.
Normally, a sextile between the Sun and Moon indicate self-acceptance
and self-confidence. However, these attributes are somewhat weakened in
Ullman's case by her close Sun/ Neptune square which, as noted before,
suggests insecurity resulting from her oversensitivity to other people's
feelings and her inability to live up to her own impossible ideals.
Another connection established by Ullman's Cancer/Leo ascendant and
Sun/Moon sextile is the link between her 4th, 5th and 6th houses. This
enables her to draw from her deepest feelings and from the circumstances
of her personal life in the roles that she plays as an actress, and to fulfill
many of her emotional needs through her creative work.
The Moon ruling Ullman's ascendant contributes to her soft, often gentle
appearance and the sensitive manner in which she expresses herself. Yet as
the Sun bursts through her Cancerian timidity, she becomes dynamic and
radiantly self-expressive.
COMMENTARY: The above interpretation is also validated by Ullman's
autobiography. Although her father died when she was six, she did view her
parents' relationship as harmonious. Her own marriage, which didn't last,
was nonetheless pleasant, and neither it nor her five year affair with
Bergman soured her attitudes toward men. Ullman's Libran/Sagittarian blend is evident in her honest reflections
about herself and her relationships. While she decries the artificiality of
Hollywood people, she nevertheless is hesitant to reveal the dark secrets of
the people she has known, and she even admits, upon viewing a woman
speak too truthfully about her husband on television, that “there are so
many situations where being honest is exactly the wrong thing to do.”
But what of Leo bursting through the Cancer of Ullman's ascendant? “I
can never completely hide who I am, what I am,” she says as she reveals
the depths of her feelings. And then in one statement she sums up her 4th
house Libran Moon and Sagittarian Sun, “I want to be in somebody's
pocket, to be taken care of. But then I want to be free too.” RETROGRADE PLUTO RISING
Naturally, Ullman's Cancer/Leo ascendant is influenced by Pluto, barely a
degree away. Because it is retrograde, Ullman does not experience or
express Pluto's overt characteristics, such as an overriding need for power,
as much as she experiences and expresses Pluto's psychological, subjective
side. She desires to plumb her inner depths, to remain in touch with the raw
and intense emotions which reside there, and to continually deepen and
transform her self-awareness by coping with the numerous crises of her life
and by regenerating herself through them.
Ullman is an intense and passionate person, aware of her inner power and
of the turbulent emotions churning inside her, demanding to be released.
Her life is a continual process of psychological deaths and rebirths. She is
also aware of the harsh reality of physical death, which she confronted quite
traumatically when very young. Because of the turmoil she experienced
then, Ullman turned inward at an early age, developing an emotional life
which was both richer and more painful than that of her childhood
companions; as a result, she felt quite isolated, unable to share her
experiences or enjoy the simplicity and superficiality of most childhood
pastimes.
As open as she is, the adult Ullman carries inside her a private life forged
in her earliest years, which she may hesitate to reveal in all its intensity. Its
hold upon her may contribute to her feelings of isolation as an adult,
because so few of the people around her are capable of experiencing or
relating to the demonic yet healing forces of the subconscious. Fortunately, however, Ullman's Pluto rules her 5th house, enabling her to channel her
turbulent Plutonic energies into romantic/ sexual relationships and into the
dramatic and psychological roles which she plays as an actress. Pluto is
retrograde in Ullman's chart, but even a retrograde Pluto is a powerful one,
suggesting that Ullman develop her will on the deepest levels and mobilize
all of her energies to fulfill her desires and regenerate herself.
COMMENTARY: The themes of self-awareness and self-transformation,
loneliness and death permeate Ullman's autobiography. “I am constantly
living in a state of change, although deep inside I am ‘a young girl who
refuses to die,” she writes about herself, and later adds, “All the time I am
trying to change myself. . . to find peace, so that I can sit and listen to what
is inside me without influence.” Of her own gentle appearance, she says,
“It is astonishing that so much anger can be contained behind such a mild
facade.”
Throughout her book, Ullman reveals how deeply her childhood
experiences have shaped her. “I will never forget,” she recalls painfully,
“the loneliness I knew as a child. ... For me, the sense of isolation was the
traumatic experience . . . . I have grown up and at times still feel the
outsider, believing that everyone else is part of some togetherness.” About
her father's death, which was followed closely by the deaths of her
grandmother and nurse, Ullman reflects, “That cut into me so deeply that
many of life's experiences relate to it. The void Papa's death left in me
became a kind of cavity, into which later experiences were to be laid.”
Ullman admits that she feels limited by her own fear of death, and describes
how some of the intense roles which she played as an actress—roles which
Bergman actually developed with her in mind— forced her to confront the
reality of her own death.
Changing is a book of self-exploration, a confessional and yet not a
confessional because Ullman retains a dignity and privacy beneath her
openness. She prefers not to expose any lurid secrets or to divulge any
intimate details about her sexual life. Her retrograde Pluto indicates a
natural reticence and self-control, but does not by any means silence her
desire to express herself. SATURN STATIONARY IN ARIES LATE IN THE 9th HOUSE Ullman's stationary Saturn in Aries also enables her to “put the brakes on”
her self-expression, as well as to successfully control her emotional and
physical energy, channeling it into the dramatic roles which require her total
involvement and concentration. Its stationary position can result at times in
an obsession with her career, as well as in a tendency to get stuck repeatedly
in the same kinds of work issues, roles or behaviors.
Because it is in the 9th house, Ullman has a quite rigorous sense of
ethics, which contributes to the guilt she feels when she does not live up to
her own expectations. She also takes her beliefs quite seriously and
attempts to clarify her understanding in a systematic way so that she may
clearly grasp the meaning underlying her experiences. This position,
accentuated by its closeness to the M.C., suggests her willingness to apply
herself to education or training related to her professional goals, and a
desire for a career which furthers her own personal development and
enables her to travel or make long distance contacts. She does not, however,
easily relax or feel at home in foreign environments.
Because her Saturn is stationary, Ullman is at times obsessed with her
father or with men who become father figures to her. Her relationship with
her own father would have influenced her philosophical approach to life
and her quest for understanding.
COMMENTARY: Many of Ullman's previously mentioned perceptions and
experiences support the above interpretation. Her father's death resulted in
her turning inward at an early age, seeking meaning in her life; her most
important relationships with men were with Jappe and Bergman, who were
considerably older than her and were, to some extent, father figures.
Ullman attended acting school in order to prepare herself for her career,
which has involved much travel and contact with new people. Although she
enjoys travelling, she admits that she is shy with strangers, frequently
homesick, and does not adapt well to new environments. Because her work
is so important to her, Ullman frequently chooses professional commitments
over domestic joys and responsibilities, and says of herself, “What I need
from a man is that . . . he should know that it is as a working woman that I
am happy and can make him happy.”
Although Ullman did flaunt conventional morality by living with
Bergman for 5 years and bearing his child, she does have a strong sense of
personal morality, evident in her unwillingness to appear nude in films, and in her guilt at not being the dedicated mother or at not always knowing her
lines. “My guilt is deep-seated,” she says. “Bad conscience is part of my
everyday life.” SOUTH NODE IN TAURUS CONJUNCT URANUS
RETROGRADELATE IN THE 10th HOUSE
Ullman's nodal placements summarize many of the important
characteristics in her chart. The South Node in Taurus in the 10th house
suggests that she feels pulled toward earning her income and maintaining
her self-worth through developing her professional resources. The
conjunction to retrograde Uranus suggests a natural ease in following her
own intuition, in remaining aware of and coping with change, and in being
an independent individual, freely creating her own unique lifestyle. Uranus'
retrograde placement both enhances her psychological understanding and
increases her inner restlessness; it does not, like a direct Uranus in the 10th
house, incline her to exhibit herself in a highly unconventional or radical
manner.
Because of the combined influence of the South Node and Uranus in
Ullman's 10th house, she is capable of acting with a minimal amount of
direction, relying on her own intuition and psychological insight to create
deeply revealing portrayals of character. She also thrives on changes of
pace in her career and develops many professional friendships.
Ullman's North Node in Scorpio in the 4th house indicates that she
should be confronting the deepest issues of her personal life and expressing
her perceptiveness and healing, transforming influence in her home, rather
than merely channelling her emotional intensity into her acting. She needs
to build a base, a security on an inner level which will enable her to
regenerate herself and find adequate outlets for her pentup emotions. Using
her South Node to fulfill the purpose of her North Node, Ullman can benefit
by drawing upon the resources she has developed professionally—-her
income, her sense of security, her artistic talents, her psychological
understanding—to build more enduring home and family ties, and to
strengthen her own inner foundations.
COMMENTARY: Again, Ullman's description of herself so far
substantiates her nodal placements. The South Node conjunction to Uranus
is particularly evident. She has experienced herself as an outsider, living an alternative lifestyle, even to the point of inviting scandal because of her
relationship with Bergman, who has been lover, director and friend. She
acknowledges that her intuition has always been her strong point in her
acting, and she most frequently plays psychological roles which allow her
to freely draw upon her own insight and experience. In her autobiography,
aptly entitled Changing, she expresses again and again how she thrives on
the unpredictabilities of her life. “Is this not where life's possibilities lie?
Not necessarily to arrive, but always to be on the way, in movement,” she
writes.
But does Ullman express her 4th house North Node sufficiently? Yes and
no. Curiously enough, many of her movies and plays have had 4th house
titles and themes, focusing on intense domestic struggles or closeness to the
land—A Doll's House, The New Land, The Emigrants, Scenes From A
Marriage, Autumn Sonata. While she says, “the private life must be the
most important,” Ullman nevertheless does find that the pull of her
professional life often overpowers her desire for a fully satisfying home life.
Yet at the same time, she does not allow herself to become overly dependent
upon the limelight and she does not regard her professional success as her
primary source of security. She is coming to terms with her nodal axis, is
groping to remain in touch with her deepest self, with her inner center.
Aware of how she used to give her power away both professionally and
personally, she is able, as she completes Changing, to state with conviction,
“The only real safety in the world is the safety I feel in myself.” PART III THE PROCESS OF ASTROLOGICAL
COUNSELING & INTERPRETATION Chapter Nine ASTROLOGY AS A COUNSELING TOOL
Knowing how to synthesize and interpret a chart is a prerequisite for
becoming an astrologer. But your knowledge alone is not sufficient for you
to effectively impart what you know in a manner which benefits others and
which responds to their needs. Whether you do brief interpretations for
friends, or are beginning to charge fees to clients for astrological
consultations, you are using your astrological understanding as a counseling
tool to influence other people's lives, and you have a moral responsibility to
develop your awareness of the counseling process and your counseling
skills.
This book does not pretend to train you as a counselor. Any astrology
student planning to use astrology directly with people is advised to enroll in
one or more counseling courses, to read books on the counseling process
itself, and to gain experiential supervised practice with counseling skills.
Only one small facet of counseling involves interpretation and imparting
information—the two domains which are usually the focus of astrological
work. But even if you define yourself as an astrologer or interpreter rather
than an astrological counselor, you are still exposing yourself to situations
in which other people are turning to you for help with stated or unstated
needs. Because of their needs, and because of the potent archetypal impact
of astrological symbols, you are likely to have a significant influence upon
their conceptions of themselves and their attitudes toward their lives. For
this reason, you have an ethical obligation to be sensitive to the nuances of
your interpersonal interaction.
In this section of this book, we will address some of the basic issues with
which you may struggle as you attempt to utilize astrology interpersonally.
What are your aims in conducting a consultation? What qualities do you
need to develop and express as an astrologer and counselor? How is an
astrologer similar to and different from a non-astrological counselor, and to
what extent do you personally choose to maximize your counseling, as
distinct from astrological skills? What psychological characteristics and problems are likely to interfere with your responsible functioning in this
role?
After addressing these preliminary issues, we will consider such facets of
the astrological counseling process as: beginning the astrologer/client
relationship, the constructive use of interpretation and advice-giving, and
the use of counseling interventions which can help deepen and facilitate the
integration of astrological material. The final chapter of this book again
returns to content rather than process and demonstrates the application of
psychological insight to the interpretation of the signs. The Aims of the Astrologer
First, let us consider the aims of the astrologer. Most of us, as astrology
students and astrologers, share most of the following aims:
1. We wish to help our client/friend clarify and gain a realistic self-image,
which involves an accurate assessment of her strengths and potential
as well as areas of weakness and conflict. Such an assessment may
involve a redefinition of the self, a relinquishing of illusions in regard
to both positive and negative tendencies.
2. We wish to enable our client/friend to increase her self-acceptance, to
appreciate her individuality and uniqueness, and to therefore be able to
conceptually hold her difficulties in a more affirming manner.
3. We wish to confirm and therefore support our client's sense of self and
sense of reality, particularly insofar as astrological interpretation
confirms these perceptions and translates what may have been vague
intimations into clearly defined language. Júpiter . We wish to help our client develop a more viable philosophy of life, or
a belief system which makes sense to her, gives meaning to suffering,
imparts a sense of purpose, and provides guidance for more effective
living. Developing such a belief system, along with the overall
perspective which astrology can provide, may involve challenging
false, outdated or destructive assumptions and beliefs transmitted by
parents and society.
5. We wish to support our client in her attempt to gain understanding and
choose paths of action which will help her to progress and overcome
her primary life difficulties. As she gains more objectivity and clarity
in regard to her conflicts, she becomes more capable of surmounting
them.
6. We wish to help our client empower herself, not only to expand her
awareness of options and alternatives, but also to build the hope, faith,
courage and motivation necessary to take more active responsibility
for her life.
7. We wish, particularly in our use of transits and progressions, to impart
to our client an understanding of cycles, and a long-range perspective
on her patterns, challenges and opportunities, so that she may develop not only patience and a sense of order, but also an appropriate sense of
timing in regard to action.
How are we likely to meet these aims, or at least to plant the seeds by which
these aims can begin to take root within an astrological consultation?
Developing such expertise is certainly a matter of understanding and
practice, as well as clear intention. Holding these aims within ourselves and
reminding ourselves of them continually may enable us to speak and act in
a manner which is in keeping with them. However, we may also need to
translate them into more concrete terms. We may wish therefore to ask:
what qualities or characteristics do we need to possess, and what specific
forms of behavior would enable us, as astrologers, to best impart these
aims? We Can Use Astrology In A Variety of Ways:
AS A CRUTCH: “Beware the Woman, too, and shun her Sight
Who, in these Studies, does her self Delight,
By whom a greasy Almanack is born,
With often handling like chaste Amber, worn;
. . . She if the Scheme a fatal Journey show,
Stays safe at Home, but lets her Husband go.
If but a Mile she Travel out of Town
The Planetary House must first be known.”
—from The Sixth Satire by Juvenal
AS AN INSTRUMENT OF FEAR . . . OR OF FAITH: “Any possibility can become either a positive or a negative actuality. FEAR
tends to make of it a negative manifestation; FAITH turns it into a positive
fact. The central problem . . . is therefore the transmutation of fear into
faith. Astrologically speaking, this means acquiring a constructive attitude
to one's ‘bad’ aspects.”
—from Astrology and the Modern Psyche by Dane Rudhyar “Will the astrologer only crystallize and focalize fear by his forecasts; will
he extend the scope of his client's confusion and sense of disorder—or will
he be able to give to him, who, consciously or subconsciously yearns for
guidance into a new realm of order the faith that this new realm exists and
can be reached?”
—from The Practice of Astrology by Dane Rudhyar
AS AN EXERCISE IN INTELLIGENCE AND INTUITION: “The interpretation of symbols demands intelligence. It cannot be turned
into a mechanical system and then crammed into unimaginative brains. It
demands an increasing selfawareness on the part of the interpreter . . . One
may follow all the right rules and yet get bogged down in the most
appalling nonsense, simply by overlooking a seemingly unimportant detail
that a better intelligence would not have missed. Even a man of high
intellect can go badly astray for a lack of intuition or feeling.”
—from Man and His Symbols by C. G. Jung
AS A CHANNEL OF DIVINE ENERGIES: “Ye are part and parcel of a universal consciousness or God—and thus all
that is within the universal consciousness, or the universal awareness; as
the stars, the planets, the sun, the moon. Do ye rule them or they rule thee?
They were made for thy own use, as an individual.
“Astrology is a fact, in most instances. But astrological aspects are but
signs, symbols. No influence is of greater value or of greater help than the
will of the individual.
“Use such directions [from the planets] as stepping stones. Do not let them
become stumbling stones in thy experience. “
—Edgar Cayce from Astrology and the Edgar Cayce Readings by
Margaret H. Gammon
“The astrologer is a priest in the temple of the cosmos; he speaks for the
old gods who reside in the farthermost and the innermost. It is his duty to
teach as well as to delineate. The surest way to re-establish the dignity of
the science of astrology is to challenge the astrologers themselves. They
must realize that it is not enough to delineate charts according to the
opinions of diversified authors. The astrologer must practice his science
from deep and beautiful convictions within himself. He must realize his responsibility not only to his client but to the great assembly of the stars to
which he has dedicated himself as a servant in their house.”
—from The Philosophy of Astrology by Manly Palmer Hall Qualities of An Effective Astrologer
1. An effective astrologer is able to perceive and respond to the actual
and immediate needs of the client, not merely his or her own
intellectual preconceptions.
2. An effective astrologer relates to the client first and the chart second.
The chart is a means to an end, not the end itself.
3. An effective astrologer communicates acceptance, respect for the
client's needs and sensitivities, as well as hope and encouragement. Júpiter . An effective astrologer speaks clearly and concretely in a language
which the client can understand. He or she is able to translate
astrological symbols into concepts and specific examples which the
client, in her life situation, can utilize.
5. An effective astrologer helps to discover or create clarity and order in
the midst of chaos, by helping the client to focus upon key issues
rather than become lost in peripheral concerns, and by helping to
clarify the problems which exist and the alternative understandings and
actions available.
6. An effective astrologer imparts a constructive philosophy which gives
meaning to suffering and provides an organizing principle in the face
of uncertainty and confusion. Such a philosophy involves the longterm perspective which results from the understanding of patterns and
cycles. It also requires the astrologer to view immediate issues through
the lens of perceiving the overall pattern.
7. An effective astrologer allows the client's needs to predominate over
his or her own needs, and therefore lets the locus of control reside with
the client. Such an attitude requires respect for the client's feelings in
the moment, and for the client's capacity to understand and integrate
the material presented so that he or she is not overloaded with more
information than can be assimilated. Such an attitude also encourages
the client to make his or her own choices and take action, rather than
indicate that the astrologer has all the answers and all the power.
Interest in and respect for the client's needs and feelings also requires
that the astrologer ask questions, elicit information, give feedback and
support, and otherwise engage in real dialogue, rather than serve
merely as an imparter of information. How are these qualities and actions similar to or different from those of a
non-astrological counselor? Because systems of counseling and personality
styles in counselors vary considerably, no simple answer exists. However,
certain qualities are primary for an effective non-astrological counselor,
which may be only secondary for an astrologer. Usually, a counselor
maximizes her empathic abilities and is more concerned with facilitating
the client's understanding and expression of feeling than in imparting her
own beliefs of a recognized system of thought. He or she encourages
emotional expression, listens carefully and perceptively, and reflects back
his or her understanding of the client's communication. Rather than
directing the session according to a personal agenda, the counselor allows
the client to determine the movement, structure and purpose of the session.
Most counselors do less than 20 percent of the talking in a session; taking a
backstage position, they provide the environment and safety for a client to
express herself and discover from within herself her own feelings, patterns,
needs, and alternatives.
Most clients who consult a counselor or a psychotherapist (who works
more intensively and psychodynamically) establish a close relationship
based on weekly sessions for a time period ranging from three months to
ten years. Counselors do not expect significant insight or change to occur
after only one or two sessions. Beginning astrologers who are hoping to
have a dramatic impact upon the life situations of their clients may need to
develop respect for the slow and intensive process by which real change
occurs.
Astrological interpretation is not counseling in the true sense of the word.
To what extent you wish to develop and utilize your specific counseling
capabilities, such as your listening, reflecting and facilitating skills, is a
matter of individual choice. However, for your astrological session to be
more than a “head trip” for the client, to have a constructive impact, with
the power and focus to mobilize new attitudes and actions, you will need to
learn and make use of at least rudimentary communication and counseling
skills. An assessment of your own capabilities based on personal awareness
and astrological understanding may help you to determine your weaknesses
and, therefore, the capacities you wish to develop. Are you a fire and air
person with a lack of water, tending to ignore the feeling realm and
unintentionally treading upon the sensitivities of a Pisces or Cancer person?
Do you, as your Mercury opposition Neptune confirms, tend to communicate in vague, esoteric and roundabout generalities, and need to
learn to concretize and ground your thinking process so that you can help an
earth person who is preoccupied with practical decision-making? An
effective astrologer, like an effective counselor, is flexible, and able to vary
her style and communications in accordance with the temperament and
needs of the individual client. The Astrologer's Problem Areas as a Counselor
Conducting an astrology session is a demanding task, not only in terms of
the knowledge required to interpret and synthesize a chart, but also because
of the interpersonal responsibility. Lacking rigorous and sustained training
in psychological systems, counseling skills and counseling ethics, many
astrologers allow their own conscious and unconscious needs and problems
to intrude upon the client. No counseling professional, whether
psychotherapist, social worker or mental health counselor, is completely
able to overcome such tendencies; we are all human and are all influenced
by our blind spots, complexes, compulsions and unresolved emotional
issues of the past. However, in order to be as responsible and helpful as we
can be, we need to develop the courage to confront ourselves, accurately
assess our limitations, and apply ourselves to overcoming those which
clearly interfere with our aims and responsibilities.
The following questions, presented in another form and discussed in
more detail in The Astrology of Self-Discovery, are meant to serve as
guidelines in helping you to pinpoint and clarify some of the problems
which may interfere with your competence and constructiveness as an
astrological counselor. Even if you are just beginning to interpret charts and
are tentatively presenting your brief interpretations to friends, you may
want to answer these questions and clarify the attitudes and behaviors
which are currently influencing you. Most astrologers, after their first year
of consultations, develop habitual methods of interpreting and counseling
which are difficult to change. The more conscious you are of your style and
process as you begin, and the more intention you develop in regard to your
aims, the more likely you are to evolve a style of counseling and
interpretation which will serve you for many years.
1. Do you experience yourself as superior to your client, by virtue of your
knowledge, understanding and/or lifestyle? Do you express yourself as
a know-it-all, a guru with all of the answers, using the astrological
chart as an authority to mask your own need for power and authority,
and your own lack of respect for or devaluation of your client's
understanding, needs, feelings and life experience?
2. Do you, because of your urge to be needed or to have value as a helper,
encourage the dependency of your clients? Do you prefer that they rely upon your advice, rather than turn to themselves and learn to trust their
own guidance? Do you, because of your urge to please others, give
clients and friends what they appear to want rather than what they may
actually need?
3. Does your desire for attention lead you to do all the talking in a
session? Do you show off your expertise rather than tune into the
needs of the other person and continually assess whether you are
responding to them? Are you able to maintain an illusion of your
considerable helping capacity by hearing only your own voice,
empowered with the authority of astrological archetypes, rather than
eliciting feedback and being willing to enter into the realities of your
client's world? Júpiter . Are you intent upon imparting truth as you conceive it, and therefore
intruding your own philosophy upon your clients? Do you pass off
your own ideas and values under the cloak of astrological authority?
5. Does your own sense of powerlessness, your own dependence upon
planetary guidance and your own lack of trust in your own resources
apart from astrological knowledge lead you to disempower your
clients, imparting deterministic attitudes rather than actively
encouraging and mobilizing their own will and trust in themselves? Do
your negativities and fears regarding certain planets and signs
influence your interpretation and result in your imparting
pronouncements which could become destructively self-fulfilling
prophecies? (If so, see worksheet on page 143.)
6. Does your lack of real emotional self-awareness, as distinct from
intellectual understanding, lead you to project your own conflicts onto
your clients, so that you encounter your own shadow in the session,
rather than the actual person in front of you? (If so, see worksheet on
following page.)
7. Are you emotionally disconnected, out of touch with your feelings and
other people's feelings, and therefore inclined to overvalue the mind
and to intellectualize? Are you unable to impart understanding in a
manner which is connected to emotion, or which facilitates the gutlevel insight capable of being translated into action?
8. Do you speak in astrological jargon which your client can't understand,
using language of mystical authority to create the illusion that you are
imparting high truths, when indeed you may be saying little of significance? Do you speak in vague, ungrounded generalities,
avoiding addressing the real here-and-now concrete issues with which
your client struggles? Mercúrio . Are you a victim of information compulsion, driven to feed your mind
and other people's minds without regard for the capacities of
assimilation, integration and application to everyday living? Are you
more concerned with revealing how much you know and covering all
the facets of the chart than you are with really using astrology to help
your client?
Most professional astrologers are guilty on occasion of at least several of
the above inadequacies, because of their personality dynamics and
unresolved conflicts. The more courageously you are willing to confront
and mobilize your resources to improve yourself in those areas in which
you are deficient, the more likely you are to increase your self-respect,
confidence and efficacy as an astrological counselor.
ASTROLOGY AND YOUR SHADOW: A Worksheet for Overcoming Fear and Negativity
1. What planetary positions, aspects, etc., do you view as negative in
your own chart (or in regard to transits)? Which ones are difficult for
you to appreciate? How and why?
2. List at least three constructive attitudes that you might develop in
regard to each of these planets or aspects. You might want to reflect
upon what you've learned from them, how you've grown as a result of
them, and what hidden strengths lie buried within the conflicts you've
experienced.
3. What planetary positions, signs, etc., in the charts of others elicit
negative reactions in you? Which “push your buttons” easily? How
and why? How do you usually respond? Júpiter . How is this planet/sign/aspect a part of you? How and why do you
disown it in yourself? What is the result? (Repeat “I am such and such
a way” in order to get in touch with how this quality may be a part of
you and what feelings it stirs up for you.)
5. What would help you to accept this part of yourself more fully? How
can you give it room to unfold, so that its more positive characteristics
can grow and uproot the negative ones?
6. What is the positive quality hidden within this part of you? List some
of its advantages and the attitudes which you might take to make peace
with this quality within yourself.
7. What attitudes might you hold and what actions might you take in
order to accept this quality more fully in other people? How might you
be aware of your negativity/conflicts in regard to this quality, and alter
your responses to it, so that it does not intrude upon your counseling? Chapter Ten THE ASTROLOGICAL COUNSELING
PROCESS
Every astrologer has a different method of preparing and conducting
astrology readings. Each of us has a unique personality dynamic, thought
process, communication style, and set of talents, as indicated by our charts.
You will, in time, evolve your own style in accordance with your nature.
In this chapter, I present my own process for preparing and conducting an
astrology session, and discuss counseling issues pertaining to interpretation
and advice-giving. Readers should not view my approach as gospel; it is
based on my experience, and suited to my personality, as reflected in my
own chart. Hopefully, however, it includes some insights which will help
you to further improve and develop your own process of astrological
counseling. The Astrological Session: Preliminary Steps
My own procedure, when clients first call or email me for a consultation, is
to begin by asking them their experience with astrology and their specific
aims for a session. Why do they want an appointment, and why now? What
issues and problems are they currently addressing? What are their
expectations in regard to what astrology can do for them? I also ask a few
questions concerning the context of their lives—age, occupation,
relationship status, and primary concerns in the present and immediate
future.
Occasionally, but rarely, I will turn away potential astrology clients
because their aims do not correlate with my approach to astrology (they
might have an attitude of “what's going to happen to me?” rather than
“what's influencing me, and how can I best respond to it?”), or because
their emotional problems appear so serious that they need deeper
psychotherapeutic work before they're in a position to use astrology
constructively. I learned long ago not to let financial need determine
whether or not I see a client—if I do not feel right about such a consultation
and do it only because I need the money, it usually feels counter-productive,
and undermines my own integrity.
To this day, I still regret a few choices I made decades ago, agreeing to
do consultations for clients that my judgment told me not to see—one who
only wanted to know when her picture would appear on the cover of
Playboy, and cancelled her check when I didn't tell her what she wanted to
hear; another, who told me during a tape-recorded session focusing on her
readiness to leave her husband, that he was in the mafia, and was not only
threatening to kill her if she left him, but also anyone who helped her leave
him. My own criteria for seeing clients: When in doubt, don't.
I may also turn away clients if they are do not know their birth times
within an hour because I am not an expert on rectification and do not wish
to influence clients by presenting faulty information. I will turn them away
—and refer them elsewhere—if, due to my own areas of expertise and
approach, I do not feel capable of answering their questions or meeting their
needs. Finally, I will refuse to see clients when I have a gut feeling that they
are not going to follow through or will be TROUBLE. Fortunately and unfortunately, because I have written a book on the
twelfth house, I attract clients who have a number of twelfth house planets
or planetary configurations which incline them toward indirect behavior.
Many are a joy to know, and very reliable, but others have demonstrated
passive-aggressive behavioral patterns—“forgetting” the appointment
several times in a row, providing me with the wrong birth information,
showing up a day early or a day late, bouncing checks or “forgetting” to
sign them. As a psychotherapist, I have learned to cope with a variety of
resistant behaviors, but if I am doing only one session for a client I do not
know, and spending a few hours preparing in advance, I do not have the
patience or the time to deal with this kind of behavior. Sometimes, but not
always, I can sense this approaching “trouble” during the initial phone call.
If I have such a gut feeling later, when preparing the session, I will contact
the client to confirm the appointment and make clear my own cancellation
policies.
Most clients, however, are eager for their sessions, and conscientious
about showing up. I only mention the above circumstances because these
are the kinds of issues which most stump beginning astrologers who may
know their astrology, but have little experience with the interpersonal
dynamics of astrology sessions.
In my initial conversation with a potential client, I describe my own
philosophy and use of astrology, and, if appropriate, my training and
experience. I then explain the details of my consultation policies—that I
conduct five kinds of sessions (in addition to a private practice as a
counselor/psychotherapist, separate from my astrological practice):
1) natal;
2) in-depth transits and progressions (after initial natal session);
3) combined natal and transits/progressions focusing only on most
significant astrological indicators; Júpiter ) special interest (natal and transits/progressions, but with an
intensive focus on one issue only);
5) and relationship readings including chart comparison and composite
(only after at least one natal reading).
Then I clarify my fees, indicating that a deposit is due a week in advance,
and clarifying my cancellation policy. In the past, whether due to my having an exact t-square to Uranus in the 7th house or because I seem to be a 12th
house magnet, I continually experienced no-show clients. As a result, I
learned long ago not to begin preparing a chart until I have received the
initial deposit. This may not be necessary for some astrologers; each of us
must devise a system that meets our needs, as well as the needs of our
clients.
I also discuss scheduling options, usually based upon 90-minute taperecorded sessions, either in person or by telephone. Since I offer a special
“package deal” when clients book two sessions (usually natal and
transits/progressions or natal and relationships), we sometimes book two
sessions, usually a few weeks apart to allow time for processing and
absorbing the first session. Because I am also a licensed counselor,
sometimes a client books a non-astrological counseling session as a first
session or as a follow-up session.
Once we have agreed upon the time for a session, I record in my client
record book (where I have been already taking notes) the client's name,
address, telephone number, email address, and birth data. In order to ensure
accuracy, I always repeat back to clients the birth data they have told me, as
well as ask the source, and if they know whether it was given to them in
standard time or daylight savings time. Since I am not an expert in
rectification, I do not do a consultation unless the birth time is known
within an hour. Even if a birth time if inaccurate by thirty minutes, the chart
axes may be inaccurate by seven or eight degrees, and planets positioned
near the beginning or end of a house may be in the next house.
Usually, I also mail or email clients my detailed consultation form,
included here in the appendix (see page 179). Since I am not trying to prove
to clients the accuracy of astrology, but rather aim to be helpful to them, I
find that the more background information they provide before the session,
the more deeply I can penetrate the mysteries of their chart. If the client is
uncomfortable with the process of filling out a form, we arrange to do a
preliminary interview (which I may conduct during this initial
conversation), usually lasting about fifteen minutes.
The conversation usually ends with a confirmation of time and fee,
directions to my office or instructions for a telephone call, and a reminder
for them to bring a recording device or tape for an in-person reading. (For
long-distance phone consultations, I record the session through my phone,
and mail them the tape). Often, I suggest that, if they have any more information or questions that they would like me to know before our
session, they contact me again before our appointment or enclose an
additional note with their deposit and interview form, which I expect to
receive a week before the scheduled appointment.
This initial conversation will indeed vary, and may even be less formal or
intensive if the client is a friend or an acquaintance rather than a complete
stranger. After this pre-session conversation or email exchange, I send my
interview form, with an additional page describing my services, fees, and
policies, and a confirmation of the appointment time and place, with
directions if needed. Preparing the Astrological Session
The next step is calculating the chart. Even if the client is only seeking a
natal session, I also calculate outer planet transits and secondary
progressions, usually extending from about two months into the past until
about six months into the future. If the session is to focus upon transits and
progressions, I calculate the outer planets and progressions for two years.
Some astrologers conduct astrology sessions without any preparation
beyond chart calculation. I have occasionally envied them, and wished that
I didn't have such 9th house Virgo conscientiousness, or difficulty doing
“off-the-cuff” interpretation. Because of my psychological training, I am
oriented toward uncovering the central dynamics of the personality and
understanding the nature of imbalances and deficits, their source in personal
experience, and the process of healing them. Doing so for me takes
considerable preparation and incubation time. My approach and intentions
may not be viable for many astrologers; I present it only to help readers
learn from it, and to reflect upon and develop their own process.
My first step in preparing the session is to calculate the charts. I use
AstrolDeluxe for Windows software, now called AstrolDeluxe ReportWriter3 Usually I print out two copies of the natal chart, summary of
features, aspects list, midpoints lists, outer planets transits, secondary
progressions, progressed chart for current date and a year later, and any
other information relevant to the aims of the session.
Because I have found no astrology software which provides all the
information I want, I also pull out my ephemeris and manually determine:
a) eclipses affecting the chart in the present and near future; and b)
significant stations of transiting outer planets and inner planet conjunctions
affecting the chart; c) lunar node transits. If focusing intensively on one
area of life, I dig deeper using the calculated information—for example,
noting outer planet transits conjuncting significant midpoints, etc. This
additional information I will annotate on my set of charts. On separate
pages, I will also summarize my initial impression of key features, while
drawing in major aspects with colored pens (red: square, blue: trine, green:
sextile, violet: opposition, orange: inconjunct).
The next step is reading over the client interview form and/or my notes
from the initial interview. Whether or not I am interpreting transits and progressions for the client, I note the positions of outer planets, as well as
Mars and significant lunations for the time of the client's inquiry, and the
date of the session. Such information helps me adapt to the client's state of
mind, so that the session is not merely an exercise in information-giving,
and is more likely to impact the client on a deeper level than the intellect.
I also glance at the distant future in order to view the client's present
concerns in context and gain a sense of what is emerging and what
constructive developments I wish to reinforce. Do I, for example, really
want to encourage a woman to drop out of her Ph.D. program to make a
down payment on a house she can't afford, when the only astrological
influence supporting her choice is transiting Jupiter in her empty 4th house?
Perhaps in several years, Saturn will conjunct her late 8th house Pluto, and
then her Sun and Mercury early in the 9th. At such a time, she may be
having serious financial problems, and be more interested in her studies
than her house. Sometimes a client is preoccupied with a transitory desire
related to a short-term transit, and may later regret making long-range
decisions which undermine more lasting values, desires or goals. Better
perhaps, in this case, to express Jupiter in the 4th house by spending a few
weeks overseas in England, finding accommodations in a grand country
inn!
This orientation toward future context also involves determining the
degrees and times of the clients' progressed New and Full Moons— usually
the last one that occurred and the next one which will be influencing them. I
then look up the Sabian Symbols for each one in Dane Rudhyar's An
Astrological Mandala.
Of course, this work is based on the worksheets and system provided in
this book which I internalized long ago (a process which is likely to happen
for any reader who uses this system). After a few dozen times using these
worksheets, you will no longer need them because the process will become
second nature. I now draw intuitively from the system presented in this
book; it provides the framework for the notes I take when writing up the
main features of the chart for further reflection. Along with this system, I
also rely upon my intuition, which often enables me to notice unexpected
patterns in the chart—unrelated features which reinforce each other or
compensate and balance each other. For example, a client's lack of the fire
element may be reinforced by his Mars conjunct Neptune in Libra, the opposite signs of Mars' Aries rulership. Or a 12th house Saturn may find
outer expression through Mars in Capricorn rising.
Occasionally—more often than I like to admit—I stare at the chart, all
the calculated material, and notes, and I DON't HAVE A CLUE. Despite 35
years of practicing astrology, I sometimes look at a chart and am unable to
perceive anything beyond the most superficial “cookbook” interpretations.
Usually, at this point, I must struggle with the internal voices berating me
with their unhelpful negativity (“I can't do this,” “This is impossible!”
“What the hell am I doing anyway, pretending to be an astrologer?”). Once,
however, I break through the internal battle lines and focus upon one feature
in the chart, the meanings of other features begin to reveal themselves, and I
am able to comprehend the essential strengths and conflicts indicated in the
chart, and their interrelationship.
Often, I write more than I will use, since I operate initially from a
Virgoan method of preparation, and a much more Piscean 3rd house flowwith-the-moment approach during the actual session. But my own process
requires extensive preparation; otherwise I am spending consultation time
attempting to decipher the chart and conceptualize what I see rather than
attuning myself to my client's energy, responses and questions.
When preparing a reading, I am not only interpreting what I see; I am
also attempting to frame my understanding in a way which will be useful to
my client. As a Libra, I tend to be aware of contradictions and polarities,
and to consider both the positive and negative dimensions of astrological
features. With some planetary positions or configurations, I have particular
biases or must struggle to overcome the influence of traditional
interpretations which deem Mars, Saturn, and Pluto as malignant.
How, for example, might an astrologer grasp the potential of a Mars
square Saturn aspect, especially when transiting Pluto is conjuncting Mars
and squaring Saturn? Reflecting upon how the planets in question might
operate as a trine or sextile, or otherwise cooperate, is helpful. Such a
transit can enable a person to draw upon a previously untapped level of
resourcefulness and personal power, in order to take on difficult challenges
and overcome internal and external obstacles. But in order to do so, he or
she may need to learn to tolerate frustration and develop a long-term
perspective.
Astrologers who have been trained to interpret Mars, Saturn, and Pluto
influences negatively can benefit by becoming aware of this tendency, and attempting to befriend those three powerful planets. Awareness of our
biases and gaps in our understanding can help us overcome them, or find
viable methods of compensation.
Sometimes, studying the chart, I become aware that a client is asking
“the wrong questions” and that what is emerging or what is needed is
significantly different than what he or she has been considering. In this
case, I prepare myself both to answer the client's questions and to respond
to his or her conscious needs, while also being ready to introduce a new
perspective or paradigm when and if the timing is right to do so.
In some cases, the central issues I perceive in the chart are not related to
what is in the chart, but rather to what is missing or weak. For example, a
woman with a 10th house Saturn/Neptune conjunction and a 12th house
Moon and Venus may be focused upon finding the perfect career, and
unable to make a choice because her dissatisfaction really stems from
neglect of personal needs or contact with her feelings. This must be
addressed if the client is to gain real benefit from the session (rather than
simply accumulate information) and if she is open to hearing it.
Finally, the astrological chart can indicate the nature of the interpersonal
process I am likely to experience when the client arrives or telephones. A
man with Scorpio rising may give little feedback and want to hear “the
harsh truth”—no tactful Libran pussyfooting for him. A woman with a
retrograde Mercury/Pluto conjunction in the 12th house may hear my most
neutral comments as judgment, and use them as ammunition against herself,
rather than as helpful insight. A person with a stationary Mercury in Gemini
squaring the Moon may have so much to say that there will not be time for
me to cover a wide range of issues; therefore, I might best use my
preparation time to clarify essential points rather than attempt to cover too
much ground. Conducting the Astrological Session
When clients arrive, some social conversation is usually necessary in order
to establish rapport and help them feel at ease. Discussion of the weather,
traffic, or offers of coffee or spring water may be followed by more
personal questions such as, “Before I begin, is there anything that you didn't
tell me before that you want me to know, or anything else you want to ask?”
A client may be anxious, afraid that I know all her secrets or foresee
imminent catastrophe. If she is new to astrology or I sense her anxiety, I
may ask, “How does it feel to be ready to learn about yourself from a
stranger?” or “Do you have any concerns about this session that you want to
express before we start?”
If she has never had her chart interpreted before, I give her a copy of her
chart (with supplemental material), annotated with keywords to describe
primary factors, and explain in rudimentary terms the nature and interaction
of planets, signs, houses, and aspects. With newcomers to astrology, I try to
limit my use of astrological jargon.
I then briefly summarize again my approach to astrology, and present my
process for conducting a session—a process which usually involves brief
monologues on my part, time out for questions and answers, another
delineation period, questions and answers, and so forth. This process varies,
for I encourage the client to interrupt me when she doesn't understand, or
has questions or feedback. My sessions vary considerably, depending upon
the individual client and the dynamic we create together.
Usually, I begin my interpretation process by summarizing the main
features I see in the chart. However, if one feature is grabbing my attention
more than any other, or I have a clear response to one of the client's
immediate concerns, I may begin by focusing on that. Although I don't
consciously control my emotional expression, the enthusiasm of my Aries
Moon generally inclines me to spontaneously express what I find most
interesting in the chart, and my Moon's opposition to Sun and Neptune in
Libra helps me to stay alert and responsive to my client's state of mind.
Undoubtedly, imparting interest, appreciation, and acceptance of the client's
personal dynamics and life experience (and confidence in the client's ability
to make progress overcoming conflicts and surmounting obstacles) helps to
create rapport and enables the client to benefit from the session With students of astrology, I usually explain which factors in the chart
lead me to make specific interpretations. If in a particular circumstance, I
am drawing entirely from my intuition rather than the chart itself, I let the
client know so that he or she may evaluate my “hunch” accordingly.
Occasionally, I diverge from my agenda because clients wish to focus indepth upon a particular issue, or need to express their concerns at length or
vent emotions. Such time for emotional expression is essential, particularly
when clients are in crisis. In such circumstances, they may be unable to
intellectually assess their situation or be receptive to new understandings
until they have discharged their feelings. Because I am also a licensed
mental health counselor, I may allow the session to stray far away from
astrology, if that is what the client needs and prefers, and to book a future
session to continue with the interpretation of the chart. However, I would
not advise astrologers who are not trained in counseling, and are not
experienced in dealing with serious emotional problems, to open the door to
in-depth expression or exploration of potentially traumatic areas of the
chart. Gently suggesting therapeutic help is the best option.
If the session seems to be moving in one particular direction, to the
neglect of focusing on features of the chart which I have previously
considered important, I usually “process the process” with clients, and let
them decide how they wish to use the remainder of their time.
Each session varies, in accordance with the temperament and needs of
each client, and often my own temperament on that particular day. Some
clients wish to talk more than listen. Others are inhibited or reserved,
hesitating to ask questions or volunteer information; they may need to be
drawn out, or allowed to maintain their privacy.
Sometimes clients are so immersed in one of their planetary personalities
(or transits) that they are unable to connect with other parts of themselves.
This may be particularly true when they have unaspected planets or
disconnected astrological configurations which reveal splits within the
personality. In this case, I may gently remind them of other facets of
themselves which in time will again demand expression. To an
astrologically trained client, I might suggest, “Ask each of your planets how
it responds to your decision. If one is asleep now, it will eventually wake
up, and may sabotage your plans if you have ignored its needs for too long.
What decision can you make here that will satisfy all your planetary selves?” If one planet objects to choices a client is making, she may need to
consider what she can offer it in order to gain its cooperation.
Very rarely, clients want me to tell them what to do in regard to a
particular situation, as if to hand over the reins of their lives to me. I will
not take the reins, or respond to a “What will happen to me?” question in a
manner which supports a passive, reactive approach to their lives. It is more
constructive to them to reframe the question and say, “This is what is
influencing you. It's up to you to decide how to shape or respond to those
influences—I can only point out some of your alternatives.”
In a recent book, The Biology of Belief: Unleashing the Power of
Consciousness, Matter and Miracles, cell biologist Bruce Lipton explains
that our genes do not control our personality or behavior as much as science
has led us to believe, and that our cellular membranes are capable of
growing and changing in a way that may override our genetic
programming. Not only our thoughts, but the powerful influences of our
environment (and the relationships we form) have a significant impact upon
who we become. I emphasize who we become rather than who we are
because we are not fixed entities, and we do have some control over the
personality dynamics we express. Desire and intention influence how we
manifest our planetary selves, but personal will alone may not be sufficient
unless we create the environment and support system to maximize what we
most wish to experience. For this reason, I am inclined not only to help the
client frame his or her thinking about the chart in a constructive way, but
also to consider how changes in his or her environment and relationship
network can make a difference.
Occasionally, I feel stumped or conflicted during the session, and may
choose to verbalize my own experience in a manner which helps me to
become clearer and helps the client to understand the ambiguities or
contradictions I perceive in the chart. At other times, I may not be able to
answer a client's question because I am not an expert in a particular area
(such as financial investments), or because astrology does not provide the
answer. I then say so.
As a Libra, I do not relish those rare occurrences in which I have to
clearly disappoint a client, perhaps because I am unable to provide the
assurance about an issue that he or she seeks (for example, “Tell me that
John Smith is the Prince Charming I've been seeking all my life”). In this
case, I will not tell her what she wants to hear if it does not appear to be true or likely. This, of course, may mean that I'm not providing immediate
gratification or increasing the likelihood of repeat business or referrals.
However, I may let her know that I wish I could give her such assurances.
In such situations, I once wrestled with my Libran inclination to please, but
now content myself with knowing that I am serving the larger Self of the
client, rather than the smaller self.
I may even, after extensive preparation and midway into a session, still
find the water murky, and be unable to perceive, for example, one clear
vocational path or viable timing for selling a house which must be sold. I
then say so. Not all people have strong planetary positions or areas of focus
in their chart. Not all time periods indicate clear and direct paths of
suggested action or change; some years are merely transitional.
Astrologers and astrology clients often seek certainty, and have difficulty
coping with uncertainty, ambiguity, and not knowing. Society, for the most
part, does not respect astrology as a serious profession; its questionable
reputation and lack of universally accepted and required credentials can
contribute to the astrologer's insecurity. “If only I knew what I should do,
when I should act, what the future may bring,” we think, “then I wouldn't be
so anxious and afraid.” Not so, because we never fully know, and because
our minds cannot provide the inner peace and trust that can only result from
a deeper and perhaps higher connection to ourselves, and the life force.
In order to do astrological counseling with integrity and respond to the
real needs of our clients, and not just the purported desires and fears which
they initially present, we need to be able to cope with uncertainty as well as
not-knowing. If we are too personally invested in being an authority, if we
want our clients to trust our guidance instead of their own inner guidance
when the two conflict, or if we want them to become dependent upon us so
that we feel needed and more secure in regard to our income, we are neither
providing a real service to our clients or to the reputation of astrology.
Guidelines influencing my process of conducting an astrology session
include:
1) Keep the original goals for the session in mind, unless you and the
client choose to abandon them and focus elsewhere, or to modify them
because more pressing needs or desires arise.
2) Be alert to the client's physical and emotional expressions,
particularly any signs of discomfort, and respond to them. Pay attention to what is going on in the here-and-now, or the emotional
effectiveness of consultation will be sacrificed. A consultation which
only speaks to the intellect is primarily information-giving, and is not
likely to lead to any deeper insight or change.
3) If conducting a long distance session by telephone, let the client
know that both of you are at a disadvantage without nonverbal cues,
which can lead to misinterpretation of your words by the client or lack
of responsiveness to client's psychological state at the time. Stop
frequently in your “monologues” to check out your client's responses.
Suggest that he or she freely interrupt with questions or feedback. Júpiter ) Attempt to strike a balance between in-depth discussion of a few
major issues and imparting information which may be processed more
fully when the client later replays the tape.
5) Respect the client's belief system. Don't assume, for example, that
because she has 12th house planets and you are interested in past lives,
that speculating about past lives is the best approach to interpreting her
12th house planets. Remain aware that although Neptune rules
spirituality and Jupiter is associated with religion, both planets may
have other meanings which resonate more with the client. This doesn't
mean that you can't suggest a spiritual or meditative practice under a
Neptune transit if a client is an atheist, but gently refer to beliefs,
attitudes, and actions which are outside your client's frame of
reference; otherwise you are likely to encounter resistance which may
lead the client to be less receptive to the rest of the session.
6) Be aware that when the client's immediate issues and feelings are
pressing, you may need to focus upon them and modify your plans to
interpret all the key factors you note in the chart. A brief glimpse at
current transits can be useful during your initial preparation period,
even if you are not intending to mention transits during the session.
7) Impart acceptance and appreciation of clients and their charts, as
well as their capacity to successfully grapple with the issues in focus
and/or learn from experience. Since that capacity may require a change
in thinking, or significant alteration in their relationships or
environment, some clients may need direct suggestions in this regard,
in order to leave the session feeling clearer and more confident.
8) Ask questions in order to ascertain how the client expresses certain
facets of herself, and how the information you are imparting specifically applies to her. Not only will this help her integrate the
material—you will learn too! Mercúrio ) After presenting an interpretation or series of interpretations, give
your client the opportunity for feedback and questions. Information
without assimilation time is useless, and lacks emotional impact.
10) Be honest. If you are unable to answer a client's question, say so. If
astrology is unable to provide the answer, say so. You do not have to
be the authority. Model the ability to accept uncertainty and
notknowing.
11)Keep the whole chart and long term perspective in view even if
focusing primarily on one issue or area of life. The meaning and
importance of “the part” depends upon its relationship to the whole. If
you and your client lose perspective, attributing far more weight to
parts of the chart than they deserve and ignoring others that call for
attention, your insights may be misguided.
12) When in doubt about whether to continue in depth with a particular
focus or to shift focus in order to cover more material, ask your client
her preference. Let her choose how she can best use the available time.
13)At the end of the session, summarize key points and allow five or
ten minutes for last-minute questions and answers. You may want to
ask your client to tell you what she gained most from the session, and
how this might impact her future attitudes and actions. At this point,
you might also want to mention your availability in regard to followup sessions, or refer your client to recommended psychotherapists or
health practitioners if you believe that she would benefit from such a
referral; you may want to develop a resource list for such a purpose. If
you do make an outside referral, make sure you their work, respect
them, and sincerely believe that they will be helpful to your client.
14) Keep in mind that by conducting each session responsibly, you're
maintaining your integrity, and the integrity of the astrological
profession, which has been undermined more than enough by
practitioners lacking in training, experience and conscience. Interpretation & Advice
Interpretation is the primary activity which most astrologers engage in, and
which many astrologers equate with astrological counseling. Yet counselors
and psychotherapists regard interpretation as only one of the skills they use
with clients, and it is a skill which must be utilized appropriately in order to
be effective. Interpretation alone does not lead to insight or change. In order
for an interpretation to have a significant impact, the client must be
emotionally receptive and psychologically ready to apply that insight,
develop personal associations to it, and allow it to influence subsequent
attitudes and behaviors.
Steven Levy, in his book Principles of Interpretation, and Fred Pine in
Developmental Theory and Clinical Process, both discuss the uses of
interpretation in counseling, and the importance of assessing its impact
upon the client. As Pine and Levy demonstrate, whatever your intent, a
person is likely to filter your interpretation through his or her own
psychological process, and often to distort its meaning and add to it his own
evaluations. He may hear your interpretation as a judgment or
condemnation which threatens his self-esteem and devalues or humiliates
him. He may experience it as a deprivation or disappointment because he is
wanting emotional support rather than intellectual understanding. He may
use it as a rationalization which enables him to continue old behaviors and
avoid new attitudes and actions, and especially to continue a pattern of
intellectualizing rather than experiencing and taking responsibility for his
feelings.
On the other hand, a client may receive your interpretation positively,
because you are paying attention to him and are therefore gratifying him. If
he is an oral person, your interpretation may be a gift to be swallowed and
incorporated—sometimes without digestion and assimilation. Interpretation
may be a satisfying confirmation of the client's sense of reality, may be
experienced as acceptance and therefore give permission to him to be who
he is, or may awaken within him a new sense of reality and an expanded
awareness of possibilities.
If you are concerned with really helping your client rather than merely
feeding him information regardless of his capacity to apply it, then you may
want to train yourself to pay attention to what your client does with your interpretation, and to help him to constructively assimilate it. Does he turn
it into judgment? Does he use it to keep rationalizing his stance in life and
to avoid taking action? Or does he allow it to open him to deeper insight
which helps him to act more effectively? Drawbacks & Constructive Uses of Interpretation
Before we discuss constructive uses of interpretation, let us consider more
fully the drawbacks of relying too heavily upon interpretation in
astrological counseling, and in using interpretation inappropriately. First,
we as astrologers may be relating less to the client than to the chart, without
regard for the client's capacity to use the interpretation. Second,
interpretation may be used to demonstrate our superiority or power, to boost
our own egos; it may also mask our own hostility and judgment. Third,
interpretation may create distance, preventing the emotional engagement
and contact by which real impact and insight occurs. Fourth, interpretation
can be used indefinitely to intellectualize about, rather than actively and
emotionally confront and deal with, real here-and-now issues. Interpretation
can be a means of helping a client avoid taking responsibility and
committing himself to constructive behavior patterns.
Still other drawbacks exist. We astrologers, backed by the supposed
authority of the birthchart, may too hastily draw conclusions, presenting
one interpretation after another as gospel truth, overwhelming the client and
devaluing him by not allowing him to participate in or confirm these selfdefinitions. When we rely heavily upon interpretation, we may be operating
from the illusions that: 1) intellectual understanding alone elicits growth
and change, and that 2) our imparting of information elicits growth and
change. These assumptions need to be examined in the light of
psychological theories which focus upon the necessary links between
understanding, emotional receptivity, and the psychological readiness to
actively utilize an insight. It is important to consider also the profound
impact of an insight we gain from within ourselves in contrast to an
intellectual interpretation presented by another person. Someone else's
interpretation may indeed trigger an experience of insight for us, but the
interpretation alone is ineffective if its timing is inappropriate. Clients may
be resistant to an interpretation or to too many interpretations when their
anxiety level is high, when important emotional needs are unmet, and when
they are deeply involved with a particular emotional crisis or issue which is
currently center stage in their lives. In such cases, we need to limit the
number of interpretations we present, choose our words carefully, and pay
attention to our client's capacity to assimilate and use that interpretation to
gain useful insight for himself. Interpretation is indeed valuable when imparted with acceptance and
sensitivity to a client's psychological state. It may help him to conceptualize
and clarify vague feelings and behavior patterns, and therefore in time gain
mastery over them. By increasing the realm of the ego over the id or
unconscious, a person becomes more conscious of himself and therefore
more capable, when he so chooses, of directing his actions. Interpretation
can help clients realize when they are operating from outdated or
inappropriate assumptions or behavior patterns, which, when understood,
may be more easily relinquished. Interpretations can also help clients define
and reorganize their sense of themselves and their reality, in order to feel
more solid and more capable. Some interpretations help clients become
aware of other perspectives, attitudes, choices, and actions so that their
range of behaviors is increased and the possibilities open to them expanded.
Much depends upon whether an interpretation is worded negatively or
positively, designed to impart “this is what you are,” as if we are fixed
entities completely determined by past conditioning and astrological
factors, or whether an interpretation imparts that “this is what you have
been . . . and this is what you can be.” Interpretation: What, When & How?
WHAT should we as astrologers interpret? First, the most significant
factors and issues as reflected by the chart—the most basic needs,
motivations, weaknesses, conflicts, strengths, and possibilities. Second,
what is currently most emotionally relevant and useful to the client.
Attention should be paid to both HOW MUCH to interpret (so as not to
overwhelm the client) and the sense of validity or certainty that we
experience in regard to an interpretation. Presenting many uncertain or
doubtful interpretations weakens the impact of those which deeply resonate
with our client's experience.
WHEN should we interpret? Because we use interpretation so heavily in
astrological work, we cannot be as sensitive as mental health counselors
and therapists might be to the client's emotional readiness. Some of our
interpretations which are not apparently received at the time may be heard
more deeply later when the tape is replayed, or even months or years later
when the tiny seed we have planted is watered by future experiences and
germinates. Nevertheless, guidelines for timing interpretations include: a)
when the client is relaxed and open, and trust has been established; b) when
the client has expressed his feelings and concerns, and no longer is
preoccupied with undischarged emotion; and c) when the client has already
expressed a particular understanding and is groping for deeper insight in
regard to this issue.
HOW should we phrase our interpretations? First, we need to communicate
emotionally, by our posture, gestures, facial expression, and voice, an
attitude of acceptance. Second, we can benefit our client most by suggesting
rather than telling, presenting an interpretation tentatively so that a client is
free to accept or reject it and to further elaborate upon it. This of course
requires that we give up that aura of authority which may provide us and
our clients with a reassuring but false sense of security. Of deeper value in
the long run, however, is our willingness to engage our client in mutual
exploration as we present questions and statements which are interpretative.
(For example, questions such as, “Do you sometimes find yourself doing x?
What's that like?” And statements such as, “This planetary pattern suggests
that you tend to do x in this area of your life. I'm wondering how you
experience that tendency.”) Sometimes presenting a general interpretation and asking for feedback can allow you and your client together to discover
specific patterns which can lead to useful insight and action.
Because of the large number of meanings for each astrological position and
the various levels at which a client may be experiencing and expressing
particular influences, we may wish to present a wide range of possibilities
when describing a particular planetary position, aspect or configuration. For
example, a t-square to Neptune in Libra in the 9th house may suggest an
urge to “get high,” but does this person attempt to transcend himself
through drugs, meditation, travel, or spiritual experience? We might say to
this client, “You are likely to experience a deep yearning and desire to
transcend yourself, an urge to ‘get high’ in some manner. This could lead
you to turn to drugs or lose yourself in fantasy, or it might also incline you
to meditate, to become involved with spiritual pursuits, to study music or
teach music or literature, or even to travel to inspiring places. You would be
particularly drawn to places which are spiritual or idyllic, places which are
on the water or which possess a natural beauty. Do any of these alternatives
particularly appeal to you?” Later, after our client has confirmed several of
our impressions, we may ask if he has considered any of the other options
which we have presented.
How do we know when an interpretation resonates with our client's
experience and is being fully received by him? First, he may indicate by
gestures or facial expressions that he has been touched and affected.
Second, he may respond verbally with associations and further elaborations.
If he does not react at all, we may be inaccurate in our interpretation or
ineffective in our wording or translation of planetary positions; on the other
hand, our interpretation may be accurate, but have no emotional impact for
the client at present because it is too superficial, or because it presents
something which he already knows or something which he is not yet
capable of hearing. If a client denies or resists our interpretation, several
explanations are possible. We may have touched a sensitive point which he
is not ready to face—in which case, we may wish to drop the issue since we
are not therapists and may have little to gain from further probing. There is
always the chance that he will be more receptive when he is alone replaying
the tape of the session. On the other hand, we may be inaccurate in our
interpretation of astrological symbols or mistakenly assume that the client is
operating from too low or too high a level of consciousness or action.
Active denial does not necessarily indicate the truth of what we are imparting; sometimes people ardently resist an interpretation, not because it
is too truthful, but because we have trod upon personal identifications
which they cherish, and they are angry or hurt in response to being
misinterpreted and misunderstood. Advice-Giving in Astrological Counseling
The issue of giving advice is an important one for astrologers to consider,
particularly because we wish to help our clients and because advice-giving
is considered by many to be a primary mode of giving help. Advice-giving,
like interpretation, has both negative and positive manifestations.
Advice may be imparted from a one-up position, suggesting that we
know specifically how a person should act; however, the client knows
himself and what works for him far better than we ever will. Our advice
may be too simplistic or similar to suggestions which he has heard
repeatedly, and which he experiences as an annoyance or intrusion. Some
people, especially those with parents who were compulsive advice-givers
(or who possess a prominent and afflicted Uranus) may resist immediately
when advice is presented, whether the advice is useful or not, simply
because they experience it as unwanted interference.
Advice sometimes sets up a “yes but” interaction with a client who is
obviously not ready for or willing to take action. It may instigate a situation
of dependency with a client who is all too willing for you to take
responsibility for solving his problems. It may prevent him from becoming
motivated to develop his own ideas and may give him an excuse to blame
you if he so chooses to use your advice and does not profit by it. Finally, in
giving advice, you may be assuming that your client has the time, energy,
money, and inner resources to utilize it. If he does not, your advice may
spark his feelings of inadequacy, deprivation, or hopelessness. Often, when
a client seeks advice he is in more need of discovering HOW to resolve a
particular difficulty than in determining WHAT indeed he needs to do.
Defining the WHAT is considerably easier than facilitating the HOW.
When is advice helpful? First of all, your advice is likely to be helpful
when your client really feels that you are with him, that you understand his
reality and his capacities, as well as the options he has already tried, and
you have been jointly exploring new possibilities. Advice may be useful
when you sense that your client is clearly open to receiving it, and both
capable of applying it and eager to do so. After you have asked him his
perceptions of his options and he has indicated some, but is unaware of
others which might be beneficial to him, your suggestion might indeed be
worthwhile. This is particularly true when he obviously has the necessary resources to act upon it. Frequently, people are most capable of receiving
and utilizing advice when it is imparted indirectly. Rather than saying, “you
should do this” (which is never recommended) or “you might want to try
this,” you might instead tell an anecdote about how you or another person
benefitted from a particular course of action. Such stories usually inspire
and motivate people far more effectively than direct advice. Counseling Interventions
If you have not been trained as a counselor, then you may not have
developed the art of asking questions or making statements which facilitate
insight, growth, and change. Indeed, even if you have had training as a
counselor, your repertoire of responses may be limited by the nature of your
training. Developing such a repertoire does not have to require years of
counseling training and experience. Sometimes, all you need is an inquiring
mind, willingness to explore how a client functions, and the desire to help a
client discover and actualize new modes of being.
I personally have found value in compiling a list of statements and
questions which are useful in both psychotherapeutic and astrological
counseling, and in consciously practicing these interventions whenever
appropriate. Most of the counseling interventions on the following pages
can be utilized constructively in astrological consultations; many are
particularly effective in encouraging client self-direction and responsibility.
Such a list may indeed be a gold mine for beginning astrologers intent upon
improving counseling skills.
————— USEFUL COUNSELING INTERVENTIONS—————
Open-ended Questions and Statements
What's coming up for you?
What's that like for you?
How do you experience that?
Are you willing to share what's happening for you?
What does this mean to you?
How is this reflected in your life?
How does this relate to your life?
Do you have any examples from your own life?
As I talk, what are you aware of experiencing?
Tell me what this means to you.
How is this true or not true for you?
Is there anything you want to share about this?
Deepening Experience Tell me more about that.
Stay with your experience.
Stay with your feelings.
Take a moment to tune into yourself.
What's it like to feel that?
Let yourself experience that and see what else comes up for you. Let
yourself breathe more fully, and see if you can get more deeply in
touch with yourself.
Just let yourself be with that, and see what comes up for you.
Further Exploration
What would happen if you . . . ?
What would happen then?
Can you imagine how you might do x?
If you were to do x, what might you experience?
Do you have a sense of how doing x might change your life?
Can you get in touch with any other benefits you might gain from
doing x?
What other alternatives are you aware of?
What other alternatives have you tried?
How would you most like to express that energy?
Where would you like to be ten years from now in regard to that issue?
If none of those obstacles existed, what might your goals be?
Action and Application
How might you bring more of x into your life?
How might you do that?
What would help?
Do you have a sense of where you want to be with that?
How can you use/apply that awareness?
What do you want to do about it?
What would it take for you to reach that goal?
What plan of action might you form?
How might you go about doing that?
Exploring and Overcoming Obstacles What's stopping you?
What might stop you?
What are you getting out of being stuck?
What obstacles might come up for you?
How might you stand in your own way?
How can you prepare yourself for those obstacles/problems?
If you had the answers, what might they be?
Who in you might interfere with your goal?
How might you prevent that from happening?
What might keep you from following through?
What other parts of you might get in the way and prevent change?
How can you prevent your inner saboteurs from sabotaging your
actions?
How might you overcome those obstacles?
What supports do you need to maintain your will?
Changing Cognitive Structures
What other attitudes might you take toward that experience?
How could you view that experience positively?
What are you not seeing?
What are you avoiding facing?
Do you see any assumptions which are influencing you?
How might you have viewed this situation five years ago?
How might you view this situation five years from now?
What do you get out of holding this view of your situation?
Can you imagine any other ways of viewing this situation?
What if you sit over here (across the room) and look at the space
where you were sitting before?
What do you, as observer, have to say about the attitudes and actions
of the person who was sitting there?
Are there any other ways available to you to describe that situation?
How might you reframe it?
Acknowledging Polarities/Building An Integrating Center
What if you let yourself experience both parts of yourself?
If part x had a voice, what would it say? What about part Netuno ? What's it like to be aware of both at the same time?
What might part x say to part Netuno ? Part Netuno to part x?
Take a few moments and dialogue between these two parts of you.
Would you be willing to let me play the role of part x and dialogue
with you as part Netuno ?
Take a moment to experience both parts of yourself and the conflict
between them, and see if you can get any insight; about how to satisfy
both of them. What alternatives might satisfy both part x and part Netuno ?
Facilitating Self-direction in the Moment
What's your sense of what needs to happen here?
Which of these alternatives would you like to focus upon?
What do you feel you need to do now?
Where would you like to focus for the rest of the session?
Would you rather explore this issue in more depth or cover more
material?
What feels like it needs to happen before we stop?
Why don't you share the main insights you've gained so far and well
see if there's anything else we need to clarify before we move on?
How would you like to use the rest of the time?
Reflective Comments
Sounds like you . . .
I get the impression that you . . .
It seems to me that you are feeling . . .
I hear you saying that . . .
I imagine you might be experiencing . . .
Are you saying that . . . ?
You're experiencing that . . .
You're wondering if . . .
You're feeling that . . .
Affirming Responses
Sounds great.
That's good. Wonderful!
Right on!
Sounds like you're really in touch with this part of you.
Sounds like you're on the right track.
You really do seem to be on the path your chart indicates.
You're really starting to come to terms with that issue.
You obviously have a good handle on that issue.
I get the impression that you've overcome that problem.
Confronting Passivity or Lack of Responsibility*
You don't seem to be willing to take much responsibility for changing
that. I'm wondering what's keeping you from acting.
Sounds like you're expecting the world to meet your expectations, to
give you what you want without having to put out any effort.
If you don't go after what you want, how do you expect to get it?
What are you getting out of doing nothing about your situation? Do
you imagine that it's all just going to come to you?
What might you gain if you were willing to develop more motivation?
Are you expressing some anger at somebody by refusing to act?
I have the impression that you're on a sit-down strike. You're
expressing your anger at the injustice of it all by refusing to act.
As long as you continue to blame him, you can keep your anger tied up
with him, rather than harnessing it and directing it toward making a
change yourself.
What might help empower you?
If you put the positive meaning of that planet into effect, you're less
likely to experience its negative meaning. What's keeping you from
doing so?
What do you imagine you're gaining by refusing to act?
I hear you presenting a variety of excuses, and am wondering if you
really want to change.
I get the impression that you're waiting for somebody to rescue you
and that you don't want to take much responsibility for making your
life work. Do you think that's true?
YOUR ASTRO-COUNSELING ISSUES A Worksheet
1. What is your major problem or deficiency in regard to astrological
counseling?
2. How does this problem manifest itself?
3. What effect does this problem have upon yourself and others? Júpiter . What keeps you repeatedly encountering this problem?
5. Where do you want to be in relation to this problem? What is your
goal?
6. What attitude or behavior would you have to change or give up in
order to resolve this problem?
7. Why do you want to resolve this problem? What would you gain by
resolving it?
8. What are you getting out of being stuck or unresolved? Mercúrio . What do you need to do in order to reach your goal?
10. What obstacles do you foresee or what sacrifices might you have to
make to fulfill your goal?
11. How motivated are you to move toward your goal? How important is it
in relation to your other priorities?
12. What is one small step you might take in the next week? How can you
begin NOW to progress toward your goal?
3 One of many excellent chart calculation programs. John Halloran is offering a $10 discount
on AstrolDeluxe Reportwriter to anyone who mentions Art of Chart Interpretation when
purchasing it at http://www.halloran.com (see review at www.soulhealing.com/rhal.htm and
http://www.astrologysoftwareshop.com).
* PLEASE NOTE: Use caution here. Many clients are not ready for confrontation. These
statements are merely examples of the types of questions you can pose, but how you pose them,
and the words you choose, will depend on your own personality and your client's needs and
state of mind. AFTERWORD
You possess within yourself
The vision of the whole,
The inner synthesis.
You have it all,
All that you are seeking.
Whether by planet,
House cusp,
Or house interception,
You have all the signs.
You ARE all the signs.
You need only know it
And become
Who you already are.
You are one and you are many
You are part and you are whole.
Disorganized and organized,
Analyzed and synthesized,
Separated and unified.
You are Libra, Gemini, Leo,
Virgo, Cancer, Scorpio.
You are Taurus, Capricorn, Aquarius,
Aries, Pisces, Sagittarius.
This you now know. This you have heard.
Wake then, and go.
Drop your role,
Follow your soul.
Spread the word.
We are all whole. Appendix One PLANETARY KEYWORDS
Students who are not sufficiently familiar with the meanings of planets,
angles, signs, houses and aspects are advised to consult a beginning
astrology book. This book, intended for advanced beginning students of
astrology, is not oriented toward interpreting the primary facets of the chart.
However, since a full range of meanings of the planets is not covered in
many astrology books, planetary keywords are provided here. These
keywords apply not only to planets in houses, but also to the planets which
rule house cusps. Which facets of these planets will be expressed in a chart
depends on such factors as direct, retrograde or stationary motion, sign and
house placements, and aspects.
Sun
identity; conscious sense of self
ego
center of gravity
Self-centeredness (higher self)
self-centeredness (lower self)
our approach to self-realization
personal will
vitality, source of energy
personal presence
self-expression
creative drive Moon
emotional needs
emotional temperament
moodiness and
changeability
desire to give and receive
nurturance
protectiveness
how we nourish ourselves
empathy and
responsiveness
the role of women in our
life
the anima (inner female,
with Venus)
the mother and mothering
our inner child Sun
confidence
pride or arrogance
boastfulness
ostentation
desire for attention
where we seek to shine
executive function
leadership ability
personal desires
open-heartedness
warmth
generosity
animus; influence of the male (also
Mars and Saturn) Mercury
mental abilities
how we think and process
information
the focus of our thinking
the urge for knowledge
how we communicate
the urge to communicate Moon
habitual and instinctual
patterns
need for security
tenacity
where we hold on to the
past
personal attachments
our domestic nature
domestic concerns
(houses, land)
passivity
adaptability
influence of family and
early life
food and eating
sensitivity to the
environment
psychic sensitivity
receptivity
memory Venus
our love nature
our romantic inclinations
how we express affection
who and what we attract
our relational orientation (Libra)
urge for one-to-one relationship
(Libra) Mercury
Venus
writing and literary interests
urge for cooperation and equality
inclination to be useful (Libra)
(Virgo)
desire for peace and harmony
analytic abilities (Virgo)
(Libra)
orientation toward details
kindness
(Virgo)
what we value and appreciate
our orientation toward facts
aesthetic
appreciation
and
(Gemini)
expression
versatility or diversity
the visual arts (singing: Taurus)
(Gemini)
duality (Gemini)
self-indulgence (Taurus)
restless, scattering of
attitude toward money and
energies (Gemini)
possessions (Taurus)
manual dexterity
how we spend our money (Taurus)
desire for physical comforts
quickness of perception
(Taurus)
response to environmental
enjoyment of social interaction
stimuli
sensitivity of our nervous
feminine energy
system
sociability
anima (inner female, with Moon)
Mars
Jupiter
our personal desires
the urge to expand, enlarge, or
how we satisfy our desires increase
personal
investment
or where we operate in a “big way”
involvement
our growth orientation
enthusiasm and excitement generosity and benevolence
initiative and motivation
goodwill
outgoingness easygoing nature
Mars
Jupiter
pioneering or enterprising carelessness
nature
broadmindedness
self-direction
ethical sense
how we take action
desire for justice and fairactive self-projection
mindedness
direct and straightforward enjoyment and ease
behavior
laziness; where we want life to be
self-assertion
easy
how
and
when
we jovial nature (Jupiter=Jove)
experience anger
optimism
how we express anger
desire to explore
fighting
spirit; orientation toward travel or
combativeness
foreign cultures
courage
the search for understanding
ability to take a stand
philosophical nature
how we seek adventure
how we conceptualize or
aggression or forcefulness generalize
competitiveness
how we assimilate/integrate
self-centeredness
holistic perspective
spontaneity
tendency to overdo
impulsiveness
or extravagance
recklessness
overconfidence
what sparks our passion
dogmatism
sexual behavior
self-righteousness or pomposity
animal nature
future-orientation
masculine energy
the animus (inner male, with
the Sun)
physical activity
mechanical skills Saturn
Uranus
our adult self
individuality
commitment and loyalty
desire to be unique or different
responsibility and reliability unconventionality/nonconformity
sense of duty and obligation the urge to dramatize or shock
perseverance, persistence & originality
patience
inventiveness
tenacity
intuition
how we concentrate and flashes of insight
focus energy
genius
conscientiousness
and
restlessness; nervous energy
thoroughness
unpredictability
where we are slow and
instability
methodical
deviance
self-discipline
eccentricity
control and self-control
extremism or fanaticism
industriousness
rebelliousness
self-reliance
authority
and
authority where and how we seek change
figures
where we make sudden changes
the father and fathering
the unexpected
ambition; desire to achieve upheavals and disruptions
achievement and success
risk-taking
professional
or
public experimentation
recognition
lack of inhibitions
the nature of our career or freedom from restriction
work
desire to emancipate or liberate
executive and administrative
independence
ability
self-will or willfulness
seriousness
the role of friendship
melancholy or depression the
urge to reform
Saturn
Uranus
sense of deprivation or lack revolutionary spirit
repression and rigidity
the desire to topple structures
confrontation with obstacles detachment or impersonal energy
or hardship
respect for universal law
capacity to endure
metaphysical consciousness
pessimism, fear and mistrust technological orientation
caution and restraint
electronic media
desire for security and
stability
where we are protective or
defensive
the
urge
to
preserve,
conserve, maintain
concern with form and
structure
realism and practicality
conformity
solitude and isolation
endings and completion
Neptune
sensitivity and
vulnerability
compassion and empathy
receptivity
soul love
selfless devotion
self-sacrifice
desire to serve
romantic spirit Pluto
power or control over others
dominance and forcefulness
ruthlessness
personal power
courage and risk-taking
passion and sexuality
desire and greed
release of energy
the lower unconscious emotional
intensity
Neptune
Pluto
tenderness or gentleness
all-or-nothing experience
imagination and fantasy
explosive energy and rage
dreams and visions
destructiveness and violence
illusion, self-deception
obsessiveness and compulsiveness
theatricality
psychological complexes
projection of an image
our underworld or shadow self
idealism
death and endings
inspiration
life-or-death experiences
creativity
self-renewal and regeneration
visual, literary and musical transformation
arts
breakdowns and breakthroughs
transcendent experience
desire to tear down and rebuild
spirituality
confrontation with obstacles
our higher self
endurance
loss of boundaries
resourcefulness
formlessness
penetration, delving beneath the
adaptable, flowing
surface
impressionability
perceptiveness
lack of direction
healing ability
indirection and subtlety
elimination and letting go
attunement
to
the revolutionary spirit
nonverbal
political power and influence
escapism
alienation
absentmindedness
privacy and secretiveness
impracticality
financial investments
confusion
wealth
addiction
paralysis
timelessness Appendix Two PRELIMINARY FORM FOR ASTROLOGY
CONSULTATION
Please answer as many questions as possible. If providing any information
requested here is very uncomfortable for you, or if you would rather not
respond in print, feel free to ignore the question or speak to me privately. If
you prefer, I would be happy to arrange a confidential phone interview with
you instead. NOTE: I don't interpret transits/progressions or relationships unless I've
interpreted the natal chart. Therefore, at least half of your first session will
focus on your natal chart, including life purpose issues. Sessions involving transits & progressions include important outer planet transits & inner
planet progressions for the upcoming year, with an overview of the
progressed lunation cycle. For your initial session, you have several
options. Please note your preferences for option a, b, c, d, or e. PRELIMINARY BACKGROUND: (confidential) As a psychotherapist, I use astrology as a tool to increase selfunderstanding and self-integration. In order to help you better, I need
background information which can enable me to interpret your chart in
regard to your current life situation:
RELATIONSHIPS
Relationship status:________________________
(single, married, divorced, living with)
Sexual orientation: ________________________
(heterosexual, gay, lesbian, bisexual, celibate, etc.)
How satisfied are you with your relationship situation?
______________________________
______________________________
What significant relationships (friends, mentors etc.) do you have apart
from a primary partner?
______________________________
______________________________
What changes would you like to see in your relationships?
______________________________
______________________________
______________________________
Are you involved in any groups or organizations? Which ones?
______________________________
______________________________
Is your mother alive? If deceased, indicate date of death.
______________________________
Is your father alive? If deceased, indicate date of death.
______________________________
Please provide names and ages of brothers and sisters.
______________________________ _____________________________
______________________________ _____________________________ ______________________________ _____________________________
Please provide names and ages of children, if any.
______________________________ _____________________________
______________________________ _____________________________
______________________________ _____________________________
EDUCATION, WORK and PROFESSION:
What schools have you attended, what degrees received, & in what fields?
______________________________
______________________________
______________________________
Briefly describe the kind of work you do (housework, raising children etc.
is work!)
______________________________
______________________________
______________________________
______________________________
How satisfied are you with your work situation?
______________________________
______________________________
What kind of work have you done in the past?
______________________________
______________________________
______________________________
What kind of work do you most want to do?
______________________________
______________________________
______________________________
Are you involved in any creative, political, and/or volunteer work which is
meaningful to you? What?
______________________________ ______________________________
______________________________
PHYSICAL AND MENTAL HEALTH
How is your physical health?
______________________________
Have you suffered from issues of substance abuse, sexual abuse, mental
illness? Please describe briefly.
______________________________
______________________________
______________________________
Are you currently consulting a psychotherapist or counselor?
For how long have you been doing so? What is the focus?
______________________________
______________________________
RELIGION AND SPIRITUALITY
What is your current religion or spiritual orientation?
______________________________
Do you believe in reincarnation?
______________________________
Is there anything else about yourself you would like me to know before
your session?
______________________________
______________________________
______________________________
THREE QUESTIONS:
Please indicate THREE QUESTIONSthat you wish to address during your
session. Knowing these ahead of time, I can reflect upon them and be ready
to answer them (and you will have a chance to clarify your aims for our
session/sessions).
(Since I'm oriented toward personal growth & empowerment, I don't answer
questions such as “What will happen to me when . . . ?” or “Should I do such & such?” I wish to facilitate your self-awareness and development, not
take responsibility for your life. Examples of useful questions are: “What
parts of myself do I most need to develop?” or “What kind of work might
fulfill me?” or “Where can I most effectively direct my energies during the
coming year?”)
QUESTION ONE:
______________________________
______________________________
______________________________
QUESTION TWO:
______________________________
______________________________
______________________________
QUESTION THREE:
______________________________
______________________________
______________________________ BIBLIOGRAPHY
Many of these books may be out of print as of 2009; however, they are likely
to be available at used bookstores online. Try http://www.abebooks.com and
also the Amazon Marketplace used booksellers at http://www.amazon.com.
Where new editions are available replacing earlier editions I first used in
writing the original edition of this book, both the old and new publishers
are indicated. General Reference
Arroyo, Stephen. Astrology, Karma and Transformation. Sebastopol,
CA: CRCS Publications, 1978, 1992.
Bloch, Douglas and Demetra George. Astrology for Yourself: How to
Understand And Interpret Your Own Birth Chart. Lake Worth, FL:
Ibis Press, 2006.
Clement, Stephanie. Aspect Patterns. St. Paul, MN: Llewellyn, 2007.
Ebertin, Reinhold. The Combination of Stellar Influences. Alfred
Roosedale, translator. Aalen, Germany: Ebertin-Verlag, 1972 (latest
edition, American Federation of Astrologers, Tempe, Arizona,
2004.)
Greene, Liz. The Astrology of Fate. Newburyport, MA: Red Wheel/
Weiser, 1984.
———. Saturn: A New Look at an Old Devil. Newburyport, MA: Red
Wheel/Weiser, 1976.
Hand, Robert. Horoscope Symbols. Rockport, MA: Para Research,
Inc./Schiffer Publishing, 1981.
Hebel, Doris. Celestial Psychology. Santa Fe: Aurora Press, 1985.
Hughes, Robert. The Sun and Moon Polarity in Your Horoscope.
American Federation of Astrologers, Tempe, Arizona, 1977. Jansky, Robert Carl. Interpreting the Aspects. Van Nuys, CA:
AstroAnalytics, 1974.
———. Interpreting the Eclipses. Van Nuys, CA: Astro-Analytics,
1975.
———. Planetary Patterns. Van Nuys, CA: Astro-Analytics, 1976.
Jones, Marc Edmund. Guide to Horoscope Interpretation. Wheaton, IL:
Quest Books, 1981.
Lipton, Bruce. The Biology of Belief: Unleashing the Power of
Consciousness, Matter and Miracles. Santa Rosa, CA: Mountain of
Love, 2005.
Lundsted, Betty. Astrological Insights into Personality. Lake Worth, FL:
Ibis Press, 2004.
March, Marion and Joan McEvers. The Only Way to Learn Astrology,
volume Gêmeos . San Diego: ACS, 1980.
Marks, Tracy. The Astrology of Self-Discovery. Lake Worth, FL: Ibis
Press, 2008 (previous edition CRCS Publications, Sebastopol,
California, 1985).
———. Planetary Aspects: From Conflict to Cooperation. Sebastopol
CA: CRCS Publications, 1987 (previously titled How to Handle
Your T-Square and published by Sagittarius Rising, 1979)
———. Your Secret Self: Illuminating the Mysteries of the Twelfth
House. Sebastopol, CA: CRCS, 1989.
Mayo, Jeff. The Planets and Human Behavior. London: L.N. Fowler
and Company, 1972 (revised edition, Sebastopol, CA: CRCS, 1986).
Meyer, Michael. A Handbook for the Humanistic Astrologer. New York:
Anchor/Doubleday, 1974. (new edition, Universe, 2000)
Munkasey, Michael, Midpoints: Unleashing the Power of the Planets,
San Diego: ACS, 1991.
Oken, Alan. Alan Oken's Complete Astrology. Lake Worth, FL: Ibis
Press, 2006. (Previous edition, Bantam Press, 1981.)
Rudhyar, Dane. The Astrological Houses. Sebastopol, CA: CRCS, 1986. ———. An Astrological Mandala. Garden City, New York Random
House/Vintage, 1974.
———. An Astrological Study of Psychological Complexes. Berkeley:
Shambhala Books, 1977.
———. The Lunation Cycle. Santa Fe: Aurora Press, 1967.
———. Person-Centered Astrology. Santa Fe: Aurora Press, 1976
(republished 1987).
Sandbach, John and Ronn Ballard. Planets in Containment: A Study of
990 Combinations. Birmingham, MI: Seek-It, 1980.
Sasportas, Howard. The Gods of Change. London, Arkana/Viking
Penguin, 1990 (new edition published by The Wessex Astrologer,
2007).
Tierney, Bil. Dynamics of Aspect Analysis. Sebastopol, CA: CRCS,
1993.
Tomkins, Sue. Aspects in Astrology: A Guide to Understanding
Planetary Relationships in the Horoscope. Dorset England: Element
Books, 1989. (also Destiny Books, 2002).
Van Toen, Donna, The Astrologer's Node Book. Newburyport, MA: Red
Wheel/Weiser, 1981. Astrological Counseling
The following books address the process of astrological counseling, or
contain exercises for personal self-empowerment using astrology.
Alexander, Roy. The Astrology of Choice: A Counseling Approach.
Newburyport, MA: Red Wheel/Weiser, 1983.
Arroyo, Stephen. The Practice and Profession of Astrology. Sebastopol,
CA: CRCS, 1984.
Bogart, Greg. Therapeutic Astrology. Berkeley: Dawn Mountain Press,
1996.
Cunningham, Donna. Healing Pluto Problems. Newburyport, MA: Red
Wheel/Weiser, 1986. Pottenger, Maritha. Healing with the Horoscope: A Guide to
Counseling. San Diego: ACS, 1982.
Rosenblum, Bernard. The Astrologer's
Sebastopol, CA: CRCS, 1983. Guide to Counseling. Schermer, Barbara. Astrology Alive. Aquarian Press, Northamptonshire,
England, 1989. (New edition, Crossing Press, 1998.)
Strusiner, Dovid. Astrology for Self-Empowerment. St. Paul, MN:
Llewellyn, 2000. Case Study: Liv Ullman
Garfinkel, Bernie. Liv Ullman and Ingmar Bergman. New York:
Berkeley Press, 1976.
Ullman, Liv. Changing. New York: Alfred A. Knopf, 1977. ABOUT THE AUTHOR Tracy Marks is an astrologer, licensed counselor, and Photoshop instructor
living in Arlington, Massachusetts. Her books, The Astrology of SelfDiscovery, The Art of Chart Interpretation, Your Secret Self: Illuminating
the Mysteries of the Twelfth House, and Planetary Aspects, have sold over
150,000 copies and have been translated into nine languages.
Tracy began her study of astrology while a senior at Tufts University, as
Pluto was transiting her Libran Sun, and immersed herself intensively in
astrological study and teaching for twenty years. During this time period,
she was actively involved in the personal growth movement, and gained
considerable experience with psychosynthesis and Gestalt therapy. During
the early 1980s, she returned to graduate school to train as a
psychotherapist, and soon became a licensed mental health counselor, with
a counseling practice in the Boston area.
As a child, Tracy was an award-winning poet who began publishing
nationally at the age of 11. As an adult, she has satisfied the creative and
spiritual bent of her Neptunian midheaven and North Node in Pisces by
pursuing nature photography.
Tracy's web sites, which have had over 16 million visitors, are
http://www.windweaver.com,
http://www.webwinds.com,
and
http://www.tracymar.smugmug.com. Astrological articles are available at:
http://www.windweaver.com/astrology.
Readers interested in personal counseling or astrological consultations,
in-person or long distance, can contact her at tracy@marks.net. from Your gateway to knowledge and culture. Accessible for everyone. z-library.se singlelogin.re go-to-zlibrary.se O cial Telegram channel Z-Access ffi https://wikipedia.org/wiki/Z-Library single-login.ru