Sun Sign, Moon Sign
Discover the Key to Your Unique Personality through the 144 Sun, Moon
Combinations Charles Harvey & Suzi Harvey DEDICATION
To our parents, Cordelia, John, Jack and Joyce
To our children Natasha, Giles and Alexander
To Grant Lewi who lit the way CONTENTS
Cover
Title Page
Dedication
Authors’ Note
PART 1 INTRODUCTION
Chapter 1 Getting the Most from this Book
Chapter 2 Sun and Moon: the Lights of Our Life
Chapter 3 Elementary, Dear Readers
PART 2 THE SUN -MOON COMBINATIONS
Chapter Júpiter Sun in Aries
Chapter 5 Sun in Taurus
Chapter 6 Sun in Gemini
Chapter 7 Sun in Cancer
Chapter 8 Sun in Leo
Chapter Mercúrio Sun in Virgo
Chapter 10 Sun in Libra
Chapter 11 Sun in Scorpio
Chapter 12 Sun in Sagittarius
Chapter 13 Sun in Capricorn
Chapter 14 Sun in Aquarius
Chapter 15 Sun in Pisces
PART 3 FINDING YOUR SUN -MOON COMBINATION
Table 1: Finding Your Sun Sign
Table 2: Finding Your Moon Sign
Table 3: British Summer Time
Table Júpiter : Time Zones Around the World For Your Further Astrological Study
Further Reading
Acknowledgements
Copyright
About the Publisher AUTHORS ’ NOTE
For convenience sake, and to make for easier reading, we have used the
masculine gender pronoun throughout the text (most of the time). Astrology
emphasizes through the Sun and Moon that we all contain both male and
female attitudes and approaches to life. Part One
INTRODUCTION Chapter One
GETTING THE MOST FROM THIS BOOK
To thine own self be true
WILLIAM SHAKESPEARE Resolve to be thyself; and know, that he who finds himself, loses his
misery
MATTHEW ARNOLD M AKING A F ILM OF Áries OUR L IFE
Imagine a cinema centre. It is showing two films of your life. On one
screen Triumph is being shown; on another screen, Tragedy. Each of us
has the possibilities for both scenarios within us. Most of us will
experience something of each.
The difference between success and failure in life ultimately comes
down to self-understanding. Within you are many different gifts,
conflicting wishes and pressures, obligations and ambitions. The more
you are able to recognize and work with your different sides and
tendencies, the more you are likely to turn tragedy into triumph, rather
than snatch defeat from the jaws of victory.
We feel that the first step in recognizing and reconciling these
different ‘selves’ inside you is getting to know intimately not only your
Sun sign but your Moon sign as well – and how they create a lively,
sometimes problematic, but always interesting dialogue within you.
And what we offer you in these pages is a series of ‘film clips’
showing some of the main features of the 144 most important Sun –
Moon story lines. One of these is yours. It describes the essential
personality of two of the most important and central characters in the drama of your life. These characters, as represented by the sign
positions of the Sun and Moon at your birth, are the heart and soul of
your story. The better you can get to know them the more will you be
able to understand, and even consciously collaborate on, the script of
your life. Once you can comprehend the innate contradictions, you can
turn them to good use – a bit like adjusting the seasoning in a soufflé.
You will discover it is a good recipe, a fine script – do not fight it;
enjoy it!
We have tried to give you a taste of the contrasting pressures and
inner dilemmas that each combination is most likely to experience, and
to show how these different aspects of you can work positively
together. You will not agree with everything you find here (unless you
are the most watery of Water types), but if these profiles encourage
you to reflect more on the full-length film of your life and how you can
give it the best performance and production you can, we will be more
than happy. F INDING O UT Áries OUR S UN -M OON C OMBINATION
If you have not had your personal birth chart drawn up, and do not
know your Sun – Moon combination, Part 3 gives instructions and
tables for finding the sign position of your Sun and Moon.
If you do not know your time of birth and there is uncertainty as to
which sign your Sun and/or Moon is in, you will need to read the two
different possible combinations. This should help you to decide which
is the more likely position and so narrow down the likely time of your
birth. Care is needed with this method, however, as other chart factors
may be involved of which you are unaware. If your decision is
between a Cancer and Leo Moon, for example, you may decide your
Moon is in Cancer, yet this could be because your Rising Sign is in
Cancer. T HE L AYOUT OF E ACH C OMBINATION
We have given our findings and interpretations for each Sun – Moon
combination under the following main sections: • quotations
• themes
• main text
• relationships
• your greatest strengths
• your greatest weaknesses
• images for integration
• famous people with this combination
Some details about the contents of each of these sections follows. The Quotations – In Their Own Words
Each one of us views the world from a different place and in a
different way. What we notice and what interests us is very much
conditioned by our birth chart, and not least by our Sun and Moon
positions. So if we want to understand a combination more fully we
cannot do better than to listen to the ideas and observations of those
who have lived a lifetime with that particular Sun – Moon
combination.
In consequence, we have started each Sun – Moon entry with
quotations from individuals who were born with that particular
combination. These have been chosen to illustrate, directly or
indirectly, some of the essential qualities of that particular type in their
own words.
We regret the fact that, despite our best efforts, there are many
more quotes from men than women in this book. This is a direct
reflection of the ratio of eminent men to women in our society over the
centuries, which has inevitably resulted in a very strong bias towards
quotes from men being available in the many collections and
dictionaries of quotations. For somewhat different reasons, certain
categories of people, for example writers and philosophers, tend to be
a more fruiful source of telling quotes than, say, sportspeople or those
working in business or the helping professions. This is not surprising.
Writers and thinkers spend their time reflecting on the nature of the
human condition and our relationship to the world, whilst, with obvious exceptions, people engaged in sport, commerce and caring for
others tend to be less immediately engaged in such reflections.
In doing our research for this book we usually found far more
quotes than we could possibly use for certain of the combinations,
whilst it was often difficult to find suitable, pithy observations from
other solilunar types. This is not surprising. Certain combinations –
such as the Sun in Gemini, Moon in Aquarius – were alive with wit
and wisdom, whilst quotes were relatively thinner on the ground for
other combinations. Even though some of these combinations are
deeply reflective – such as those with both Sun and Moon in Scorpio –
they seem to be less naturally verbally articulate. Themes
This paragraph gives a very brief summary of some of the main issues
of the combination, starting with the element combination of the Sun
and Moon. The first element given is the Sun’s; the second element
that of the Moon. To avoid constant repetition and to save space, we
have given further details about each of the 10 element combinations,
including some observations about compatibility with other types, in
Chapter 3. The Main Text
This main essay identifies and discusses what we have found to be the
main issues for the combination. We have resisted the temptation to
break this text up into formal sections. Each combination is usually
presented in a somewhat different way as dictated by the combination
itself and by the material we have available. We have usually given
suggestions about the types of work which are likely to be especially
congenial to the combination, though, as we have noted elsewhere, we
do not see these combinations as a clear indication to vocation, but
much more as indications of the approach and attitudes that the type
will bring to what they do. The one area we have separated out is
Relationships, as these are so central to what the Sun and Moon
combination in the chart is all about. Your Greatest Strengths
This is a summary of what seem from our research to be some of the
more creative possibilities of the combination. Other factors in your
full birth chart will suggest other strengths and creative potential, so
you should not be dismayed if your favourite virtue is not mentioned! Your Greatest Weaknesses
Here we pull no punches. This section attempts to identify some of the
greatest defects and life problems the combination can produce. We are
not saying you are like this (though others may agree!), but these are
issues that you would do well to note. As with your virtues, your chart
as a whole may suggest more obvious blemishes to your otherwise
perfect self! Images for Integration
These may not obviously hit you between the eyes the first time you
read them. They are intended to be reflected upon. Sometimes we have
given just one image, more often two, and sometimes more when the
very different possibilities of a particular combination seem to require
it. These images are intended to evoke what we see to be some of the
essential issues of the combination in question, and to get you
thinking. If an image does not speak to you, put it to the back of your
mind. One day when you are wrestling with some problem or theme
that repeats itself in your life, the penny could drop.
Since this is a book rather than a video we have usually given these
images as ‘word pictures’. But we could equally well have used
pictures, cartoons, sculptures, music, landscapes and other symbolic
expressions of these ideas. Occasionally, where works of art and music
are very well known or especially appropriate, we have used these.
Under Sagittarius – Cancer, for example, you will find Jimi Hendrix’s
legendary Woodstock version of The Star Spangled Banner. Its mixture
of emotional patriotism (Cancer) and raw, fiery, exuberant energy and
brilliance (Sagittarius) as he imitates the ‘rockets’ red glare, the bombs bursting in air’ on his guitar, speak volumes about this combination. In
a different vein, under Gemini – Libra you will find Elgar’s Enigma
Variations. The composer dedicated it ‘to my friends within’. Not only
does Elgar’s very concept evoke the synthesis of these signs, but if you
listen to the sheer range of musical experience Elgar derives from his
one simple theme you will arrive at a deeper, inner, understanding of
this combination. Likewise under Scorpio-Sagittarius we have
Picasso’s painting Guernica. To view its tortured images conveys to us
a moral statement (Sagittarius) about the destruction and iniquities of
war (negative Scorpio) which goes to the heart of the preoccupations
of this Sun – Moon combination. The Famous People
This book grew from our study of peoples’ lives. You will find that
one of the most fruitful ways of finding out more about the subtleties,
dilemmas and creative possibilities of a specific Sun – Moon
combination is to study the biographies and autobiographies of famous
individuals who have that combination. The list of celebrities that are
given at the end of each entry is a selection of some of the betterknown contemporary and historical individuals whom we have
recorded as being born with that particular Sun – Moon pairing.
We have made every effort to check on the accuracy of the charts
we have used for these individuals, but inevitably some errors may
have crept in. If you have reason to suppose that any of the people
given under a combination are there under false pretences, we would
be pleased to hear from you.
While the Sun – Moon combination can give some clues and
indications as to career choice, it will be found more useful to consider
the famous people listed in terms of the kind of approach they had to
their particular work, the ideas and themes which have engaged them,
and the general flavour of their lives. So, for example, to understand
the acute paradox of the combination of clinical detachment and
intense passion of those born with Sun in Aquarius and Moon in
Scorpio, one can learn volumes by looking at the output of the writer
Alex Comfort. The very titles of Comfort’s best sellers – Sex in Society and The Joy of Sex: A Gourmet’s Guide to Love Making – encapsulate
a creative synthesis of these very different approaches to life. His
many other books, plays, poetry, essays and novels draw upon similar
themes, with the clash between freedom and possessiveness, between
intellect and emotions, between personal liberty and social obligations.
His work is often expressed in a pungent blend of Aquarian-Scorpio
humour as in Come out to Play, his satirical fantasy about a biologist
deeply learned in the knowledge of human mating habits.
It would be wrong to conclude from this example that all AquariusScorpios will be writers, or that they will all be preoccupied with
understanding their relationship to sex (though many will be!). But
what we can conclude from Comfort’s life, and many other cases, it
that the creative pivot around which this Sun – Moon combination
revolves is the conflict between mind and emotion. By attempting to
reconcile the fundamental tension between a need to see the world
through a strongly developed rational intellect and the irrational
intensity of their emotional life, this type finds their own unique
creativity.
If you take some time out to study the lives, accomplishments and
aspirations of those people we have listed, you can gradually build up
a picture of how other people have used your own particular
combination creatively, how they have reconciled conflicting
pressures, and indeed where their dilemmas have tripped them up. To
illustrate this further, let us take a brief look at the different lives of all
the people listed under Sun Scorpio – Moon Pisces .
Scorpio and Pisces are both Water signs. Water is the element (here
) that emphasizes the feelings and emotions and a general sensitivity
to, and understanding of, other people’s needs and experience. Hence
such types often have a strong attraction towards the caring professions
and other occupations that demand emotional sensitivity, such as the
theatre and creative writing. Even though all Water signs are
theoretically highly compatible, the intense, self-controlled, purposeful
and ambitious Scorpio is a very different kettle of crustaceans from the
free-flowing, adaptable, often self-sacrificing and addictive sign of the
fishes, and this combination of signs can experience as much inner
conflict as any other. A consideration of our list reveals the wide variations of expression possible from this one combination, yet the
common themes they tend to share. Hillary Clinton
A lawyer by training and one of the US’s most influential First Ladies.
But forget her profession – what is she like? She has been described
alternately as a Lady Macbeth and a Florence Nightingale. The
astrological truth is that she is both. Sun Scorpios are naturally forceful
and ambitious, but Moon in Pisces gives a softer, caring concern for
the world, and especially the underdog. So it is that her solar public
image can be typically Scorpionic – stiff, icy, aloof – whilst in private
she can be warm and funny, with the classic Piscean flair for mimicry.
In her work in the White House, as in her earlier legal practice, it is
clear that Hillary Clinton really cares (Pisces) passionately (Scorpio)
about what she does. She is not only concerned with personal power
(Scorpio), but is guided by a natural concern and compassion (Moon
Pisces) for the sick, addicted, unemployed, underprivileged and the
underclass – all groups traditionally symbolized by the Moon in
Pisces. With characteristic Scorpio concern for regeneration, Clinton’s
purpose is to help these people help themselves with hand-ups rather
than hand-outs. Also typical is her determination and intense
commitment to get to grips with and to purge the Scorpio abuses of the
drugs industry, ruled by Pisces. Gene Tierney
This actress was famous for her silky, feline femininity, which she used
in portraying classically Scorpionic indefatigable scheming heroines
and seductresses in film noir thrillers. Indeed mystery thrillers
themselves are of the essence of this combination.
Tierney’s life was marked by a deep struggle to get to grips with
(Scorpio) her chaotic emotional life, which was constantly running
away with her (Pisces). As so often seems to be the case with this type,
her emotional life went in waves of collapse into self-abandonment (Pisces), and self-motivated dramatic recovery and regeneration
(Scorpio). Grace Kelly
Another actress, Kelly is remembered particularly for her elegant,
coolly self-possessed (Scorpio) yet intensely vulnerable (Pisces) roles
in Hitchcock suspense thrillers such as Dial M for Murder and Rear
Window. Her marriage to Prince Ranier is a classic combination of the
romance (Pisces) and purposeful ambition (Scorpio) that this type
needs to marry within themselves.
In her very private, private life as Princess of Monaco she was
famous for her dedicated work (Scorpio) for numerous charities and
good causes (Pisces). Details of her closely guarded emotional life are
only now beginning to emerge, but these suggest that this was vastly
more complex and tangled than her outward, almost chilly Scorpio
self-assurance would have suggested, and that she had an intermittent
drink problem. Bela Lugosi
Lugosi is one of the many actors that this combination seems to
produce, but more significant is the kind of parts he played. Like Grace
Kelly he is associated with suspense thrillers in particular and with
menacing, Dracula-type roles which appeal to, and evoke, the darker
(Scorpio) aspects of the imagination (Pisces).
Like others of this combination, Lugosi was tempted by the
enchanting Piscean world of drugs and the sense of self-transcendence
and emotional release they can bring. Equally typical of this type,
however, he successfully fought his addiction and, with typical
Scorpionic powers of regeneration, regained his creative equilibrium. Martin Scorsese
The films of this highly imaginative (Pisces) cinema director focus
upon the darkest aspects of male aggression and violence (Scorpio) and a preoccupation with sexual inequality. Typical of his work is Taxi
Driver with its nightmarish Scorpio – Pisces vision of New York as an
open sewer spewing forth pimps, whores, addicts and criminals.
Equally expressive of the mixture of social concern (Pisces) and
personal struggles (Scorpio) is Scorsese’s melodramatic Alice Doesn’t
Live Here Anymore, in which a newly-widowed woman tries to cope
with economic survival and create a new life for herself and her 12year-old son. The very title of Scorsese’s The Last Temptation of Christ
combines Scorpio, which rules temptation, and Christ, whose symbol
was the fish, into one image. Indeed, on the highest level, one could
say that the Crucifixion and Resurrection of Christ is the ultimate
symbolic image for this combination which can plumb the depths and
heights of human experience. Robert Louis Stevenson
The themes and characters in Stevenson’s writings constantly reflect
the contrasting dark, passionate approach of Scorpio with its
fascination with the problem of evil, and the gentle, imaginative,
lyrical qualities of Pisces. This contrast is most explicit in the split
personality who is both the dedicated Dr Jekyll and the murderous Mr
Hyde. People who are strong Water types are very much in touch with
their dream life, so it is fascinating to note that the story of Dr Jekyll
and Mr Hyde came to Stevenson in a nightmare. He spent the next
three days in a state of feverish creativity, writing down this 30,000word story that so captures the essence of the Scorpio – Pisces split
between passion and compassion, and between savagery and
civilization. This incident is also a classic expression of the creative
power of the inner connection of Sun and Moon, which can come
about between sleeping and waking.
This same splitting and marrying of tough and tender is present in
Stevenson’s kindly, caring, yet utterly villainous Long John Silver in
the romantic thriller Treasure Island. For all his wickedness (Scorpio),
he still evokes our compassion (Pisces). Likewise we can contrast
Stevenson’s wild Scorpionic study in evil of The Master of Ballantrae with his superbly Piscean recollections of childhood of his Child’s
Garden of Verse. William Cullen Bryant
The majestic writings of this poet and lawyer speak volumes of the
power of Scorpio combined with the lyric sensitivity of Pisces. His
dedicated anti-slavery campaigning is typical of the resolute
commitment and compassion of this type. Alexander Alekhine
Chess is a classic Scorpio – Pisces war game. It involves Pisces
strategy and Scorpio plotting, Pisces subterfuge and Scorpio
unexpected attack. Alekhine was not only one of the greatest of all
chess players, he was passionately addicted to the game and its
strategies, just as he also became passionately addicted to alcohol.
When his drinking lost him his world title he, like Bela Lugosi, picked
himself up from his addiction and made an astonishing comeback from
his self-destructive drinking (Pisces) through his sheer determination
and applied willpower (Scorpio). Marie Curie
In the area of science, few life stories appeal to the imagination as
much as that of Nobel Prize-winning Marie Curie. Her research against
fearful odds into the secrets of radioactivity and its application in
radiology, carried out with her husband Pierre, was typically
Scorpionic in its intensity and dedication. At the same time her classic
Pisces concern for the suffering of others led her, during the first world
war, to equip ambulances with X-ray equipment and then personally
drive them to the front so that she could help diagnose and care for
wounded soldiers. So it was that one of the world’s great scientists also
became head of the radiology services for the Red Cross, a superb
creative synthesis of these two different impulses. Summary
From the above you can see how these lives illustrate the range of
expression of this combination which, whilst often very different in
terms of their occupation and detail, still reflect the underlying
principles of these signs. If you want to obtain further pointers to your
own inner dynamic, we would encourage you to study the lives of
those born with your own combination.
If you come up with additional observations and insights about any of
the types, we would be happy to hear from you. All material used will
be acknowledged in future editions of this book and/or our further
publications. O THER A STROLOGICAL F ACTORS
The sign position of your Sun and Moon are of great importance in
understanding your central psychology. When it comes to refining your
understanding of your Sun and Moon, your Ascendant sign and the
position of your Sun and Moon in the 12 ‘houses’ of the chart are also
very significant. Interpretation of these is outside the scope of this
book. The Ascendant and the houses are determined by the time of
birth. Each house focuses on a different area of life and has qualities
not unlike the signs. Regardless of your Sun sign, if you were born at
sunrise, with Sun in the first house, you will have some of the selfcentred qualities of Aries. On the other hand, if you were born in the
hour or so after sunset, your Sun will have some of the Virgo qualities
of the desire to be of service and to develop special skills.
The other important factors that will modify the basic
interpretations given in these pages are the aspects made to the Sun
and Moon by the planets. If you have your Sun or Moon in close
aspect to Saturn, it adds a Capricorn overtone. Likewise, if one of the
lights aspects Jupiter it will add jovial qualities, and so on.
For your further exploration of these and other factors, a short list
of recommended astrology books is given on page 567. Of these, Grant
Lewi’s Heaven Knows What contains the classic pioneering texts on
Sun – Moon combinations, whilst Liz Greene and Howard Sasportas’ The Luminaries is an invaluable study of the deeper psychologies of
the Sun and Moon, and is especially recommended for those who want
to obtain an in-depth understanding of these life principles. Chapter Two
SUN AND MOON: THE LIGHTS OF OUR LIFE
As different as night and day.
The greater your understanding of what the Sun and Moon represent
within you, the more valuable and interesting you will find the Sun –
Moon profiles given in this book. This chapter looks in more detail at
the significance of each of these ‘lights’ or luminaries, as astrologers
call them.
We all have different sides to our personality. These different
aspects of ourselves are not always in agreement with one another. The
two most central and important parts of our nature are represented
astrologically by the Sun and the Moon. We can think of these as
rather like our masculine and feminine approaches to life that we
learned from our father and mother (or those who acted as our
parents). For to an astrologer, regardless of our sex, we all have both
male and female dimensions to our nature. The central purpose of this
book is to show something of the main issues involved with each of
the different types of Sun and Moon zodiacal combinations. Equally, it
is to show what can happen when we really become aware of these two
sides and begin to work – and live – more wholeheartedly with them. B UT W HY S UN AND M OON ?
When we talk about the Sun we are essentially referring to our
conscious, focused, ‘thinking’ level which we use to make decisions
and move about purposefully in the world. By contrast, when we talk
about the Moon we refer to our spontaneous, natural, receptive,
‘feeling’ level, and the way we seek and give nourishment and comfort to ourselves and to others. So far so good. But what, we may ask, have
the Sun and Moon out there got to do with what is going on within us
down here ?
The ancient wisdom, of which astrology is an important part, had
no problem with this question. The ancients saw no real separation
between man and the cosmos. Their central dictum was ‘As Above, So
Below’. In other words, they saw that all things are the product and
reflection of the same Creator, that ‘all things are made in the image of
the One’. This idea may at first sound very strange to modern ears, but,
as those who have seen the film Jurassic Park will know, this idea is
still central to contemporary scientific thought. For we now know that
the instructions for making the whole body are given in the DNA of
every body cell.
Just as one cell can tell us about the whole body, so likewise the
ancients argued that what we see Above, in the heavens, will be
reflected down here, Below, on Earth. Or, put another way, what we
see in the macrocosm, the larger whole, will be reflected in the
microcosm, the smaller whole. Science is increasingly corroborating
this premise through discoveries about the ‘inter-connectedness of all
life’, which has given rise to the now universally accepted idea that the
ecological balance in nature, when disturbed by man’s greedy
interferences, threatens our survival.
The Sun and Moon are certainly the most prominent features of the
heavens; they illuminate our distinctive but complementary worlds of
day and night. This being the case, we can argue that all things will
contain an equivalent Sun and Moon within them. So this means that
the ideas of the Sun and Moon are to be found at work within all
organisms. And, just as the DNA we see under a microscope looks
nothing like the cells, tissues and organs that it can become, so the Sun
and Moon take on different forms in different entities. In other words,
no-one would mistake a chicken for an egg, or an acorn for an oak.
They look totally different. Yet we know in fact that chicken and egg,
acorn and oak are rather intimately related to each other.
Astrology is a larger expression of this same chicken and egg
metaphor. The ancients saw that if Above and Below are reflections of
each other, then all things must contain the same essential ingredients. (But as to the perennial question – what came first, the chicken or the
egg? – that discusson belongs in another book!)
To the ancients the Sun and Moon were the gods who illuminated
and ruled over the starkly contrasting worlds of day and night. So by
analogy the same gods are seen to dwell within us, illuminating our
own days and nights, our own minds and hearts. The Sun, which lights
our days, represents the state within us of being wide awake. This
‘noonday’ level of consciousness enables us to be deliberately
conscious, focused and attentive. In this state we know ourselves as
separate, alert individuals, attempting to make our way heroically in
the world, even though we may wonder why we sometimes bungle it
so badly. Nevertheless, we consciously keep trying.
In terms of recent research on the brain, the Sun relates to that level
of consciousness which is traditionally associated with a masculine
approach to life: the left brain’s activities of reasoning, manipulating
objects and numbers; the ability to think in three dimensions, to orient
oneself, to plan, organize and pursue specific goals.
The Moon, by contrast, represents the feminine level of our
personality. The ancients knew that the Moon ruled the world of night
and the mystery of the unconscious, of dreams, imagination and the
ebb and flow of our emotional needs, responses and sympathies. At
this level we are in the realm of the feminine and all matters related to
the right hemisphere of the brain, such as sensitivity to sights, sounds,
smells; verbal fluency; and interest in people and relationships. The
Moon is our connection with the larger world of what some would call
Soul, that principle by which we are connected through body and
feeling to all life. The Moon is our ability to respond to our own needs
and to the needs of others for nourishment, protection and affection.
To put it on a postcard, we could say that the Sun shows our more
individual side and what we are like when we make wide-awake,
conscious decisions about our life, what interests us and where we are
going. Whereas the Moon shows our natural, gut-level, instinctive
response to life, our emotional needs and our approach to looking after
ourselves and the needs of others. And the vital thing to remember is
that, whether we are male or female, we each have both Sun and Moon sides to our nature. To clarify further what these two different sides
actually mean for us in real life, let us look at some real-life situations. T HE S UN AND M OON IN E VERYDAY L IFE
Imagine you are at a party. At most parties the aim is to make everyone
feel at ease and sociable and, without realizing it, more in touch with
their Moon level. Hence, parties are usually held in the evening, as the
Sun is setting or has set, and the time of carousing begins.
Nourishment is provided – plenty of food, drink, music and probably
soft, muted lighting. These are all lunar things which encourage us to
feel relaxed, more intimate, and in touch with our spontaneous
feelings, or in other words our Moon side.
Now, imagine that you have had a bit too much to drink and you
are drifting along with the mood, and are generally a bit ‘out of your
head’. Suddenly someone behind you drops a glass which smashes on
the floor. As this happens you find yourself ‘pulling yourself together’
and ‘getting back into your head’. You may shake yourself and blink
your eyes so as to ‘wake up’ and be able to size up the situation and
take appropriate action, such as stopping people stepping on the
broken glass, or helping mop up the spilt drink. If the situation is
potentially dangerous you may actually turn up the lights to ‘shed
more light on things’.
This scene illustrates a shift of consciousness from the relaxed,
cosy, soft-lit Moon level, to the more purposeful, bright-lit, focused,
decision-making level of the Sun. Indeed, whenever you hear someone
saying ‘pull yourself together’, you are hearing the instruction ‘move
from your Moon level (where you have become over-identified with
your feelings and emotional responses) into your Sun level (where you
can have more conscious, decisive control of what is happening to
you)’. If, while you are reading this, you take a moment out to say
‘pull yourself together’, you will probably find that as you do this you
will pull your shoulders back and straighten up your spine. You are, as
it were, taking possession of your body or, as we say, ‘becoming more
self-possessed’. It is interesting to note that, astrologically, your back
and spine are ruled by Leo, the Sun’s natural sign. So when we say of someone who is weak-willed that they are ‘spineless’ or ‘lacking
backbone’ we are suggesting that they are lacking solar qualities.
To give another example of the way we switch levels in daily life –
imagine you have just had a serious talk with your bank manager about
your overdraft. With good Sun-level conviction you have assured him
or her that you are working hard to get your debts paid off. Outside the
bank you meet an old friend. You start talking and soon you are deep
in the lunar world of your mutual memories and shared experiences.
Then out of the corner of your eye you see the bank manager coming
down the street. Immediately you recognize that you are ‘wasting
time’. You straighten your back, ‘pull yourself together’ and briskly
‘go about your business’, back into your Sun level again. For most
people such shifts of consciousness occur repeatedly throughout the
day. With a bit of deliberate self-awareness you can catch yourself
shifting between these levels.
We most obviously experience this shift when we wake in the
morning from the lunar world of dreams. We gradually become
conscious that it is time to get up and that there are things that have to
be done. The more important the things are that have to be done, the
more quickly we are likely to wake up and get going. (Indeed when
there is a ‘big day’ ahead some people find it very difficult to surrender
to the Moon level and her healing sleep.) This shift of consciousness
represented by waking up is, for most people, normally around dawn
as the Sun is beginning to rise in the sky. With sunrise, our own
consciousness begins to rise, and we gradually leave the world of lunar
unconsciousness behind.
Each of these cases illustrates the very normal process of moving
our centre of consciousness from a responsive, reactive Moon mode to
a purposeful, decision-making Sun mode, or vice versa. Each level
serves an important purpose in our natures; each has its own strengths
and weaknesses, its own desires and aspirations, and each will tend to
pursue its own interests irrespective of the other. This is why so many
people find that they are in conflict with themselves. One side pulls us
one way, the other side pulls another. When this happens, we feel
inclined to ask ‘Which is the real me?’ The answer, of course, is both. Ideally we need to be more aware
of both, and to be more adept at recognizing when one is dominating to
the detriment of the other. Indeed, as we shall see, the more we can
accept, understand, and work with both these Sun and Moon levels, the
more we will move towards that ‘inner marriage’ of the lord and lady
within us, of which the great alchemists and philosophers have always
spoken. We are this inner marriage all the time; there is no hard and
fast separation of these modes in the way we actually live our lives.
But is it a good marriage, or does one side feel like divorcing the other
all too often?
You will find some of the ideas associated with Sun and Moon
listed on the next page. Some Ideas Associated with the Sun and Moon
SUN
Day
Male
Yang
Dry
Gold
Illumination
Father
King
Prince
Mind
Thinking
Science
Left Brain
Right Hand
Logic and Structure
Clear facts
Focuses attention MOON
Night
Female
Yin
Moist
Silver
Reflection
Mother
Queen
Princess
Heart
Feeling
Art
Right Brain
Left Hand
Imagination
Symbols
Reflects the moment Interested in things
Interested in people
Guided by reason
Guided by experience
Purposeful, goal-oriented Responds to needs
Takes action
Receptive
Makes decisions
Feels what is needed
Present and Future
Past and Present
Progress
Tradition and Habit
Table 1. The Sun and Moon can be seen to correspond to two very
different ways of relating to the world. We each use both. When either
is overemphasized, there is an imbalance. When both are used together
(see Table 2), we can become increasingly vital and creative. G ETTING IT T OGETHER – T HE K EY TO C REATIVITY
When our conscious, masculine side is at war with our feeling,
feminine side, our life can become an endless struggle between what
we feel we need to do and what we think we ought to do – like a child
living with constantly arguing parents. This can lead to a perplexing
sort of self-sabotage which trips us up at the crucial moment. Indeed,
we say of some people that ‘their left hand does not know what their
right hand is doing’. As we have seen above, this is just another way of
saying that our left-brain, conscious, Sun side does not know what our
right-brain, unconscious, Moon side is on about.
But experience shows that the more these two sides can be brought
into contact with each other to form an inner dialogue, the more whole,
fulfilled and creative our life becomes. In fact, there are times when
these two aspects of ourselves do come together. As we wake we may
remember a dream we have had. Dreams speak from our lunar side. By
training our solar side deliberately to remember our dreams, we can
learn to listen consciously to our unconscious. Working with dreams in
this way gradually brings the conscious and unconscious mind first
into a recognition of, and eventually into a dialogue with, each other. F ALLING IN L OVE – W ITH Áries OURSELF
The experience of falling in love is a good metaphor for what happens
when the masculine and feminine, the Sun and the Moon, begin to
work more harmoniously within us. As anyone who has ever been in
love will know, when we are in love everything seems possible. The
world is beautiful and life is good. The bliss of being released to life’s
magic through falling in love can even become addictive. It makes us
feel alive and, even more important, it makes us feel creative.
It is a notable fact that, even in puritanical periods of history, the
affairs and infidelities of the creative artist tend to be accepted. In
some way, we admit that strongly creative people, be they artists,
musicians, poets, politicians, entrepreneurs, indeed philosophers, are in
the business of finding their inner wholeness. As such, it is recognized
by society, albeit unconsciously, that deep emotional experience and
experimentation is for such people the essence of their life.
Everyone loves a lover. This is because their love reawakens our
own capacity for love, and we are reminded that we, too, are alive and
potentially creative . A loving relationship can be an immensely
powerful outer trigger to our own inner creativity. This is because
falling in love connects us with both our Sun and Moon energies and,
at least temporarily, creates a state of inner ‘alchemical marriage’.
This inner fusion and creativity can, however, take place at any
time if we encourage it and give both sides enough space to develop in
conjunction with each other. It is probably no coincidence that
Leonardo da Vinci, who was a great scientist as well as a great artist,
was ambidextrous and could actually write different messages with
each hand simultaneously. In other words, Leonardo had equal access
to his conscious, purposeful, scientific-orientated left brain (through
his right hand), and to his poetic, artistic right brain (through his left
hand). Although very few of us are ambidextrous, this inner marriage
is something that can happen to all of us. Having tasted it once, it gets
easier and easier.
We hope the profiles in this book will help you to recognize some
of the main qualities of the central Sun – Moon polarity within you,
something of its conflicts and something of its creative magic. The more conscious you can become of the issues in your own Sun – Moon
polarity, the more will your left hand be able to shake your right hand,
and the more you will be able to get your act together and move
towards a greater level of vital wholeness and harmony.
Table 2 offers some images for the resolution of the Sun and Moon,
which show how much more valuable it is when we have the Sun and
Moon working together. As the old saying goes, it takes two to tango,
and this is also true for the individual personality. Happy dancing! The Middle Way – Working with Both Sun and Moon
SUN
Day
Sunlight
Father
Male
King
Active
Mind
Thinking
Self-Conscious
Right hand
Logic
Science
Progress
Interest in things
Awake
Words MOON
Night
Rain
Mother
Female
Queen
Passive
Heart
Feeling
Spontaneous
Left hand
Imagination
Art
Tradition
Interest in people
Asleep
Music Purposeful Responsive SUN+MOON
Dawn, Dusk
Growth
Child
Androgyne
Alchemical marriage
Aware
Wisdom
Intelligent kindness
Conscious spontaneity
Ambidexterous
Creative thought
Inspired invention
Living tradition
Practical help
Creative dreaming
Opera, song, poetry
Attentive Table 2. The often opposing priorities and methods of the Sun and
Moon can find a creative resolution in the ways shown in the third column. Chapter Three
ELEMENTARY , DEAR READERS
Walk groundly, talk profoundly, drink roundly, sleep soundly.
WILLIAM HAZLITT The zodiac divides people into 12 different types. Underlying the
signs, however, is an even more basic division into what the ancients
called the four elements: Fire, Earth, Air and Water. These were seen
as the basic building blocks of all life. In this chapter, we will look at
this four-fold division in detail. Plutão EOPLE AS ‘T YPES ’
The 19th-century English critic William Hazlitt may not have known
much about astrology, but his off-the-cuff summing-up rhyme of how a
person should behave (quoted above) actually touches closely upon the
four element types and the thing they each tend to do best. But before
we look at these four types and why they are good at certain things, it
is helpful first to think about categories and why we categorize people
at all.
People are different, and yet the same. Sameness and difference are
what make the world go round. The sameness and difference about
human beings has been argued about since the dawn of human life on
Earth, but the differences are in fact what attract us to one another and
bind us together in the tension of creative conflict. We say tension
because if we can be attracted, we can also be repelled, but we are still
bound by that repulsion – the repulsion of difference – and remain in
some kind of dynamic relationship because of it. Something which is very different from us tends to fascinate us,
and often we are compulsively attracted to it in order to develop and
nurture something which is deficient in ourselves. An example, and a
very common occurrence: the well-organized, logical ‘thinking’ type
of man is often found in relationship with the romantic, somewhat
dreamy and chaotic, emotional woman. Both irritate and yet fascinate
each other. Communication is often difficult; each thinks the other
quite odd at times; and their own particular realities are so different.
They each develop typical defences which become more pronounced if
they cannot recognize their mutual dependence on each other’s
strengths. They may become accustomed to a habitual sort of tension
and conflict and yet they need each other. They live in different
universes but each affords the other more than a glimpse into another
universe that enriches and expands their own. If they want more than a
superficial understanding of the differences between them, they would
be well advised to look into their own astrological strengths and
weaknesses – and differences.
So categorizing difference is just a natural way of trying to make
sense of what we experience in life in all kinds of ways. People are
different, need and want different things, see and value different
things, and understanding just how ‘we’ are different from ‘them’
makes us feel better about ourselves. It gives us a starting point, a
handle with which to negotiate with the ‘unknown’. Categorizing is
also about defining, and defining is about affirming and respecting
uniqueness.
Harking back to Hazlitt’s rhyme, an astrologer can see the four
element types poetically evoked by this ditty. The earthy individual
tends to ‘walk groundly’ and seems rooted in the world like a 200year-old oak. In fact, we rely on him to be that way: solid, immovable,
absolutely dependable. The airy individual can usually ‘talk
profoundly’, and we envy that gift of the gab and dexterity with ideas
and people which make the air type the socializer par excellence.
When we say the fiery individual ‘drinks roundly’, we are alluding to
the intensely dramatic joie de vivre of this type which fuels his
childlike faith in life, his romantic visions and his celebratory, daredevil approach to most endeavours. And what do we mean by asserting that the watery individual ‘sleeps soundly’? A bit of poetic licence
perhaps, but nevertheless, in human terms, water rules the realm of
feelings and the instinctual, unconscious process of making
evaluations. Water seeks union, safety and relatedness, and responds
irrationally, always from the sleeping depths, from the heart, and from
a need to safeguard his or her precious emotional possessions.
No, William Hazlitt may not have known much about astrology,
but as a good Sun-Aries he must have sown a few wild oats and
learned a thing or two. It is said of Hazlitt that he ‘was possessed of a
peculiar temper, which led to his quarrelling with most of his friends’.
Maybe if they had known that he was a fiery Sun in Aries, for whom
being assertive and argumentative is as natural as birds taking to flight,
they would have chuckled and taken no offence. Indeed, understanding
what makes others tick can help us get beyond stereotyping, which
tends to make us dismiss people before we have a clue about where
they are coming from – and what they might have to offer. T HE F OUR E LEMENTS
The four element types are of special interest to astrologers and
psychologists. Ever since the Greek philosopher Empedocles offered
his thoughts on the subject in the 5th century BC, there has been the
idea that all things in the Universe are composed of a mixture of these
four elements: Fire, Earth, Air, and Water. An ancient Eastern myth
describes the Great Mother Kali as apportioning the elements to create
life, with water giving blood, earth forming the physical body, air
providing breath, and fire producing vital heat.
The elements can be seen to represent four different types of
energy, four distinct states of consciousness or approaches to the
world. They have their counterpart in the four states of matter
identified by modern physics: plasma (Fire), solids (Earth), gas (Air)
and liquid (Water). Equally, the elements can be seen to correlate with
the Great Swiss psychologist Carl Jung’s four main psychological
types: Intuition (Fire), Sensation (Earth), Thinking (Air) and Feeling
(Water). These correspond to the medieval personality classifications
of choleric, melancholic, sanguine, and phlegmatic. Early on, the Greeks allocated these elements in an orderly sequence around the
zodiac, starting with Fire for Aries and repeating the sequence Fire,
Earth, Air, Water, three times, as shown overleaf.
As you can see, three signs are allocated to each of the elements.
The fire signs are Aries, Leo and Sagittarius; to Earth belong Taurus,
Virgo and Capricorn; Air governs Gemini, Libra and Aquarius; and the
Water signs are Cancer, Scorpio and Pisces. You can begin to
understand the dominant characteristics of each element type by
thinking of the imagery each element evokes. The signs of the zodiac and their elements. Fire
The most obvious characteristic of this positive, ‘yang’ element is its
power to transform (whether we like it or not!). When we speak of a
fiery temperament, we are referring to a quality of behaviour that
pushes ahead into life. It is unpredictable, even unstable, active and
forceful, and usually extremely noticeable! Fire types need to make things happen, and to be in the absolute centre of their lives. They can
sense the potential of a situation and make that crucial leap into the
unknown either to fall on their face or to create a ‘roaring success’.
Likewise, we can imagine how people living with a Fire type can
be inspired and encouraged by their partner’s enthusiasm, but also how
easily they might get ‘burned’ by the flames of fire’s passionate ego
and outrageous escapades. Fire evokes descriptive phrases such as
‘burning with zeal’, ‘hot-blooded’, ‘can’t stand still’, ‘hot stuff’,
‘energizing’, ‘stimulating’, ‘inspiring’, ‘ego-centric’ and ‘visionary’. Earth
The Earth is usually referred to as a feminine, ‘yin’ element – Mother
Earth, the ever-dependable source of all life. In the realm of Earth all
material forms stand out and are distinct: we receive our ultimate
material definition as well as our material limitation from Earth. No
matter how fiery and wonderful our visions of what could be, the final
test of their reality resides in the world of matter. How does it act,
taste, feel, measure up in the ‘real’ world?
The predominantly earthy individual tends, therefore, to be matterof-fact, solid, reliable, sensual, productive, grounded in the practical
everyday world, and preoccupied with the here and now. The virtues of
this type are obvious: they know how to get things done, run a
household and a business, balance the books and make flowers grow.
But Earth types go for security, not risk; order rather than chaos; and,
as a result, often have a problem expanding beyond their known,
quantifiable and controllable universe. Air
Like Fire, Air is a positive ‘yang’ element, but has a more impersonal
quality. Just like the wind, it is all-pervasive and constantly moving,
and connects and relates everything it touches in the outer world.
Hence the need for airy individuals to socialize and share ideas with
many different people. Unlike the intensity of Fire, Air is more
detached, abstract and non-intimate in its mode of operation. To find the rational principle at work behind the operations of nature and
human behaviour is what the airy individual seeks. And so we usually
find that the airy temperament is breezy, intellectual, communicative,
curious, co-operative, sometimes ‘airy-fairy’ but always interested in
cause-and-effect, in the past-present-future relationship of things, and
in understanding people and situations with their minds.
Air types handle ideas well, they are logical, cool, civilized, witty
and usually the life of the party where they can indulge themselves in
the sheer variety of people. In the realm of feelings, however, the airy
individual is often insecure and naive, as feelings do not lend
themselves easily to the logical measurement of the rational mind. Water
When we think about the ‘yin’ element of Water, we immediately enter
the realm of the mysterious Feminine. Images arise such as the
refreshing, nurturing, cleansing, cooling qualities of spring rain and
also the power, enchantment and mystery of the deep, blue sea. Water
flows, dissolves and unifies, and indeed the watery temperament
desires to be intimate, to merge and to experience the bliss of
emotional security and containment. Containment is an important clue
to understanding this type, as water will be contained by its
boundaries, or else, as with the terror of a flood, it overwhelms,
engulfs, saturates and drowns.
The watery individual is moved by feelings, by the irrational realm
of romance and imagination, and seeks meaning through relating at a
deeply personal and unexplainable level. Unconcerned with whether or
not someone or something makes ‘logical sense’, they ask instead
‘does it feel right?’ The emotional, watery individual is concerned with
feelings, values, rapport, belonging and memories. T HE E LEMENTS AND T IME
The subjective experience of time is one of those perennial mysteries
of the human condition. Our state of mind – our temperament – seems
largely to determine whether we constantly look at the clock or sail through the day as if it consisted of a few interesting moments. Some
people are constantly harping back to the ‘good old days’, whilst some
are focused on the immense possibilities of the future. Others are
ploddingly preoccupied with the here-and-now, and other types are
happy to scan the past, present, and future and how they relate in a
cause-and-effect way.
Fire is preoccupied with the future, with the hidden meaning and
potential of things and what can be made of them. Earth is interested in
the here-and-now, in facts and figures, concrete accomplishments, and
getting things done in a practical way. Water is concerned with
personal feelings and emotions, with safety, security, and
connectedness, and is especially concerned with the past. Air is
concerned with the abstract reasons behind things and their cause and
effect; air scans past, present, and future in an attempt to get the broad
picture and the abstract principle. I NTERPRETING THE E LEMENTS
The elements can at times be taken literally. Thus those with a strong
Earth element in their charts will be strongly physical in some way –
they will like and feel at home with the earth, gardening, farming,
pottery, building and working with their hands to make things. Water
types will often thrive beside the sea or next to a lake or a stream. Fire
types can quite literally enjoy piling up a roaring open fire and even
being the blacksmith. Air types often love the open air, walking in the
wind, bird-watching, flying, gliding, or simply flying a kite or listening
to their wind chimes.
It is not quite that simple, however. A person may be strongly
Water, yet be an airline pilot, or strongly air and be deeply attached to
farming or become a master builder. Strength in an element or
elements shows us an approach to the world. This can be illustrated by
considering the chart of Gertrude Ederle. One of the great pioneer
women swimmers of early this century, she became, in 1926, the first
woman to swim the English Channel. Surely someone who spent so
much time in the water would have to have her Sun, the focus of her
life, in a Water sign? In fact, Ederle had Sun in Libra and Moon in Capricorn, making her an Air-Earth type. So what is an Air-Earth type
doing spending their days immersed in the salty deeps?
First of all, it should be said that her birth chart does have a great
deal of Water in it, not least a conjunction of Jupiter and Neptune in
Cancer trine Saturn in Pisces, indicating watery ideals and ambitions,
and Mercury in Scorpio, indicating a mind attracted by oceanic depths.
But what is her approach to swimming? Listen to what she has to say
on the subject:
To me the sea is like a person – like a child that I’ve known a
long time. It sounds crazy, I know, but when I swim in the sea I
talk to it. I never feel alone when I’m out there.
So although she spent much of her life immersed in water, her
approach and attitude to swimming was utterly airy. T HE E LEMENT C OMBINATIONS
Each Sun – Moon type is a combination of elements. In the following
descriptions of the element combinations, please remember that the
pairing can be either way around. For example, a Fire – Earth
combination refers equally to Sun Fire – Moon Earth as it does to Sun
Earth – Moon Fire. There will be subtle differences, but the dynamic is
generally the same. The diagram on page 26 will tell you which
elements your Sun and Moon are in. See the table of Sun – Moon
combinations (below) to find your Sun – Moon type. The Sun – Moon Combinations
SUN/MOON: The four pure types, with both Sun and Moon in the same element,
most vividly express the element involved. Such an emphasis on one
element also represents an imbalance, so such types are liable to swing
into their complementary or opposite element. Fire-Fire Combinations (See nos. 1, 5, Mercúrio , 49, 53, 57, 97, 101,
105)
Fire is the most primary of elements – hot, volatile, creative, dramatic.
The double-fire type is intensely passionate and lives from a very selfcentred perspective. That is, he approaches life according to his
keenly-felt beliefs and visions of what could be and what is truth for
him. The double-fire type may be so in tune with his inner reality that
he becomes insensitive to others. Frequently his relationships suffer
from his lack of awareness that others might not have such a strong
sense of destiny. Whatever his interests might be, this individual
throws himself into life with enormous enthusiasm, often bumping into
and scattering others in the process.
When Aneurin Bevan described Winston Churchill – a double-Fire
type (Sun Sagittarius, Moon Leo) – he summed up the problems of the
pure-Fire combination:
The seven league boot tempo of his imagination hastens him on
to the sunny uplands of the future, but he is apt to forget that
the slow steps of humanity must travel every inch of the weary
road that leads there. There is about the double-fire type all that one associates with the
imagery of fire – it burns, it roars, and it waits for nothing. This type
can be brash, arrogant and impatient, but also inspiring and childlike
with an immense capacity for enjoying life and persuading others to
believe in themselves and to ‘have a go’. This type will often sense the
hidden opportunity in a situation, and his belief that anything is
possible is the magic ingredient behind his natural leadership qualities.
Never mind the fact that he needs plenty of lackeys to make it all
happen in the concrete world, he has the vision – the rest is incidental! Shadow
Because of his very enthusiastic flight towards glory, the strongly fire
type may paradoxically develop a compensating pessimism when he
comes down to earth. Indeed, coming down to earth is generally what
he tries to avoid, for the mundane necessities of life seem like
obstacles thwarting the pursuit of important things. Churchill’s
oppressive periods of what he called ‘black dog’ and Mark Twain’s,
(Sagittarius – Aries) bouts of dark depression are classic examples of
what can happen when there is a loss of meaning for the fiery
individual. This type’s tendency to rebel angrily against the confines of
the mortal condition, such as seeing to the needs of the body and the
bank account, will severely restrict his potency. He needs to develop
patience, moderation, practical skills, sensitivity to others, and respect
for the simple, inarticulate material world. Relationships
The pure-Fire type may gravitate towards other Fire types, but this can
be too much of an exhausting good thing. The airy individual is
intellectually provocative and challenging for the double-fire type, and
together they can make a very creative team. A relationship with the
watery individual can be quite exciting and romantic but also volatile
and unstable. The most compelling relationships tend to be with the
Earth type, people who are comfortable and adept at dealing with the
everyday world – making breakfast, mowing the lawn, getting the tax returns in on time. There is a strong mutual fascination between these
two types which can help to build a strong relationship although
inevitably there will be some difficulties in understanding each other’s
basic values. Male v. Female
Men in Western society are undoubtedly more inclined to feel at home
with the strongly extrovert qualities that Fire normally bestows. Whilst
‘spirit’ and energy are admired in women, there is no question that the
Western woman who overtly uses her Fire energies is likely to be
rather disparagingly labelled as ‘pushy, forceful, quick-tempered and
bossy’. This is slowly changing, however. The double-Fire woman is
not inclined to care too much about what others think, and is very able
to stand up for herself in a man’s world. Earth – Earth Combinations (See nos. 14, 18, 22, 62, 66, 70,
110, 114, 118)
The double-Earth type is down-to-earth and matter-of-fact. His
pragmatic philsophy and concern for material well-being was
expressed well by Karl Marx, a double Taurus, in his famous dictum:
from each according to their abilities, to each according to
their needs.
This type is usually well grounded in economic and physical reality.
He is very much in tune with his senses and instincts through which he
feels connected to, and in control of, his world. There is often an innate
understanding of the natural, organic processes of growth which gives
this individual persistence, patience and self-discipline in the pursuit of
his goals. Stable, realistic, practical, dependable and down-to-earth,
this individual is the ‘pillar of society’ type on whom others rely for
sound judgments and solid, traditional wisdom.
Usually very much at home in their bodies and appreciative of
sensual pleasures, the earthy individual knows that the body and all the material realm sustain us and supply us with evidence that we do
indeed exist – and that we have a creative existence, too. This type
readily learns how to manipulate the material world to his own delight
and advantage, and usually with the awareness that the Earth and the
laws of nature deserve respect. However, an overly earthy
consciousness eventually becomes sceptical and fearful of what may
lie beyond the physical realm. He risks losing his vision and sense of
meaning through over-concern with concrete facts and trusting only
what he can touch, taste, see, hear and, most of all, measure. Shadow
The double-Earth type’s deepest, darkest fear is chaos and the loss of
control. The unconventional and deviant are seen as threatening, or
even evil. The intangible, unseen realm of spiritual meaning and
purpose tends to elude him or only peeps into his life via the classic
superstition and the odd psychic apparition. A strongly traditional and
too-rigid adherence to concrete reality can create an increasingly
hollow treadmill and enslavement to the physical – which the earthy
type with dread has to admit only ends in death. What then?
The double-Earth type often needs to develop his imagination, his
trust in new possibilities, and to accept that his need for spiritual
sustenance need not threaten his physical security and his need to be in
control, as far as possible, of his life and circumstances. To entertain
the idea that there may be a realm in which quantitative measurement
does not apply – the realm of meaning and spiritual purpose – can only
release him from the risk of stagnant imprisonment in the fleshly cage. Relationships
The double-Earth person is one of the best marriage partners of all, for
he is an able provider and a loyal, dependable mate. He may gravitate
towards other earthy types with whom he will share many values and
feel secure and validated. But he is likely to have a more tantalizing
attraction to the fiery type whose enigmatic and unpredictable ways
stimulate and challenge. The airy individual and the double-Earth person make a compatible
pairing due to their mutual impersonal, practical, logical approach to
problem-solving. The watery individual finds the double-Earth person
a perfect container for his emotions, and these two can build a cosy
nest and a strong, binding attachment that wears well. Male v. Female
The qualities of the practical double-Earth type fit comfortably with
both male and female in Western society. Both will have a strong sense
of duty and commitment, and in the case of the female, a strong
inclination to serve human needs.
Double-Earth women are enormously capable, able to sustain
demanding long-term professional projects as well as order and wellbeing. They tend to be protective, resourceful, patient, and
hardworking, capable of showing their loyalty and love through action
but remaining somewhat restrained in the expression of feelings. The
male of this type may not fit into the stereotype of the ‘macho’ western
man with all his extrovert courage and Indiana Jones-like panache, but
his groundedness and quiet determination, plus his strongly rational
bias, make him a practical and effective leader who can map out his
territory with polished organization, and work steadfastly towards the
mastering of whatever medium he chooses. Air – Air Combinations (See nos. 27, 31, 35, 75, 79, 83, 123,
127, 131)
Intelligent, gracious ladies and thoughtful gentlemen, double-Air types
are the most reasonable, civilized, clear-headed of combinations. They
are probably the most cultured and elegant as well, never at a loss for a
word or comment, always ready for discussion and reasoned argument
and debate. Being told this will not go to their head for they are not
normally prone to self-importance – that would be far too illogical for
their poised and intelligent approach to life. The double-Air type assumes independence as his birthright. To be
able to move and connect with ideas and people is the stuff of life for
him. Witty, cerebral, urbane and polite, the double-Air type is a natural
communicator and thinker who prefers to soar in the ideal realm where
he can build social, political or philosophical schemes that help
improve humankind’s lot.
A thinker par excellence, the double-Air type finds security in
taking the broad intelligent viewpoint, in stepping back in order to see
the patterns and principles at work in the whirlwind of life’s activities.
He is an observer and theorizer of life, and his faith in the power of
ideas is well exhibited by the British economist John Maynard Keynes
(Sun Gemini, Moon Gemini) who said:
The ideas of economists and political philosophers, both when
they are right and when they are wrong, are more powerful
than is commonly understood. Indeed, the world is ruled by
little else.
This detached, observant mode is useful but it often earns this type the
accusation of being cold and unfeeling. Although others may
experience double Air in this way, the strongly airy individual insists,
often at considerable length, that he is only doing what comes naturally
– questioning, examining and remaining open, fair-minded, friendly
and harmonious, and above all communicating with whoever will
listen and discuss. Shadow
The double-Air type labours under the illusion that there is such a
thing as complete objectivity and perfect impartiality. He is utterly
honourable and, alas, childlike, in his attempt to understand, analyse
and name everything. Childlike in that his feeling for life, because it is
such a conundrum to him, tends to remain immature, undeveloped and
very often unconscious. The whole range of human feelings – hurt,
angry, jealous, dependent, fearful, in love, hateful – tends to be avoided, repressed or played down with great agility. The only possible
exception is cheerfulness, which Air is particularly good at.
The rejection of the feeling dimension makes this type curiously
sensitive and vulnerable to the waywardness of human behaviour. The
strongly airy individual can therefore be a real challenge in a
relationship. It is not easy being the only one admitting to all those
unpleasant and uncontrollable feelings whilst your airy mate looks on
with a cool, nonchalant and maddeningly debonair gaze. The doubleairy individual weaves clever arguments so you have to be subtle and
careful when you try to bring his feelings to his attention. Relationships
The double-Air person is an adventurer and a traveller, if not
geographically then intellectually in some way. He will usually meet a
wide variety of people throughout his life and be attracted to
adventuresome souls. Communication is paramount for this type, and
he needs mental rapport and mutual respect in a relationship for it to be
satisfying and long-lasting.
Air is compatible with Earth and they make a good team, for they
both approach life logically and practically. Fire and Air stimulate each
other in the realm of ideas and possibilities, but this relationship could
lack stability and burn itself out. Air is fascinated by the watery
individual whose predominant feeling mode will help the airy person
to get in touch with his mysterious emotions and to develop his
imagination. Airy thinking and watery feeling are opposites, and yet
because of that very fact they are intensely drawn to one another. Male v. Female
Traditionally we expect to see the objective, witty, thinking
characteristics of the double-Air type in men whose intellects make
them leaders of thought and action. Women of this type are just as
independent, inquisitive and extroverted, and rebel when others try to
peg them into more traditional female roles. Adaptability, ingenuity
and handling people with cunning insight and skill are double-Air virtues, and the female of this type can employ these qualities in both
the home and the marketplace. Both sexes are often drawn towards
learning and communication, as well as professional activities that
allow for maximum freedom of movement and travel. Water-Water Combinations (See nos. 40, 44, 48, 88, 92, 96,
136, 140, 144)
Water is the element of feelings and imagination, and the English
language is full of Water imagery which is descriptive of this type. The
strongly Water type is able to get into the mainstream and go with the
flow. They drink in life’s experiences, and nothing washes over them.
They can gush with feelings, quickly go misty with emotions and
dissolve into tears. Sentimental and nostalgic about the past, this type
can wax lyrical about his longings for times gone by, as does the
Anglo-Irish dramatist Oliver Goldsmith (Sun Scorpio, Moon Cancer):
I love everything old: old friends, old times, old manners, old
books, old wine.
This type can also at times be a wet blanket, especially to more
boisterous Fire types and restless Air types. In politics their
compassionate natures incline them to be the caring and compassionate
‘wets’, rather than the airy ‘dries’ with their doctrinal purity. Heartier
types may consider Water individuals to be ‘drips’ and ‘still wet
behind the ears’. But ‘still waters run deep’, and the feeling strengths
of the double-Water type give the capacity to empathize with others
and to show caring concern for everyone in need.
This individual also has a rich imagination and often the ability to
‘get inside the skin’ of another; hence the poetic, artistic and theatrical
talents often come easily. A confusion of personal boundaries is,
however, an occupational hazard of the strongly watery type. They can
be so sensitive that they become psychic sponges, picking up moods
and emotional undercurrents in the environment, and unable to
differentiate their own feelings and needs from those of others. This type wants emotional security and emotional food, and
because the two do not always come together in equal doses, they
easily get hurt. If wounded he can withdraw into an icy silence, but
once his feelings are recognized and addressed, his heart quickly melts
and thaws out and he is soon back in the flow of things. Shadow
Swimming in the seas of subjectivity does not make it easy for doubleWater types to engage in clearly reasoned arguments and objective
judgements. They know how they personally feel about people or
situations, and that is their reality – rather than a collection of objective
facts which lead indubitably to a logical conclusion. Hence the
strongly watery individual tends to remain irrational when he thinks he
is being rational. This type needs to learn how to think things through
with more detachment. Yes, he may have had a bad experience with a
Malaysian taxi driver, but does that really make all the Malaysian race
bad?
The double-Water type is also prone to cling in relationships,
because they provide the arena for the emotional exchange,
containment and security that is so vital for this individual’s wellbeing.
This type often needs to learn that letting go just a little, and allowing
loved ones more room for manoeuvre, usually strengthens rather than
jeopardizes a relationship. Male v. Female
Water is undoubtedly a feminine-oriented element, and hence generally
much easier in our society for females to handle than males. Whilst
men can be sympathetic, caring and compassionate, it is still not easy
for men in the West to show their feelings or to allow themselves to be
seen dissolving into tears. In consequence, strongly watery men may
actually swing into the opposite pole and become ultra-rational,
detached, and unemotional to a degree that some would see as almost
pathological. This can lead to men of this type, and some women,
taking pride in showing no emotions and acting only through reason. When this does happen, however, this type of polarized individual
will almost always be found surrounded with highly emotional people
and situations that ‘act out’ the inner emotional life they find
themselves unable to handle. This can be seen in the super-rational
husband with the hysterical wife, and the calm, reasonable
psychologist who is deeply concerned in a supremely rational way to
help those who have become ‘confused’ and ‘emotionally disturbed’. Fire – Earth Combinations (See nos. 2, 6, 10, 13, 17, 21, 50,
54, 58, 61, 65, 69, 98, 102, 106, 109, 113, 117)
The Fire Sun – Earth Moon type is a strong, compelling personality.
We can see this as the volcano pouring forth lava which will eventually
become new, fertile lands. This individual can deal with molten metal
like the blacksmith or the engineer shaping raw material into
serviceable tools. Here is the practical enthusiast, the doer who can
also enthuse others to action.
This combination has been called the bull-dozer, for he has
tremendous weight and drive to push ahead in exactly the direction he
wants. J. Pierrpoint Morgan (Sun Aries, Moon Virgo), the American
industrialist, typified this combination well when he said:
I don’t want a lawyer to tell me what I cannot do; I hire him to
tell me how to do what I want to do.
Likewise, the Earth Sun – Fire Moon combination is also the practical
visionary who consciously keeps his feet on the ground but has the
instinct to go for the main chance, to know when to risk, and to pull
rabbits out of hats when least expected. This individual could be the
hard-headed pragmatic entrepreneur who sees future opportunities and
can seize them with confidence and know-how, turning them into solid
and often lucrative realities in the present.
Earth – Fire types may possess a raucous sense of humour, a
pronounced sensuality and a real penchant for the good life, as can be
seen in the life of Alexander Woollcott (Sun Capricorn, Moon Sagittarius), the American drama critic and wit, who said, whilst
surveying an elegant country estate:
Just what God would have done if he had the money.
Either way, with this Fire – Earth combination there is a strong
practical, rational bias coupled with a powerful intuition and a
compelling need for freedom and power. When the positive interaction
between Fire and Earth is not working, this person can become very
tense, swinging between a burning, intuitive faith and a down-in-thedumps inertia and Doubting Thomas scepticism. Shadow
People with Fire – Earth combinations tend to have enormous
conviction and certitude about themselves and their beliefs. As a result,
they can suffer from the defects of their virtues and become fixed,
dictatorial and insensitive to others and to the subtler nuances of
human relationships.
Whether it is Fire Sun – Earth Moon or Earth Sun – Fire Moon,
this combination produces a powerful ego which can easily run the
show in any relationship. When the urge to dominate meets with
resistance, they can become baffled and frustrated until they begin to
respect the rights and needs of others. Relationships
Fire – Earth may find his own type atttractive, but can enter into very
creative and complementary relationships with Air – Water types who
can both fan the flames and water the garden! Often a benevolent
dictator in relationships and in the home, this type nevertheless is
usually a very committed mate, tending to show his romantic feelings
through actions. His stubbornness can, however, sometimes block
domestic harmony and get in the way of intimacy. Male v. Female
This is a good combination for people in politics and managerial
positions who must make high-powered decisions and push through
policies and procedures. Indeed, these individuals can be quite pushy
and competitive, qualities the Western world feels are more acceptable
in males.
The female of this type is authoritative and pragmatic and is
unlikely to waste time over failures or adverse reactions to her
independence. Both males and females tend to have substantial
ambition and terrific stamina. Fire – Air Combinations (See nos. 3, 7, 11, 25, 29, 33, 51, 55,
59, 73, 77, 81, 99, 103, 107, 121, 125, 129)
The Fire – Air type is a real ‘live-wire’, full of exciting ideas and able
to communicate them with tremendous zeal which impresses and
persuades everyone around them. If taken to the extreme, this makes
this individual full of bluster and bombast, long-winded and prone to
be carried away by his own rhetoric and eloquence. Others may also be
carried away as he tends to have lots of joie de vivre, cleverness and
charisma. Noel Coward (Sun Sagittarius, Moon Gemini) expresses the
wit and impatience of this combination well:
I write at high speed because boredom is bad for my health.
Indeed, boredom is something this type shuns and can usually avoid
because they think and live at such a fast pace.
If the Sun is in Air and the Moon in Fire, the effect is rather like
that of a hot-air balloon – a beautiful way to travel that takes you way
up into the giddy heights. So likewise this type tends to be a Utopian
idealist, seeing ever more distant sunny shores to which the human
race may travel, loftier vistas and wider horizons. Alternatively, if this
type gets on a high horse, they can be very moralistic, ‘knowing
exactly what is good for us’. Shadow
This type is a potential visionary, but visionaries need earthiness in
order to bring ideas to fruition. The Fire – Air individual can be
impractical and may exhaust himself with his intense sociability and
the generation of stimulating ideas and new risks. If he remains in the
realm of impersonal possibilities, he becomes cut off from body and
the more mundane but essential needs of human life. And without
emotional vulnerability, he misses out on real intimacy. Relationships
Fire – Air types are so mentally active and gregarious, so keen to
understand and to share their understanding, that they rarely play the
role of the loner in the crowd. Their interests drive them on, and when
they get to their destination they meet and strike up conversations and
relationships with other interesting mavericks. In a relationship they
need intellectual rapport and plenty of freedom to pursue their own
interests.
They may often be out of touch with their feelings and emotional
needs, and an Earth – Water type can help remind them that they are in
fact human. There is a kind of restless, eternal youthfulness about the
Fire – Air type which is very appealing, but without the challenges of a
serious relationship they can remain somewhat emotionally immature
and superficial. Male v. Female
The extroverted, enthusiastic and argumentative qualities of this type
are applauded in males, whilst females of this type tend to be seen as
‘masculine’ and intimidating. Female Fire – Air types tend not to settle
for traditional roles that limit their potential, and are therefore often at
the cutting edge of social change. Both males and females of this type
lead pacey lives to some extent, and can often live by their wits and
land themselves at opportunity’s doorstep with the greatest of ease. Fire – Water Combinations (See nos. Júpiter , 8, 12, 37, 41, 45, 52,
56, 60, 85, 89, 93, 100, 104, 108, 133, 137, 141)
Take fire power and water power and put them together and you get
steam, the power which drove the great trains. Steam is used to cleanse
and sterilize and can also scald. Emotionally, this combination has a
reputation for being especially given to passionate emotional
involvement. Volatile, romantic, moody, the Fire – Water person has
the artistic temperament which can fluctuate wildly. It is a poetic,
ardent temperament, courageous in its visions yet vulnerable in its
need for love and inspiration.
The poet Shelley (Sun Leo, Moon Pisces) exemplified this
passionate, artistic nature very well and could equally be describing
himself when he rejoices in the Skylark:
Pourest thy full heart in profuse strains of unpremeditated art.
When the Sun is in Water and the Moon is in Fire, the result is a
passionate crusader whose feelings fuel his purpose and art. But fire
can make water evaporate, and water may extinguish fire. When this
happens, this type can feel unstable, depressed, and disoriented. Shadow
The Fire – Water individual often lacks the ability to take the
impersonal view; that is, to step back and reason impartially about
things. Their approach is intensely personal, urgent, passionate, and for
them life lacks meaning and colour if that vital personal ingredient is
taken away.
Often a slave to the intense fluctuation of moods, this type’s
volatility can reach fanatical proportions, especially if a cool, reasoned
argument is called for. Instability and impracticality can play havoc
with the smooth running of their lives. Relationships The Fire – Water type is a highly romantic, warm and emotional
person, and to a large degree thrives on love and satisfying
relationships. Whilst one part of the nature may want to merge and
gain absolute security, however, another part wants excitement and
challenge: one part may feel an infinite capacity to give whilst another
part is impelled to devour. This mixture can be demanding to live with,
but also exciting and rewarding in the way that it might stretch other,
less emotional types.
People with this combination tend to feel contained and grounded
by Earth – Air types. Their moodiness and changeability is less
problematic as they learn to direct some of their emotional energy into
their own creative pursuits. Male v. Female
This combination blends the most feminine and the most masculine of
the elements. An extreme ‘yang’ and an extreme ‘yin’ quality together
produces a very creative but also a very volatile and often difficult
combination for either sex to handle. Both males and females can
experience huge mood swings as they contact first their powerful
independence and pride, and then their sensitivity and vulnerability. In
general, both males and females will seek highly personal professional
avenues. Conforming to convention is not their strong point!
Under the label of the ‘artist’, both the male and female Fire –
Water type will find more compassionate acceptance as well as intense
admiration from others. In other words, their artistic inspiration and
highly theatrical style usually more than compensates for their lack of
emotional stability. Earth – Air Combinations (See nos. 15, 19, 23, 26, 30, 34,
63, 67, 71, 74, 78, 82, 111, 115, 119, 122, 126, 130)
This combination produces a productive, rational personality which
can be both innovative and efficient. The challenge of being up-in-theair and down-to-earth at the same time is that of bringing together abstract thought with the nitty-gritty issues of getting on in the world.
These two elements combine easily and make for a clear-headed,
objective and scientific approach. This is the temperament of the
practical idealist who observes, thinks, plans a course of action and
then acts. American president John F. Kennedy (Sun Gemini, Moon
Virgo) is an example of this combination, and expresses the lunar
instinct to give service to a rational, well-considered ideal in his
famous injunction:
Ask not what your country can do for you —ask what you can
do for your country.
When the Sun is in Earth and the Moon is in Air, the conscious,
rational impulse is to get to grips with reality, to build, consolidate and
organize with the logical instinct to make one’s efforts as humane and
far-reaching as possible. There is often a dry sense of humour and
capacity to use language with adroit accuracy. The late American poet
Carl Sandburg (Sun Capricorn, Moon Aquarius) had a talent for using
colloquialisms, which is characteristic of this combination, and his
view of slang expresses this down-to-earth communicative ability:
Slang is a language that rolls up its sleeves, spits on its hands
and goes to work. Shadow
The Earth – Air individual is adept at mastering the mundane world,
learning how things work and then applying his knowledge in many
different and normally useful ways. He can, however, easily lose touch
with the less quantifiable things of life such as emotions. When this
happens he risks the danger of becoming ‘dry as dust’ and stuck in the
pragmatic, cost-effective, scientific approach. Relationships This type enjoys communicating and being helpful, and tends to get on
well with most people at a practical, social level. They will find
predominantly Fire and Water types either alien or fascinating, but
either way the latter would enable the Earth – Air person to contact the
more mysterious and emotional, irrational parts of his personality. The
Earth – Air individual seeks rational rapport in a relationship and is
very supportive and adaptable, but he needs help in learning how to
discover and share his feelings. Male v. Female
This is a very androgynous combination, encouraging both the
supportive skills associated with natural female roles and the
intellectual skills of the male. Earth – Water Combinations (See nos. 16, 20, 24, 38, 42,
46, 64, 68, 72, 86, 90, 94, 112, 116, 120, 134, 138, 142)
Flanders and Swan sing ‘Mud, mud, glorious mud’, and you do not
have to be a hippopotamus to appreciate the qualities of mud. Think of
the rich fertility of well-irrigated fields, the potter’s clay on the wheel
ready to be formed, the clay of bricks and tiles, or the malleable
concrete which forms the basis of so much construction. This is one of
the most practical, supportive and nourishing of combinations. It
combines the capacity to feel sympathy for others with a devotional
determination and enterprising ability to do what needs to be done to
meet others’ needs. American churchman Reinhold Niebuhr (Sun
Cancer, Moon Taurus) gives eloquent expression to this type’s
orientation:
God grant me the serenity to accept the things I cannot change,
courage to change the things I can, and wisdom to know the
difference.
When the Sun is in Earth and the Moon in Water, the individual can
readily develop a practical understanding of day-to-day life, and seems to have the innate wisdom to know what is important and what is not
in a situation. For this type, both practical and emotional needs ‘make
sense’ and should intertwine in a balanced, normal life. Consider this
view of the 18th-century wit Samuel Johnson (Sun Virgo, Moon
Pisces):
A man is in general better pleased when he has a good dinner
upon his table, than when his wife talks Greek.
A bit dated yes, chauvinistic indeed, but nevertheless Johnson
expresses that practical wisdom and measured sensuality of the Earth –
Water combination. Shadow
The Earth – Water individual wants both material and emotional
security, and therefore usually views change and challenge as
threatening. As a result, there is with this type a propensity to get stuck
in the mud, and a danger of getting swamped by duty and slowed down
by the inertia of possessiveness and limited viewpoint.
Life is highly personal for this individual; what he can see, taste,
hear, smell and feel, and how it might affect his world, is all important
to him. The larger, detached viewpoint is usually lost on him. He may
need to learn how to move just a little out of his well-defined groove
so that life does not become too stagnant. And like quicksand, his mind
can suck him down. Relationships
The Earth – Water person normally finds immense satisfaction in a
relationship that brings out the innate dependable, resourceful, gentle,
devotional qualities of this combination. This individual feels affirmed
and valued when he knows he is needed and valued for his useful
accomplishments.
People with this combination are particularly good at serving and
caring for others, and once they find their romantic niche they get on with nurturing and nest-building. Hence they make excellent partners,
and tend to prefer sitting around the fire drinking hot cocoa to lots of
razzle-dazzle on the town. This type helps to ground and contain the
more unstable, exciting Fire – Air type, and there is likely to be a
mutual attraction due to the striking differences. Male v. Female
This is a primarily receptive, feminine combination and has all the
hallmarks of the female stereotype – caring, domestic, loyal, quiet,
persevering. Both male and female of this type will tend to be
introverts and could work well on their own in an artistic medium, but
they could also develop a shrewd business sense and do well in the
marketplace. They can employ their pragmatism and sensitivity in
quiet but purposeful ways, ‘sussing out’ the climate of the times and
the integrity of would-be business partners. Air – Water Combinations (See nos. 28, 32, 36, 39, 43, 47,
76, 80, 84, 87, 91, 95, 124, 128, 132, 135, 139, 143)
Air and Water together produce mist which is a seemingly
insubstantial, rather ethereal mixture. In fact, this combination of mind
and emotion can produce a wonderful sense of humour and an
extremely creative imagination, making for an equal interest in both
sciences and the humanities, in people and things, in fact and fiction.
This individual is enormously sensitive and potentially insightful, but
may need to exert terrific effort in handling the real world. It is
potentially a romantic, poetic combination, powerfully expressive and
often theatrical. The Welsh poet Dylan Thomas (Sun Scorpio, Moon
Aquarius) expressed this ironic blend of mind and heart in a note about
his Collected Poems:
These poems, with all their crudities, doubts, and confusions,
are written for the love of Man and in praise of God, and I’d be
a damn ‘fool if they weren’t. When the Sun is in Air and the Moon in Water, the individual may be a
thinking type who consciously reflects upon the mysteries of life. This
person thinks he is a free spirit, but soon finds out how deeply attached
he has become. The Scottish birth-control campaigner Marie Stopes
(Sun Libra, Moon Pisces) was typical of the combination in her
idealism, which was concerned with the realm of human values and the
mysterious world of feeling and emotion. She expressed this well
when she said:
There is nothing in the world I so reverence as beauty, whether
of the world, of character or in a soul. Shadow
The Air – Water type may sometimes get confused as to whether he is
thinking or feeling something. An apparently detached viewpoint may
in fact be tinged with personal bias. This individual may also
experience a mind – emotion split, feeling both emotionally involved
and even dependent, and yet detached from the object of his affections
at another level.
In general, there can be a tendency for a rich imagination to remain
somewhat ‘up in the air’, and for procrastination and an impractical
approach to limit the possibilities of successful self-expression. If
Water is the stronger element, there can be intense emotionality,
receptivity and self-dramatization, but with a lack of strategy about
one’s creative energies. If Air is the stronger element, the individual
initiates well-thought-out schemes but they may lack that touch of
originality which comes from the depths of an inspired heart. To find
out which element is stronger, you need to know further details about
the horoscope, such as whether there are several planets in Water or
Air. Relationships
The Air – Water type is interested in relating and communicating, and
makes a delightful and stimulating partner. But there may be a kind of divine discontent in this individual, a sort of unconscious yearning for
something more and a sense that the grass is greener somewhere else.
Relationships can be problematic because there is a need for intimacy
and security as well as for variety and change.
Women with the Moon in a Water sign may tend to gravitate
towards men with a strong Water component, for they will help bring
out their sense of femininity, which could otherwise get suppressed
and intellectualized. For similar reasons, men with the Moon in an Air
sign may find themselves drawn to Air-type women, with whom they
will feel a spontaneous affinity. It may be possible for this combination
to drift into new intimacies without realizing it is happening, and they
would expect to be able to remain friends with all past lovers. Male v. Female
This combination is probably best handled by females who can stay in
touch with their feelings and also reflect on them without too much
distress. The female role requires ‘diffuse awareness’ – the ability to
be aware of many different things at once – and it also requires
tremendous adaptability, which this combination provides. It is likely
that males will tend to polarize towards the mental and intellectual
dimension, defending themselves against the overt expression of
feelings. This will especially be the case when the Moon is the water
element. Part Two
THE SUN -MOON COMBINATIONS Chapter Four
SUN IN ARIES S UN A RIES —1—
M OON A RIES An actor’s a guy who, if you ain’t talking about him, ain’t listening.
MARLON BRANDO Glory to Man in the highest! for Man is the master of things.
ALGERNON SWINBURNE Themes
FIRE/FIRE Bold; quick-thinking; innovative mind; extrovert;
passionate; blunt; impatient; self-centred; courageous; intuitive;
adventurous; nervous energy; touchy ego; optimistic; progressive;
integrity; maverick and crusading temperament.
Fools rush in where angels fear to tread – this expresses a core truth
about you, and one of your greatest strengths, which is this: you
embody the ‘beginner’s mind’ with all its hope, vitality and yearning
for life. This makes you an exciting companion because you live in the
present, in the moment, although that moment is inevitably geared up
to take you into a fabulous future. Always ready to take up a challenge
and express what is on your mind, you have a forceful, eager,
adventurous personality and a basic assumption of total independence.
Your ‘beginner’s mind’ is not strong on forethought or patience, but
your fiery spirit and unabashed self-interest is very impressive, often
inspiring, and always a force to be reckoned with. You are quick-thinking and action-oriented, every fibre of your
being instinctively attuned to your thought and purpose. Like the
flowers in early spring, you need to burst into action, and you can
easily get irritable if your energy meets an obstacle along the way.
When you’re young, these obstacles make you kick and fight, but in
time you’ll engage with them differently, realizing that life and people
are a lot more complex than you thought. Your tendency to plunge into
life with impulsive zeal is what gives you the reputation for being
bossy and competitive, a bit of a warrior. But your energy is all about
the desire for development, trying out your strength, meeting life with
gusto but with no destructive intent. In fact, your competitiveness is
mainly with yourself – you want to find out what your ‘best’ is,
because that is finding out who you are, which is the top of the list on
your unspoken agenda.
You are a non-conformist and are naturally good at challenging
people if they get too set in their ways. This characteristic can mean
that you tend to stir up controversy and ruffle feathers, but it often
spurs others on to realize more of their own potential. Whether or not
they thank you for it depends on your ability to develop diplomacy.
This will come as you learn about yourself through the challenges of
living, for your seemingly unquestioned belief in yourself belies a
vulnerability and proneness to feeling lost and alone. This is
befuddling to you. Your courage and dynamism mask your insecurity;
what you know about is action, and situations in which you are
powerless make you feel despair. But even that won’t last long because
you come to life in a crisis. You can be a fierce rescuer, battling for the
rights of the weak and unprotected, but you may need to be careful that
in your zeal you don’t deprive others of developing their own voice.
Although you are sociable and you like people, you do not want
them to take too long in explaining themselves. Impatient with
ditherers, you want people to plunge into life with you – at your speed.
Your weak point, then, is insensitivity to the speed and interests of
others. If you can slow down, take more interest in other people’s
opinions and problems and put yourself in their shoes more often, you
will be amazed at the response and the increased level of co-operation
you get. Others are already inspired by your courage, your keen, incisive mind, and your vitality and ability to cut through nonessentials; all you need is to develop more tolerance for other points of
view, and for the fact that there may not always be an immediate
solution to every problem you encounter. Relationships
You are an ardent and honest romantic who wins friends and lovers by
the directness, honesty, and enthusiasm of your love. You bring
warmth, spontaneity, and unselfconscious enjoyment to your
relationship which can help to cut through any defensiveness in your
partner, and which can even liberate him or her from old wounds, such
is the magic of your joie de vivre. Your childlike capacity for
embracing the new and letting go of the past can encourage your loved
ones – lovers, friends, children – to believe in the exciting possibilities
of a fresh start. You may find yourself attracted to someone earthier,
quieter, slower, someone who is your opposite and whose presence
demands that you confront and learn to value the qualities you lack.
Your tendency is to self-involvement and so sometimes you miss what
your loved one is saying because you are so busy and self-preoccupied.
You are also very independent and self-motivated, and your fiery
nature can at times come across as brusque and insensitive to others.
Nevertheless you are extremely loyal and your lover will know this
and will feel confidently loved by you in this quality of fierce
protectiveness. Because of the strength of your personality and your
need for challenge, it will help if your partner can confidently stand up
to you and meet you in your need for direct confrontation. What you
want is not aggression but friendly sparks and honesty. Your fiery
cheek is what both bemuses and inspires your loved ones, and
passionately wins them to you. Your Greatest Strengths
Honesty and courage (nothing is impossible for you); incisive intellect
that cuts through non-essentials; optimism and youthful spirit. Your
vitality and assertive enthusiasm can inspire others to see how simple it is to believe in themselves. You have that initiating sort of
personality for which lesser mortals yearn. Your Greatest Weaknesses
Blunt approach to life; lack of sensitivity to the spoken or unspoken
needs of those around you; a tendency towards overt selfishness and
bossiness; a hasty approach to work and a dislike of attending to
details or finishing what you started; a one-track mind that can miss
important nuances and invite antagonism rather than cooperation. Image for Integration
An invincible Hercules, propelled by a primeval power, bursts into the
dark castle, unties the fair maiden, and together they ride off into the
sunset. Famous Personalities
Marlon Brando (actor), Sue Cook (TV presenter), Anatole France
(novelist), Sir John Gielgud (actor), Samuel Hahnemann (founder of
homoeopathy), James Hillman (archetypal psychologist), Algernon
Swinburne (poet and critic), Max Von Sydow (actor), Emile Zola
(novelist). S UN A RIES —2—
M OON T AURUS A tart temper never mellows with age, and a sharp tongue is the only
edged tool that grows keener with constant use.
WASHINGTON IRVING I move at a hell of a pace and I can’t bear anybody who pussyfoots
around.
GLORIA HUNNIFORD Themes
FIRE/EARTH Gentle yet tough; intuitive yet pragmatic; diplomatic yet
tactless; straight-from-the-shoulder charm; energetic; confident; selfassertive; sexy; staying power; bawdy sense of humour; ambitious,
possessive.
You have a flair for living. You know how to enjoy yourself, how to
get others to enjoy themselves, and how to get the things you want
done, done. But are you a six-shooting enforcer or a softly-softly,
sweet-talking charmer? Are you a slow and steady conservative or an
impatient radical? Are you a sensualist or a romantic? Should you
believe your mind as it leaps to intuitive truths or should you follow
your instincts and not believe anything you cannot see and touch,
count and measure? You are torn between the eager need to make your
mark upon the world immediately as Mr or Ms Action, and your
instinct for the slower but surer comforts of the inside track and doing
leisurely business over a long drink. You can equally be divided
between art and science, between your need for personal selfexpression and economic security. You are equally divided between
your instinct to mother and support others and your conviction that
people must do their own thing and make their own mistakes.
When these tough and tender aspects of you come together they
can produce a formidable drive, energy, endurance and determination
and an irresistible charm, charisma, creative drive and, let’s be frank,
sex appeal. Sex and sensuality are very much at the roots of that
natural, bright-eyed magnetism you give off when you are firing on all
cylinders. This dynamic combination of energies with its easy-going
toughness enables you to bring a freshness and hang-loose zest to
whatever you do, be it in the arts, the sciences, business, sport or
leisure.
Whilst you can be judicious in smoothing down ruffled feathers,
you hate hypocrisy and are never afraid to speak out with a dry,
pointed wit to name names, or to fight hard for what you believe to be
rightfully yours. Many will be those who wish they had your healthy
dose of self-respect, and equally many will be those who wish you had a stronger dose of tolerance and sensitivity. Such wishes will be tinged
with both envy and truth, for yours is a personality which is
impressively confident, strongly influential, and blatantly determined
to get what you want. This, together with your sheer enjoyment of the
material world, gives you a natural flair for financial and business
matters where your mailed-fist-in-velvet-glove approach can produce
powerful results.
You have a natural understanding of money and property which,
combined with a competitive instinct makes you a natural
entrepreneur, a ready player of the stock market and a merchant
adventurer. But whilst you have an instinct to build up your wealth,
you are likely to find that your hedonism and generosity can spend it
even faster. For all your firm grasp of material matters, your intuitive
vision of the larger realities makes you suspicious of out-and-out
materialism. This means that, whatever you may be or do, there is
always a space in your life where, despite yourself, an element of
enchantment and the sheer dynamic mystery of life expresses itself. Relationships
You are wonderful company. You have a real zest and appreciation for
life and not least of the opposite sex. You love the rough and tumble of
a good challenge, yet you love life’s luxuries. One moment you can be
taking on all comers in open competition, and the next you can be
lounging at ease, cracking bawdy jokes.
Other people are intensely important to you and you can make
them feel deeply cared for and needed. Yet on analysis you somehow
seem to end up in charge and running the show. You can be deeply
possessive and prone to fits of intense jealousy. Whilst your strong
masculine and feminine energies make you naturally attractive and
encourage your roving eye, you can be extremely loyal and
romantically devoted. The problems begin if you start getting taken for
granted, for you like to be centre stage in any relationship. When you
are ignored you can be inclined to brood and sulk and give off vibes
which will deter all approaches. Yet once you click on again you can
charm those who moments before had become life-long enemies. Your Greatest Strengths
Forceful and magnetic charm; courage, stamina and determination;
practical ambition and go-for-it will to win and endure; ability to enjoy
your successes and feel you deserve them! Your Greatest Weaknesses
Self-centredness and personal ambition; stubborn resistance to
anything you do not want to do; your go-stop-go approach to work;
letting ego get in the way of basic co-operation and harmony. Images for Integration
An explorer practises the violin in a jungle clearing … Having won an
arduous race, the champion sits down to a gourmet meal. Famous Personalities
Hans Andersen (writer of fairy tales), Karen Blixen (novelist, author of
Out of Africa ), René Descartes (philosopher), Robert Downey Jr
(actor), Gloria Hunniford (television personality), Washington Irving
(writer), Elton John (singer, entertainer), Marcel Marceau (mime
artist), Gregory Peck (actor), Diana Ross (singer). S UN A RIES —3—
M OON G EMINI When a man gives his opinion he’s a man. When a woman gives her
opinion she’s a bitch.
BETTE DAVIS ‘Do you come here often?’
‘Only in the mating season.’
SPIKE MILLIGAN , The Goon Show Themes
FIRE/AIR Purposeful or scattered; communicative; live-wire; direct;
humorous; deft; witty; persuasive; entrepreneur; young at heart; too
many irons in the fire; creative; musical.
‘Quick, quick, what does it say about me ? Brilliant! A load of old
cobblers!’ Slow down a moment and you may learn something. Ask
yourself whether you are single-minded or many-minded? A singleshot, high-velocity rifle or a shotgun, hot-metal sprayer? You will
certainly be in many minds about that. So, should you try and focus
your very considerable drive and ambition on one objective, or is your
greatest asset the sheer diversity of your interests and aspirations?
You have immense dynamism and nervous energy and a very sharp
mind, but you can lack focus and stamina. You bore easily, be it in
work or relationships. Variety is the spice of your life, so whatever you
do, you need to be in situations and with people that keep you on your
turbo-assisted toes. Make an asset of the fact that you are a starter
rather than a finisher. Simply by working with someone who can carry
things through from where you left off will greatly enhance your selfesteem. Not that it needs enhancing, but there are moments when you
wonder why nothing has come of yet another brilliant idea.
You are one of the great persuaders. Words are your greatest gift.
As with everything else, you are a fast mover – fast-talking, witty, with
a love of, indeed a veritable flair and inspiration for, slang and
witticisms. (If you need to learn a foreign language, your best bet is to
go to the country and focus first on the slang.) You would be tops at
telephone selling, indeed selling anything to anyone at any time.
Your vital, lively, witty joie de vivre makes those with whom you
come into contact feel more alive. Great! The problem is that you can
get carried away with your own wit and eloquence and talk yourself, as
well as everyone else, into shooting off after your latest enthusiasm
before the last project has reached its prime. You can, and do, reach for
the stars, but you can simply play the star with your ready quick quips
and ease of self-expression and forget to put in the solid homework or
appoint the helpers who will ensure the goods get delivered. You enjoy yourself and want others to enjoy themselves. You can
be the life and soul of the party – a bit crazy, but definitely vital, alive,
light, bright and vivacious. Whether you are partying, playing or
working you like to keep things bubbling along. There is something of
the eternal youth about you: vivacious, outrageous, highly vocal and
eternally optimistic.
You are probably naturally creative in many directions, and not
least musical. Top of the pops, or top of the classics, here you come.
When you focus your attention and gifts on some idea or experience
that has captured your imagination, you are capable of formidable
creative outpouring. But again you have to ask yourself whether you
are seriously ambitious or simply doing it for the laughs and because it
comes easily. Relationships
Are you blowing hot or cold today? You are inclined to fall in and out
of love mighty fast, though you expect to remain good friends. You are
essentially a romantic, specializing in knights in shining armour and/or
Princesses to be rescued. You are a delightful companion until you get
bored, when suddenly you find that ‘good old X’ is really rather wet
behind the ears and not all that exciting intellectually … and you are
on to the next sure-fire winner.
For fidelity you require someone who will constantly surprise you,
but you may be drawn to the understanding, ‘mothering’ type to give
you the security you need deep down – and your partner gets you to
spice up his or her life. Well it could work … for a while! Your Greatest Strengths
Zest; enthusiasm; quick wits; gift of the gab; capacity to take an idea
and run with it; eye for an opportunity and entrepreneurial skills; your
sheer oomph and chutzpah. Your Greatest Weaknesses Brash impatience; unreliability; insensitivity to less extrovert and
expressive types; naivety; unwillingness to learn from experience. Images for Integration
A fencing master carries off the prize … A racing driver plays the
piano to relax … Haydn’s Farewell Symphony. Famous Personalities
Howard Cossell (sports commentator), Bette Davis (actress), Doris
Day (actress), Alec Guinness (actor), Joseph Haydn (composer), Ewan
McGregor (actor), Spike Milligan (comedian), Sergei Rachmaninov
(composer, pianist and conductor), Omar Sharif (actor), Spencer Tracy
(actor), Herbert von Karajan (conductor). S UN A RIES — Júpiter —
M OON C ANCER Americans are like a rich father who wishes he knew how to give his
sons the hardships that made him rich.
ROBERT FROST I have more memories than if I were a thousand years old.
CHARLES BAUDELAIRE Themes
FIRE/WATER Artistic temperament; rich imagination; indirect selfassertion; volatile; sensitive; protective; temperamental; self-centred;
strongly individualistic; clannish; responsible; devoted; romantic.
Independent by nature, you are self-protective and emotionally
sensitive as well. Like a rugged, pioneering poet, you rush headlong into romance and adventure but often, to your great chagrin, come
home with your tail very much between your legs.
Your nature is complex. Self-centredness and independence are
marked, as is your charismatic appeal, as others can sense your real
desire to sympathize, help and understand their needs and motivations.
You are also the inspirational type with a gift for imaginative work,
although the impulse to create may come in fits and starts. But creative
self-expression is essential for your wellbeing, as is having an
appreciative audience.
You can size up a situation intuitively and, in a seductively caring
way, say just the right thing at the right time. Because you readily
sense what a group or an individual needs, people tend to look to you
as a natural leader. You are excellent at motivating people – even to do
something they may not initially want to. With deep, emotional
conviction about ‘what is good for humanity’ (and for you), you
influence people by appealing to their heads and their hearts. But you
can just as easily invite resistance and conflict if you get too attached
to your own views and come over as preciously self-preoccupied. You
think of yourself as – and indeed you are – incredibly sensitive, and
would not want to hurt anyone. But your natural self-centredness,
based on your Arien need for self-assertion and your Cancerian
emotional defences, means that your own concerns are dramatized and
are vastly more important to you than the needs of others.
Paradoxically, one of your greatest difficulties derives from one of
your most sterling qualities: sensitivity. Whilst you can be an
extremely charismatic leader, you can also descend into the grips of
bitterness, self-pity and depression if you and your ideas are not
wholeheartedly embraced. You have a lot of pride, take yourself very
seriously, and your outlook is always distinctly subjective. This means
that you are capable of carrying a grudge if disagreements escalate into
a win-or-lose situation.
You may be astute in business matters for you like the exhilaration
of a gamble as long as you know it is a sure winner. Your challenge is
to combine security and adventure – cosy cream teas and high drama –
and it will produce enough creative tension to keep you going for your
whole life. Relationships
You think of yourself as daring and original, but in your heart of hearts
you want your emotional and physical needs to be taken care of. You
may idealize the romantic chase but end up with someone decidedly
like mother. If you explore your emotional patterns you will discover
just how much of your life is conditioned by your feeling responses.
And if you look even deeper you may find that the root of emotional
patterns of brooding and spiteful over-reaction is in childhood
relationships.
You are independent and dependent at the same time. With too
much solitude you easily get restless, depressed and your outlook can
become warped. You need a close, loving relationship and domestic
security in order for your talents to really flower. And when they do,
your charm, wit and dramatic flair will flow seductively from your
tongue, for at your best you are your own best publicity. You are a
maverick, a creative artist who is more susceptible to the whims of
your public than you want to be. Your Greatest Strengths
Smooth-talking charisma; uncanny knack of catching the imagination
of your audience; ability to bring your feeling for the past to bear on
your visionary thrust towards the future; the immediacy and
enthusiasm of your personal involvement in projects and relationships;
your very individual, dramatic style and sense of the poetic. Your Greatest Weaknesses
Difficulty handling personal criticism; a conflict between needing to
belong and needing to be different; oversensitivity and tendency to be
emotionally defensive, which results in moodiness and a basic
instability that undermines your best talents and achievements. Images for Integration A child in a fit of petulant fury runs away from home … A lightning
storm at sea gives way to a peaceful, radiant dawn … The Salvation
Army. Famous Personalities
Jeffrey Archer (politician and author), Charles Baudelaire (poet and
critic), William Booth (founder of Salvation Army), Adrian Boult
(composer and conductor), James Callaghan (former British prime
minister), Aretha Franklin (singer), Robert Frost (poet), William
Holden (actor), Erica Jong (writer), Chaka Khan (singer), Dennis
Quaid (actor), Mary Beth Whitehead (actress). S UN A RIES —5—
M OON L EO The big question is whether you are going to be able to say a hearty
yes to your adventure … the adventure of the hero – the adventure of
being alive.
Follow your bliss.
JOSEPH CAMPBELL I am an optimist, unrepentant and militant. After all, in order not to be
a fool an optimist must know how sad a place the world can be. It is
only the pessimist who finds this out anew every day.
PETER USTINOV Themes
FIRE/FIRE Proud; optimistic; sociable; warmly enthusiastic; playful;
adventurous; stubborn; creative; imaginative; showmanship; selfcentred; big thinker; honourable; romantic; intensely devoted; an
impassioned idealist; big appetite for life; a leader; the hero. You have a BIG personality – fiery, romantic, adventuresome – and
you exude a warm, uplifting influence on the people in your life. There
is such a deep belief within you that your rightful place is at the very
centre of the universe that, by willing it, it usually happens. You know
what you love and love what you securely know about; it is simply a
part of you.
Mentally you are incisive, quick and immediate; emotionally you are
intense, fervent and devoted. This forceful combination of fiery feeling
and sharp intellect is a winner. A certain nobility of manner coupled
with a deeply romantic view of life (and of yourself) tends to attract
admirers to you – people who are impressed by your generosity of
spirit, your conviction, your social magnetism and your devil-may-care
personality. You are a natural actor, a talented and self-indulgent ham
who eats up attention like a kid in a sweet shop. You mythologize your
life, your needs, your goals; you are the hero in search of the finest
performance of self and in love with your role in life (and if you are
not, then you are pretty unhappy). You make a fine leader, for you
have that envious ability to inspire others just by being yourself.
It is easy, however, for you to go over-board because your need for
ego-gratification is immense. Your vanity is easily wounded and a
certain emotional immaturity – a tendency to throw temper tantrums
when your cherished view or dignity is challenged – can be your bête
noire. You want your own way, and you know no other way of being
your real self than to play the role of Boss. Although you do this with
great panache, so much so that you convince others of your specialness
and importance, your behaviour can nevertheless be domineering and
condescending if you rely on others too much for applause. You can be
a bit like Toad of Toad Hall, who was in love with the grandiose
adventure of his life, but who needed his loyal comrades to witness
fully his heroism on every escapade (‘I only want to give pleasure to
you fellows. Live for others! That’s my motto in life.’). You want to be
in command of your life, but you also want to share your enjoyment of
success.
You are a person of enormous courage, vitality and integrity. You
can inspire others, not only by the way you dramatically live your life (mistakes and all), but also by the sheer intensity of your enjoyment of
life. This makes you a wonderful teacher and communicator. Your
creativity is immense and your enthusiasm contagious; you paint a big
picture of yourself and others will want to catch whatever secret it is
that you have. Relationships
You are the original romantic – totally involved with the love of your
life, heart, mind and soul. Love and friendship play a very important
part in your life; you need passion and adoration from your partner, as
well as thoughtfulness. You in turn will give the same, and you tend to
throw all of yourself into the burning passion of the moment.
You can be wonderfully loyal, but your loyalty is severely tested
by a relationship that loses its romantic savour. Your mate could grow
tired of being the loyal dogsbody if you are too consistently
uninterested in ordinary life. You also need to admire and respect your
loved one. You want only the best!
Although you can be fairly demanding in an intimate relationship,
sometimes impatient and temperamental and exasperatingly intolerant,
you are always intensely honourable and honest when it comes down
to it. You do not give up easily, and you have reserves of optimism and
vitality that make you a person others will not want to give up on
either. Your Greatest Strengths
Creative imagination; ability to communicate your ideas to a wide
variety of people and situations so that you easily muster support
around exciting causes; ability to inspire others with your inner faith in
yourself which makes you a potentially heroic figure in whatever
sphere of life you work. Your Greatest Weaknesses A tendency to insist childishly on only seeing things your way; to go
for the biggest and best before finishing and tidying up the debris from
your last project; and a propensity to let your ego needs for affirmation
and applause blind your true self-perception. Image for Integration
After slaying the black dragon of sloth and greed, the young warrior is
knighted by the one true king. He marries the maiden of purity and
they live happily ever after. Famous Personalities
Joseph Campbell (mythologist), Olivia Hussey (actress), Neil Kinnock
(politician), Melanie Klein (psychologist), Andrew Lloyd Webber
(composer), Gloria Steinem (feminist and journalist), Peter Ustinov
(actor, producer and writer), Michael York (actor). S UN A RIES —6—
M OON V IRGO Poetry is the spontaneous overflow of powerful feelings … recollected
in tranquillity
Strongest minds Are often those of whom the noisy world hears least
WILLIAM WORDSWORTH I don’t want a lawyer to tell me what I cannot do; I hire him to tell me
how to do what I want to do.
J. PIERPOINT MORGAN Themes
FIRE/EARTH Selfish yet dutiful; outspoken yet timid; impulsive yet
orderly; bossy yet diffident, with organizational and administrative skills; straightforward and direct; strongly analytical and critical;
practical perfectionist.
Go, go – stop, stop – go. Are you boisterously outspoken or shyly
reticent? Careful or careless? Conscientious or carefree? Do you lead a
quiet, self-contained life or are you out in the world shouting the odds
and telling everyone what to do?
Whichever way you are, and you are probably frequently torn both
ways on different occasions, there will often be times when you wish
you were doing the opposite. You want to throw caution to the wind
and follow your creative impulses, yet habit, and your easily aroused
sense of guilt, seem to demand that you live your life for others in the
fulfilment of the endless duties that life seems to place in your path.
This means that you can often find yourself torn between the desire to
be selfish and do your own thing, and the tug of duty and the worthy
cause.
Despite your natural modesty, you are in fact impatient to be where
the action is, and to be in command of the show, because you usually
have clear ideas of how things should be done. You can be selfeffacing, disciplined and conventional yet also highly forthright,
argumentative, judgmental and outspoken. Whatever your inward
sense of inadequacy, you like to be the one giving the orders, and
expect to be obeyed (though you may protest too loudly to be
convincing that this is not the case). You want everything and everyone
to fit into well-defined roles and are likely to have strong likes and
dislikes. Whilst this may put some people’s backs up, you can soon
gain others’ respect with your forthright, upfront manner and probably
boisterous, and at times outrageous, sense of humour.
Your inner creativity can catch fire in those areas where your
natural self-assertion and penchant for being in charge can marry with
your reliable, realistic, conscientious, dutiful and perfectionist
approach to the work in hand. You are likely to be efficient and
effective in whatever you set yourself to do and could flourish in
senior management and administration, though you may find the
earlier rungs of the ladder frustrating. Your strong powers of analysis
enable you to identify the most effective course of action in any situation, and when you get yourself together you may find that you
have natural flair as an entrepreneur and organizer. Added to your
strong need to make your mark and your natural qualities of
leadership, this is a combination that would find itself at home in the
armed services, or in any work that requires strength of character and a
desire to be of real service to society.
Your master/servant dilemma is often best resolved by becoming
an expert in some field, or developing a high-level craftsmanship in a
specialized area. When consciously developed, this can make you an
admirable teacher, both able to identify with students’ problems and to
goad them into trying harder. As a creative artist you are the classic
craftsperson, combining passion with sheer technical skill and mastery
and an eye for detail.
As you mature, your toughness and modesty can develop into a
nobility of spirit inclining you to ‘little, nameless, unremembered acts
of kindness and of love’ which help make the world a better place. Relationships
You are inclined to find yourself torn between a dedicated loyalty to an
ordinary family life and the desire for excitement and adventure.
Should you play the field or settle down? If you are a woman you are
likely to be torn between your wish to speak your mind and to be tough
and assertive, and your natural instinct to be passive, self-effacing and
adaptable. The modest virgin or the raucous whore?
Whether male or female, you can develop a charismatic quality,
and bring both the ‘bliss of solitude’ and the joy of the chase to your
relationships by combining your natural modesty with your more
impetuous side. Your Greatest Strengths
Power of analysis and criticism and your eye for quality and detail;
ability to refine new skills; administrative gifts and your ability to
combine duty and initiative; willingness to put your cards on the table
and say what you think. Your Greatest Weaknesses
Intolerance of others’ weaknesses; bossiness and insensitivity to the
feelings of others; proneness to feelings of self-doubt and guilt;
tendency to stand in your own shadow and to sabotage your own
initiatives through extreme self-criticism. Images for Integration
A surgeon performs a daring operation … A metal worker forges an
intricate masterpiece … A William Morris design … A remembrance
that the perfect is the enemy of the good. Famous Personalities
R.A. Bloch (writer), John Harvey-Jones (business specialist), George
Jessel (actor), J. Plutão . Morgan Snr (banker), William Morris (artist and
designer), Amedee Ozanfant (artist), Bessie Smith (jazz singer),
Dorothy Tutin (actress), Erich von Daniken (writer), William
Wordsworth (poet). S UN A RIES —7—
M OON L IBRA The love of liberty is the love of others; the love of power is the love of
ourselves.
The art of pleasing consists in being pleased.
WILLIAM HAZLITT No annihilation without representation.
ARNOLD TOYNBEE Themes FIRE/AIR Forthright; charming; ingenious; eager for life; apparently
confident but inwardly indecisive; gregarious; convivial; amorous;
chivalrous; idealistic; intellectually precocious; self-centred but kindhearted; emotionally naive; vacillates between independence and
dependence.
Throughout your life you may often have to ask yourself: Who has the
power, me or others? Does my need for harmonious relations frustrate
my basic get-up-and-go individuality?
You have a vivacious, outgoing, and aspirational personality as
well as an almost childlike desire for creative self-expression and huge
doses of social involvement. You may have big ideas about your
potential and the success and admiration your creative efforts should
bring. But although you may feel that no one deserves first prize more
than you do, you become aware early on just how much you depend on
a gracious, appreciative audience.
Harbouring a romantic inner picture of yourself that sometimes
takes on heroic proportions, you let your vivid imagination work
overtime as you plan out your route to glory. But then you find
yourself amazed, and not a little hurt, when you discover that others do
not (at first) see the same heroic picture, and that life does not hand
you your dreams on a platter.
Although your imaginative powers are considerable, they can be a
vice as well as a virtue because you indulge them when you should be
getting on with things. Sometimes you are lazy and find it difficult to
get going and to make your dreams come true. You have ambition but
hate strife, and very often for you the former invites the latter to some
degree. Most of the time you throw yourself wholeheartedly into life,
wearing your heart on your sleeve and hoping for the best. When you
do not receive the positive response that you crave, you can be truly
thrown off beam.
This is a full-Moon position, which means that your head and your
heart often work against each other. You are eager to please, to cooperate, to make peace and to be helpful, and this makes you a natural
diplomat – courageous but strategic, a maverick but a lover of justice. Sometimes your keen awareness of others and instinct for justice
causes you to suppress your personal power in the interests of
harmony. You may then become overly accommodating and eventually
very frustrated. When this happens you can feel that you are on an
emotional see-saw, going up and down but essentially nowhere.
Sometimes you feel powerfully self-directed; at other times you feel
your fate is sealed by others. Feeling loved and appreciated will always
be a strong need within you, and when you have gained a certain
amount of emotional contentment your confidence and assertiveness
will blossom. Teamwork and group goals help you to come alive and
to find that innate aptitude for leadership which can inspire others. Relationships
Romantic and devoted by nature, you tend to be quite a flirt and
experimental in your youth, but feel happier when you are in a good
relationship. ‘Good’ means a relationship that is supportive, exciting,
aesthetic, egalitarian but lets you at least think that you are in
command. You enjoy lighthearted but stimulating and convivial social
situations, but in relationships your lightheartedness and essential
naivety could attract emotional heaviness or complexities that baffle
you and from which you run. You may feel awkward when it comes to
looking at ‘nasty’ emotions, preferring to emphasize the ‘nice’ and the
‘heroic’. You want adventure but will be surprised to confront the
emotional extremes that your Libran Moon may attract.
Your emotional nature is strongly challenged by the prospect of a
mature relationship, because your Arien goal of independence and
your Libran instinct for dependence and co-operation have to be
worked with, balanced and affirmed in order for you to be truly happy
with yourself. The more aware you are of just how much you invest in
being accepted, even adored, by others, the more you will be able to
minimize the roller-coaster quality of your emotional life. Your Greatest Strengths Ebullient sociability and charming hospitality; idealism and
hopefulness; sensitivity to others; capacity to inspire optimism; artistic
imagination and talents; ability to be exactly who you are in close
relationships – and to make your partner love it! Your Greatest Weaknesses
Tendency to vacillate; to think great guns and then peter out; to let
frustration eat up your confidence; to permit your need for appreciation
to fuel your vanity rather than your creativity; and to rest on your
laurels when you should be making strides. Image for Integration
A conductor leads an orchestra with passionate conviction and a
vibrant, pulsating organism of musical perfection is created to the
ecstatic uplifting of the audience. Famous Personalities
Pearl Bailey (singer), Jean Paul Belmondo (actor), Matthew Broderick
(actor), Richard Chamberlain (actor), Antal Dorati (conductor),
William Hazlitt (essayist and journalist), Shirley Jones (actress), Julian
Lennon (musician), Simone Signoret (actress), Gloria Swanson
(actress), Arnold Toynbee (historian), Jack Webb (actor), James
Dewey Watson (biologist), Wilbur Wright (pioneer aviator). S UN A RIES —8—
M OON S CORPIO Live all you can … it doesn’t so much matter what you do in particular,
so long as you have your life. If you haven’t had that what have you
had ?
HENRY JAMES The best part of married life is the fights. The rest is merely so-so.
THORNTON WILDER Themes
FIRE/WATER Personal integrity; witty; intense; powerful; passionate;
highly motivated; persuasive; ambitious; forceful; self-dramatizing;
charismatic.
Should you storm life by the front or back door? Is life full of freshfaced opportunities and bright laughter, or is it a corrupt place, worthy
of cynical humour and dark suspicions?
You are a forceful individual with drive, energy and tenacity. You
know what you want and will find ways, direct or indirect, of
achieving it. But you can become torn between an impatient, up-front,
naive, trusting approach to the world and a suspicious, distrustful
doubt; between a self-denying, intense, slow-burning determination
and a go-for-it pizzazz. When these two sides of yourself work against
each other you may find yourself becoming embroiled in bitter
conflicts which seem to be none of your making. Relationships fall
apart, and those you thought of as friends stab you in the back. When
you get your act together, however, you become unstoppable, a
courageous, humorous, charismatic, co-operative leader, prepared to
push yourself to the limit and beyond in your determination to set the
world to rights, and to leave your mark.
People may see you as cynical, brash, self-assured and pushy, or as
somewhat private and quietly purposeful, but none will doubt your
sincerity and commitment to your chosen path. Most would, however,
be surprised at how much you care about others’ good opinions. For
though you want to make a real and lasting impact upon the world by
one route or another, you especially want and need the approval,
appreciation and loud applause of your peers and can even brood, get
bitter and self-destructive if your path is blocked, or your plans are
crossed.
Your secret weapon, when you find it at your centre, is your belief
in your own abilities. This gives you a formidable will to win. Equally it gives you a great capacity to help others stand on their own two feet,
and to motivate and encourage them. To bring out this creative core
you need demanding projects and ambitions to occupy your energies,
especially when young.
Life for you is a drama, and self-dramatization is your forte. This
can draw you towards the theatre or any arena, such as sports, where
there is an opportunity to shine. No matter what career you follow,
however, you will make a career out of your life. You believe in
yourself and make a natural leader, but at the same time you want to be
thought well of, and can become withdrawn and even bitter if your
enthusiastic ideas meet with resistance.
Yours is a sharp, clear-headed, penetrating approach to life. You
identify what you want to achieve and you go about achieving it with a
natural gift of strategy and leadership. You have many of the qualities
of the natural leader: an ability to put yourself and your cause first
single-mindedly; dedication; charisma; force; a talent for research,
probing into hidden corners, which is excellent for military
campaigning tactics and manoeuvres, but also for campaigning
journalism; and a gift for psychological insights and penetrating
analysis.
You are attracted to physical exercise and sport. If you do not
consciously channel your physical, emotional and mental aggression in
a purposeful way you can become very bitter, frustrated and selfdestructive. You can take a real disliking to people, and can be
arrogant, irascible, rude and bloody-minded. Yet you are a person of
integrity. You are frank, honest and like to tell it as you see and feel it.
This refreshing honesty keeps you young and open-minded, always
ready for new ideas and experiences. Your forceful, sharp, biting wit
and wry cynicism about human weaknesses makes you an excellent
humorist and comedian. Relationships
In relationships you are a full-blooded romantic. Very highly sexed,
you are not one for half measures! You are a person of intense physical passions who needs to be totally involved and committed in a
relationship.
Whilst you are attracted to a mate who can fight their own corner,
there is also about you the romantic spirit of the gallant crusader
rescuing the helpless, drawn to wounded birds who need your strength
and who will give you the unquestioning devotion you need. You can
be intensely faithful or intensely unfaithful, but never indifferent. Your Greatest Strengths
Integrity; belief in your own and others’ individual worth; relentless
single-mindedness; ambition; courage; determination; capacity for
gutsy hard work; ability to push through your ideas and plans against
all obstacles. Your Greatest Weaknesses
Narcissism; self-dramatization; insatiable hunger for applause;
determination to put yourself first; impatience and self-assertion which
can, unless reined in, become overbearing and ruthless. Images for Integration
Charlie Chaplin saves a maiden in distress … A passionate woman
sells herself for her cause …The Godfather films. Famous Personalities
Warren Beatty (film actor), Anita Bryant (entertainer and evangelist),
James Caan (actor), Claudia Cardinale (actress), Mariah Carey (rock
star), Charlie Chaplin (actor and comedian), Julie Christie (actress),
Eric Clapton (rock star), Francis Ford Coppola (film director), David
Frost (actor and entrepreneur), Henry James (novelist), Hayley Mills
(actress), Dudley Moore (actor and comedian), Arturo Toscanini
(conductor), Thornton Wilder (novelist). S UN A RIES — Mercúrio —
M OON S AGITTARIUS Man’s main task is to give birth to himself, to become what he
potentially is. The most important product of his effort is his own
personality.
ERICH FROMM There’s no reason to bring religion into it. I think we ought to have as
great a regard for religion as we can, so as to keep it out of as many
things as possible.
SEAN O’CASEY Habit is a great deadener.
SAMUEL BECKETT Themes
FIRE/FIRE Visionary; highly-strung; explorer; impatient; emphatic;
talkative; confident; intense moral certainty; exuberant; optimistic;
big-hearted; fun-loving; prone to exaggeration; outspoken;
competitive; friendly; an adventurer.
Your ability to radiate warmth, enjoyment of living and an effortless
resilience to the ups and downs of existence makes you one of life’s
irrepressible winners. Your intense vitality and independence is hard to
keep up with, and loved ones will have to fasten their seat belts, expect
the unexpected and enjoy an adventure in order to appreciate the whole
of your BIG personality.
You are dynamic, highly enthusiastic, fabulously gregarious, and
your visionary qualities plus the sheer energy you generate make it
easy for you to rally support around any number of exciting projects
and pet causes. You are restless and require lots of movement and
space – to you, life is one big journey, one large adventure that holds
many exciting possibilities. Delightfully refreshing to meet, you cannot help but exude a joie de vivre and inner commitment to life which can
inspire and motivate others to action. And this is never so true as when
you are engaged in intellectual exchanges and arousing public interest
in moral and social causes.
Outspoken, intensely honourable and deeply intuitive, you are
essentially more interested in the future and in making sure it will be
exciting than in finding security in the humdrum routine of daily
living. Your focus on large ideas could take you into law, religion or
academia. It also takes you often into the realm of speculation and
risk-taking; you ‘sense’ that a particular solution is right and will
magically unlock the door to a brighter future, even though it appears
flagrantly inappropriate to other, more practical souls. In other words,
you often by-pass the logical, step-by-step thinking process of the leftbrain because of your capacity to perceive instantly the essence of any
given situation. Your hunches are more real to you than a set of
mundane facts. To you, life must be a game well-played (even if not
always won), a challenge to the imagination and a test of your deep,
creative, innovative spirit.
This intuitive approach to life can, however, create some instability
for you and your household. Being true to your visions – doing what
you want to do – takes priority over completing mundane tasks, and
the result in your day-to-day life can sometimes be chaos. But even in
failure, your honour is likely to stay intact for ‘nothing ventured,
nothing gained’ is what you say; ‘it is the idea that counts’, and things
will ‘all come right’ in the end. You are an incurable optimist, very
noble and a touch arrogant as well. One of the most important things in
your life is being able to express yourself freely and without inhibition,
for honesty and fair dealing are virtues that are nearly gods to your
inner life. Relationships
Emotionally you are ardent, uncomplicated, warmly spontaneous and
in love with the experience of falling in love. You give yourself
wholeheartedly, but at the same time you can be pretty restless and
impatient, eager to jump the fence if you feel stifled with someone. More aware of your own feelings and needs than those of others,
you can get wrapped up in ideologies and hold forth about some ‘ism’
at inappropriate times (when all that your mate requires is a cup of
tea). Practical duties weigh on your spirit, so you need to know that
there is room for movement and new adventure in your relationship.
Quite frequently you need to just drop everything and go camping,
get on an airplane, go to a party or take up a new hobby. You have got
to enjoy yourself! The great thing about you is that you can swing
from the depths of philosophical sobriety to the heights of bawdy fun
in the twinkling of an eye. Your Greatest Strengths
Contagious optimism; entrepreneurial spirit; powerful influence on
others. You need challenging, stimulating work where there is scope to
let your intuition play with ideas. Just remember that generalities need
details, inventions need practical working out, and that remaining in
the realm of limitless possibilities will not get the job done. Your Greatest Weaknesses
Grandiose philosophizing; moving around and never landing;
insensitivity to human feelings; impatience with the limitations of the
material world; total self-absorption to the extent that your capacity for
relating remains childlike; and a tendency to let your daredevil side
sabotage your material security. Image for Integration
A child shoots an arrow towards the enchanted castle in the distance as
he follows the road less travelled. Famous Personalities
Richard Alpert (‘Ram Dass’ – psychologist), Kingsley Amis (writer),
Samuel Beckett (playwright), Dirk Bogarde (actor), Rory Bremner (mimic/comedian), Robert Fludd (metaphysician), Erich Fromm
(psychologist), Gus Grissom (astronaut), Sterling Hayden (actor),
Thomas Hobbes (philosopher), Garry Kasparov (champion chess
player), Sean O’Casey (playwright), Wilhelm Reich (psychiatrist),
Ravi Shankar (zitharist), Vincent Van Gogh (artist). S UN A RIES —10—
M OON C APRICORN When I was one-and-twenty I heard a wise man say, Give crowns and
pounds and guineas But not your heart away.
A.E. HOUSMAN The great questions of our day cannot be solved by speeches and
majority votes … but by iron and blood.
OTTO VON BISMARCK Themes
FIRE/EARTH Unstoppable; ambitious; tough-minded; domineering;
enthusiastic and forceful manner; pragmatic intellect; droll sense of
humour; sensible; ardent; persistent; aggressive; good organizer; a
realist; the winner; the boss.
You are a go-getting realist, a maverick traditionalist whose strident
energy and ambition takes you into the struggle of life at an early age.
It is not so much that your life is a struggle, but that you experience
life as a series of challenges to be conquered, and you more than most
need a challenge in order to feel alive.
Something of a young up-start with an eye to the main chance, you
are likely to be found in the establishment but often waging war
against oppressive laws or traditions. You could also be a creative
entrepreneur forging some new and exciting product or enterprise.
Whatever you are involved with is likely to possess both originality
and longevity, flair and endurance. Politics is a very natural habitat for you, and it is here that you can
be a very persistent thorn in the flesh of the status quo, bringing a
searing honesty and fresh viewpoint which shocks people out of
stagnant ways of working. And despite the insults and threats that you
may provoke, you do not go away. You have tremendous willpower
and are thick-skinned enough to see your personal aim through to its
completion. You respect the law and learn to work within its
boundaries, but just by a hair’s-breadth, because you have to push the
system to its absolute limit to make enough room for your
individuality to express itself – and leave its stamp for posterity.
You say matter-of-factly what you intend to do, then you do it. You
may be fairly low-key, not obviously a colourful Aries, but you are all
the more determined for the close focus of your attention. There is
something of the working-class hero about you, droll, down-to-earth
and unaffected, with a scathing wit and a controlled cheekiness. You
often use humour and sarcasm to get your point across.
You go for sound, solid ideals, and rarely waver from your path
once you have seen the way ahead. You always assume you are right
until proved wrong, and it takes quite an audacious opponent to stand
up to you. Although you are naturally arrogant and impatient, you are
nonetheless devoted to truth and respect personal courage in anyone,
and you will immediately climb down to acknowledge the soul who is
strong enough and wise enough to teach you a new lesson.
Although you want to win (and usually do), your self-respect and
personal integrity is more important to you than anything. This goes
for personal relationships, too: they tend to play second fiddle to your
career ambitions and to those personal challenges that are such
powerful grist to your mill. Relationships
Your approach to love probably has as much practical common sense
about it as your approach to work. In your bold enthusiasm to drive
home a point you can seem somewhat abrasive to a partner who just
wants a cuddle. You are basically very self-controlled, and constantly push for
more control of your outer world. Because of this, you may frequently
mistake confrontation for relating, and loved ones may easily feel
bruised and learn to avoid confrontation with you. Nevertheless, you
are honest and open and ready to learn what you have to in order to be
a success, be it in love or in career. You have certainly got what it takes
to succeed, but you need to take care that your passion for winning and
for economy of effort does not compromise the quality of your
personal life. Do not forget to smell the roses along the way to success.
Otherwise, it can be pretty lonely at the top. Your Greatest Strengths
The sheer magnetic force of your personality; a quick and pragmatic
mind which sizes up situations accurately and astutely; the powerful
mixture of risk-taking and caution in your approach to problemsolving; natural leadership abilities; the total involvement and
courageous commitment you bring to each moment of life. Your Greatest Weaknesses
The sheer magnetic force of your personality which can overwhelm
weaker souls; a propensity to charge ahead with your instinct to
conquer in inappropriate situations; a too blunt, businesslike manner in
personal relationships; a lop-sided and overpowering need for control
and to be recognized as ‘tops’. Images for Integration
A young soldier is rewarded by the King for exceptional bravery in the
cause of freedom and individual human rights … Columbus discovers
America, and a new world order is born. Famous Personalities Al Gore (American vice-president), A.E. Housman (poet), Eric Idle
(actor and comedian), David Lean (film director), John Major (British
prime minister), Elizabeth Montgomery (actress), Sarah Jessica Parker
(actress), Stephen Sondheim (composer), Rod Steiger (actor), Mstislav
Rostropovitch (cello virtuoso and conductor), Mies Van Der Rohe
(architect), Sarah Vaughan (singer), Reese Witherspoon (actress). S UN A RIES —11—
M OON A QUARIUS I shall marry in haste and repent at leisure.
JAMES BRANCH CABELL To be free is to have achieved your life.
TENNESSEE WILLIAMS Themes
FIRE/AIR Selfish yet altruistic; full of bright ideas; friendly;
congenial; extrovert; enthusiastic; incisive; sharp; analytical; sociable;
progressive; revolutionary; social activist; dramatic; exceptionally
individual.
You are where it is at, and beyond that too. But are you a self-obsessed
revolutionary or a social prophet? Are you a passionate progressive or
a detached onlooker? Or have you discovered how to combine both
through a vocation which meets your need for constant challenge?
You may appear to be self-centred but, just when everyone thinks you
are in it only for yourself, you reveal your capacity for true friendship
and interest in the needs of others. You can be very civilized and very
selfish. You want to make your mark upon the world but you do not
want to scar it in the process, though it may not believe you at first.
When firing on all cylinders, and not just spouting hot air, you are
original and inventive; a natural pioneer, entrepreneur and leader of
progressive causes; a great improver, able to see the big picture and inspire others with a large and distinctly different vision of things. You
will take an active interest in anything that appeals to your maverick,
heretic and non-conformist approach to life. New schemes and ideas
may be more exciting to you than the prospect of finishing what you
have already started, for orderly routine is a living death for you. Being
self-employed and doing your own thing attracts you, yet you also
have a strong social sense and can work well with others, provided you
are in charge. You rightly have a high opinion of your own genius, and
in order to be happy you need to be working and playing in areas
where you feel free to take the initiative and pursue your observations
and insights.
With your razor-sharp mind, you enjoy an intellectual challenge,
and have an ability to look at things from a different perspective. You
delight in being controversial and poking fun at the status quo. You see
yourself as a go-ahead mould-breaker, an anarchist even. Be it in
politics, film, fashion or the very way in which you express yourself,
you are drawn to the non-conformist, original and maverick, and are
never happier than when out on limb arguing for a viewpoint that
others do not yet share. In this you can combine courage and
imagination, for you are a natural campaigner who can pursue what
you believe in with a burning conviction.
Friendships and social contacts are very important to you, and here
as in so much of your life you can oscillate between self-interest and
social concern. One moment you are being an elitist social climber,
using your natural charisma and powers of persuasion to chat up the
in-crowd with a cynical eye to the main chance; the next you are
giving your time and energy to help the socially deprived and underprivileged. This dichotomy may play havoc with your philosophical
and political affiliations as you veer from radical liberalism to
complete free-enterprise. If you can allow room for both you will
probably end up embracing an enlightened self-interest and make
friends right across the fascinating spectrum of human viewpoints. Relationships You are a great ‘people person’, intrigued by individual differences
and able to get on with most types. You should appreciate, though, that
your combination of romantic passion and clinical detachment which
can be disconcerting for you can be even more bewildering for your
partner. For whilst you pursue the object of your desire with a sense of
ardent adventure, your natural instinct is for personal friendship and
intellectual companionship.
Sex, likewise, is something that can both obsessively absorb you
and yet be something to be dismissed lightly and humorously. Your
infatuations turn into friendships, and your friendships into ardent
desires. Though you may be unconsciously drawn to maternal types,
you need someone who will keep you guessing as well as help ground
you for a long-term partnership. Your Greatest Strengths
Gift of the gab; broad intellect; energy and enthusiasm; interest in
people; large, individual vision; natural charisma; idealism. Your Greatest Weaknesses
Selfish altruism that sacrifices others for your social vision;
insensitivity to others’ feelings; over-rational approach to life and
people; impatience with practical details and dull routines; elitist
tendencies. Images for Integration
A gallant crusader turns his sword into a computer chip and broadcasts
New Age philosophy … A militant feminist joins a non-sectarian
commune. Famous Personalities
Béla Bartók (composer), Victoria Beckham (celebrity), James Branch
Cabell (novelist), Peter Brook (film and theatre director), David Cassidy (singer), Joan Crawford (actress), Russell Crowe (actor),
William Harvey (physician and scientist), Kate Hudson (actress),
Cerys Matthews (singer), Jayne Mansfield (actress), Steve McQueen
(actor), Colin Powell (policitian), Debbie Reynolds (actress), Dane
Rudhyar (astrologer and composer), Tennessee Williams (dramatist,
novelist and poet). —12—
S UN A RIES M OON Plutão ISCES If you don’t swing, don’t ring.
HUGH HEFNER I am a realist in my novels – and a trance realist at that.
ROBERT LOWRY Themes
FIRE/WATER Romantic; moody; affectionate; restless; a worrier;
enthusiastic but inwardly timid; hopeful; thoughtful; nervous but
eager; non-conformist; artistic; stylish; inspirational; imaginative;
expressive; temperamental.
You are a bit like the BFG – the Big Friendly Giant – forceful but
diffident, single-minded but dreamy, maverick and very much your
own person but kind-hearted and needy of affection and consideration
from others. You have plenty of initiative and strong personal
motivations, and you seem to want to be out in the forefront of human
activities. Underneath your impressive exterior, however, you are often
quaking with doubt and timidity and wondering how you could have
made such a challenge or said such an outrageous thing.
One part of you is very independent, impulsive, eager for action
and rooted in a sense of yourself as an opponent of social injustice.
This part thrives on self-assertion, on making things happen and
feeling at the helm of all the action-making. But another part of you shrinks from excessive exposure, risk, bright lights and noise, and
prefers to slip away into the inner sanctuary of your own room, or
mind, to brood and worry and often just to dream. This part of you
abhors the brisk self-definition after which your other part strives. You
know what you want, but do not feel right about insisting that you get
it. You know what needs to be done and can rally the troops to join
your crusade, but all of a sudden you can feel like a stranger in your
own crowd – lost, misunderstood, convinced in self-pitying mood that
no one could possibly understand the real you or your true intentions.
Masculine assertion versus feminine receptivity; bold defiance versus
the soft blurring of boundaries; self-interest or self-sacrifice; sticking
your neck out or living it all out in fantasy – this is your dilemma.
The needs of your Arien ego versus your Piscean instinct for selfimmolation can create a conflict within you. This is perhaps best
resolved in a career that brings you both personal recognition as well
as a sense of being emotionally involved with people and life. You are
an aspiring individual who wants a unique identity and, well, just a
little bit of recognition, but you also need to feel connected in a broad
impersonal way with the world in which you find yourself. In some
ways you are a maverick, and in other ways you very much need the
support of understanding colleagues and friends.
Unusual ideas interest you, and you need a harmonious
environment in which to develop your own self-expression. You feel
happier when you get these ideas down on paper, canvas or
photographic film – whatever the particular direction you take. When
you find yourself feeling that life is too harsh and demanding, you can
be sure that the gulf between the realist and the idealist within you is
widening. It is time to withdraw, to get in touch with your own feelings
and dreams and make sure that they are your own. Then you must
work to master a medium of expression so that there is always a bridge
of communication between the bold Arien and the elusive Piscean
dreamer within you, between the daring child and the artistic visionary.
At your very best, you combine the spirit of enterprise with the
human touch of care and understanding. Together they make you a
powerful force for good in the world. Relationships
You are a very romantic person and you need intimacy, but you will
find it difficult getting everything you need from one person. When it
comes to emotions, you are easily influenced and have a tendency to
go for the tragic love story at least once in your life, where you get
involved with a person or people who let you down. The sense of
emotional suffering you may be left with can either eat you up – if you
allow it to – or it can fuel your heroism and creative inspiration.
One minute you are all dreamy and ready to risk all for love, the
next you are industriously engaged with your own personal goals and
concerns, with no intentions at all of leaning on anyone. Whilst you are
both passionate and caring, you may experience a conflict between
running the show and giving in. Try not to martyr yourself by
attracting the lame dogs to show how strong you can be: moderation in
all things! Your Greatest Strengths
Fertile imagination; off-beat but wonderfully original style and
philosophy of life; vulnerability and openness to experience;
commitment to the never-ending quest to find your real identity and to
be true, intellectually and emotionally, to yourself. Your Greatest Weaknesses
Tendency to worry too much, which can weaken your vitality; the
power of your mood swings, which can undermine your relationships
and darken your state of mind; emotional impressionability; tendency
to drift into dreams rather than concentrating on the here and now. Image for Integration
A world-champion boxer and an artist in Greenwich Village meet, fall
in love, marry and struggle happily ever after. Famous Personalities
Herb Alpert (bandleader and trumpet player), Roberta Cowell
(transsexual), Paul Daniels (magician and showman), Dr Richard
Dawkins (geneticist), Sarah Michelle Gellar (actor), Hugh Hefner
(creator of Playboy magazine), Thomas More Johnson (Neo-Platonic
philosopher), Robert Lowry (novelist), Ann Miller (actress),
Mistinguette (actress). Chapter Five
SUN IN TAURUS
—13—
S UN T AURUS
M OON A RIES
Power takes as ingratitude the writhings of its victims.
The greed for fruit misses the flower.
RABINDRANATH TAGORE All poetry is putting the infinite within the finite.
Oh, to be in England/Now that April’s here.
ROBERT BROWNING Themes
EARTH/FIRE Determined; forceful; strong desires; go for what you
want; great panache; musical; artistic; energetic; enduring enthusiasm;
independent; powerful; selfish; steadfastly ambitious; good at practical
or technical skills; a leader.
Are you a wandering gypsy, a nature mystic or a kind of Davy
Crockett figure, king of the wild frontier, who aspires to become lord
of the manor? Whatever you do, you have the instincts of an artist and
the mind of a businessman. You want fixity, permanence, power and
security, and yet you are ever the pioneer, looking for new frontiers
once your territory gets too familiar and easy. You want action, so you make things happen, throwing yourself
into life. If something feels comfortable, however, you put your foot
down and it will not budge. Instinctively tuned into your own needs
and desires, you have extraordinary determination and unabashed selfinterest, which probably carry you into the drama of your life at an
early age. You do not wait around for the approval or permission of
others – you are a self-starter and usually finish what you have begun.
Direct and forthright, you call a spade a spade, and are so certain of
yourself and your ideas and feelings that you do not easily stop to
question your actions or how they could be improved. You want what
you want and usually plough full-steam ahead to get it.
You love action and enterprise but you also need security and roots,
and this can create a tension within you which manifests from time to
time in impatience and intense irritability. At home you can be the
benevolent dictator. You possess such a strong instinct to manage and
control that the co-operative spirit you say you believe in – it makes
good sense, right? – is usually put on the shelf. You were made to be
captain of your own ship, but to prevent mutiny you have to learn how
to treat others with more respect, kindness and equality.
Your need for achievement, and indeed your talent for using your
resources with inspiring innovation, is much stronger than your interest
in human nature. Practical and hard-working, you just do not have time
for people who moan or have complex emotional problems. With so
much drive to conquer and establish, you will find it difficult
understanding dreamier, more fragile types.
Uncontrolled passion and temper is what trips you up: you can
express real infantile rage if pushed to the limit. But with more selfawareness, that same energy can go into creative endeavours and move
mountains in the business world or in some artistic profession. Often
you just want to sit on that mountain after you have got it where you
want it, like Smaug the dragon sitting on his mound of jewels. You
want to consolidate your position and use your resources to their
maximum advantage – and then live off the interest. You could be an
excellent entrepreneur, may be very musical or artistic, would be an
efficient provider, an organized homemaker and an untiring servant of your own inner vision. That vision will include whatever you feel is
your duty to family and mate. Relationships
Sometimes you seem to be the absolute epitome of the rational,
sensible person, ready to invest only in what you can taste, touch, see
and add up. And yet at other times you are capable of acting from
totally emotional concerns, and of expressing outlandish beliefs,
fantastic ideas and irrational behaviour.
Although you are romantic and loyal, given half a chance you will
dominate most relationships. You are possessive and demanding, but
can be generous, fun-loving and exciting when you have found the
right person to balance your big appetites. Home life is extremely
important to you, and you want it to be a haven for enjoyment and
creative hobbies.
In co-operative ventures you are quick to take charge, and you may
develop a following of subordinates who come to trust your
competence and leadership implicitly. But your raucous sense of
humour and love of a party endears you to others. Quite simply, your
personality stands out as vital, outrageous and funny, but you will win
more friends and influence more people if, paradoxically, you attach
less importance to personal conquests. If you can do this, you will be
an inspiration to loved ones instead of a moody artist they have to put
up with. Your Greatest Strengths
Charisma; confidence; courage; indefatigable resilience; unswerving
belief in yourself; organizational flair and practical instinct for making
your dreams come true. Your Greatest Weaknesses
Stubbornness; tendency to be quarrelsome and to ride roughshod over
others; self-centredness; tendency to let emotionalism turn you into a bully. Images for Integration
A pirate’s chest full of gold is discovered, which adds to the already
vast empire of Ghengis Khan … An orgy of love on a carpet of
bluebells. Famous Personalities
Cate Blanchett (actress), Robert Browning (poet), Georges Braque
(artist), Salvador Dali (artist), Ian Dury (rock star), Susan Hampshire
(actress), Immanuel Kant (philosopher), Kathryn Kuhlman (minister
and healer), Robespierre (French revolutionary leader), Rabindranath
Tagore (poet), Stevie Wonder (singer and musician), Malcolm X
(American black leader). S UN T AURUS —14—
M OON T AURUS From each according to his ability, to each according to his need.
KARL MARX Doin what comes naturally. IRVING BERLIN, Annie Get Your Gun Themes
EARTH/EARTH Sensuality v. self-control; love of nature; practical;
supportive; seeks certainties; slow and steady; deep calm v. explosive
anger; good business sense; natural counsellor; dry, mischievous
humour; dictatorial; possessive; unflappable.
Is life for you a delight and pleasure to be enjoyed, or a practical affair
to be managed and organized? You can be torn between a lazy, sensual
self-indulgence and a deliberate, even stoic, self-control; between an almost mystical love of nature and a matter-of-fact cost accountant’s
approach to life.
You are naturally a sensualist, with a keen, raw enjoyment of the
tastes and scents of foods, the sounds of music and the countryside, the
textures of things, the visual delights of life and art. Yet you seek to be
in command of the changing material world, and that includes your
own body, a tendency that can lead you to deny your own feelings and
desires. For above all you seek certainty and security for yourself and
your loved ones.
In all you do, you want to get down to basics, to the practical
certainties and self-evident realities. You want to define things, lay
foundations and simplify. You can become impatient with abstract
theories and yet be as rigid and dogmatic in the way you believe things
should be done as any theorist. Your criterion is: does it work? You are
a hands-on teacher who believes in the power of experience and in
what you can directly see for yourself.
You have a deep understanding of some of the basics that make the
world go round, such as pleasure, sex, security and money. This makes
you excellent at business matters and equally gives you a gift for
therapeutic work and counselling. You are at your happiest and most
creative when you are doing work that both expresses your loving care
of others and brings pleasure, and yet also produces tangible results.
Careers or pursuits that will bring out the best in you include cooking,
music, painting, creating a home, nursing, counselling, teaching or
indeed building up a business around your own interests.
Whilst you very much live in the here-and-now, you also like to
feel that the foundations you are laying will be of permanent value.
You have the rare gift of real common sense, and whether in the area
of psychology, business, art or science, you can always be depended on
to offer sound, well-grounded, straight-from-the-shoulder insights. You
have a rather slow, steady, dependable approach to things, and a quiet,
even shy, manner. This can make your dry, tell-it-as-it is, often bawdy
sense of humour all the more surprising.
You are a deeply grounded individual with great reserves of
practical kindness, and your sheer sanity and stability can be
enormously reassuring to those who know you. In consequence you can become the proverbial rock to your friends, on whom all depend.
Your tea is served in mugs not in cups, in the kitchen not the sitting
room. You enjoy what is in front of you and you deal with the
problems, often those of other people, with a quiet stability and
directness of spirit. All this makes your occasional outbursts of
seemingly uncontrollable rage all the more mystifying. Such rages,
when they occur, are the consequence of your habitual calm and desire
for order which demands that you keep the dark side of life at bay.
Hence when your accumulated angers and irritations do break through,
you have little experience of coping with them.
Because you can be so understanding and supportive of others, the
great risk for you is that you will be treated as Atlas, the support of the
world, so that your own needs are constantly neglected. When this
happens you may find yourself retreating into illness to attract the
attention and support that you too need to receive. Relationships
As a strongly earthy, sensual type, sex is likely to play an important
part in your relationships, yet you are not inclined to play the field. On
the contrary, you tend to be solidly, stolidly faithful, for what you want
in relationships is security, stability and, as in all things, certainty.
You can offer total dedication and loyalty but you will expect the
same in return. You expect to possess your mate and to be possessed
for always. Once this is agreed, you become a living demonstration
that true love and devotion is centred in the will rather than the heart.
Yet for all your love of stability there is one big exception to this
picture: you find yourself being drawn magnetically, and irrationally
towards strongly Fire types (here ). The magic of Fire’s unbridled
imagination and intuition, and their courage to plunge into the
unknown without looking at the map and checking the supplies, can
irresistably attract you, as much as your effortless stability can attract
them. Your Greatest Strengths Kind, calm, supportive approach; logical mind; endurance; realism and
practical skills; ability to call a spade a spade, and to bring a sense of
order, stability, certainty and security to your world. Your Greatest Weaknesses
Lack of contact with your own anger which can erupt directly or
indirectly as passionate hatred; possessiveness; lack of imagination;
rigidity and stubbornness; intolerance of those with whom you
disagree. Images for Integration
A successful baker is surrounded by delighted children eating fresh
bread rolls … A loving teacher resolves an angry dispute. Famous Personalities
Irving Berlin (composer), Angela Carter (writer), Stewart Granger
(actor), Jack Klugman (actor), Joanna Lumley (actress), Karl Marx
(social scientist), Rollo May (psychologist), Florence Nightingale
(pioneer nurse), Henri Poincaré (mathematician and philosopher),
Tyrone Power (actor), Jane Roberts (author of Seth books), Tim Roth
(actor), Toyah Wilcox (rock star). S UN T AURUS —15—
M OON G EMINI Where id is let ego be.
SIGMUND FREUD The trouble is that my heart would not willingly remain one hour
without love.
CATHERINE THE GREAT Themes
EARTH/AIR Mind v. body; quick-slow, quick-slow; clear, practical
intelligence; dogmatic yet flippant; good business sense; charming;
witty; persuasive; opportunist.
Are you a quick, streetwise, light-hearted city slicker or a slow country
soul tuned into the rhythms of nature and the serious business of
survival? Are you a flippant, easy-come-easy-go flirt or an ardent,
possessive lover, loyal to the last? Often torn between mind and body,
half the time you can be a stanger to yourself. At one moment you are
taking ultra-conservative decisions that restrain your light-hearted love
of free-flowing freedom; and at another you are acting on spontaneous,
flip, fun-loving impulses which challenge your hard-won security and
desire for certainty and stability.
When you can contain these two aspects of yourself and get them
talking to one another, you can realize your gift for understanding the
natural world and for conveying an inner understanding of things.
Yours is a combination of the earthy sensual and the breezy intellectual
approaches to life. This can give you an enormous practical
intelligence and a great gift for vivid, direct communication – the kind
that is invaluable not only to teachers and scientists but also to writers,
artists and businesspeople. Your creative genius flowers when these
two sides – solid realism and light brightness – are kept in balance.
Then you can become both prolific and practical in your projects,
always willing to entertain a new idea and put it to work.
If you give precedence to your body and your desire for control
and certainty in your life, you can end up denying the playful child in
you who breathes life into your feet of clay and puts a spring in your
otherwise ponderous gait. If you emphasize the mind at the expense of
the body, you can end up attempting to rationalize the sensual life out
of existence. Taken too far, this can divorce you from your own
sensuality and appetites and cut you off from the direct experience of
life as a living reality. When you work with both sides of yourself it
can produce the delightful free-flowing movements of a Fred Astaire dance or the delightful zest and irreverant fun of the music of
Sullivan’s operettas with Gilbert.
Your gift for practical communication makes you a natural teacher,
but you will flourish equally in any kind of work or business connected
with the media, publishing, negotiations and sales. You have an
enviable gift for both understanding the real value of things and for
being able to express it. This makes you a natural fund-manager or
fundraiser, with a gift for promoting your own or your company’s best
long-term interests.
Although you would like to be the strong, silent type and want to
be able to brood on things, you are an impulsive talker, needing to
communicate your experiences. In consequence, you can be an
extremely witty yet penetrating conversationalist, though perhaps
rather given to laying down the law and wanting the last word. You
have a strong will but an ability to hide your natural determination
behind a flexible exterior and your natural gift of the gab. Since your
approach to life is strongly practical and you want to see results from
your activities, you quickly learn that you can get your own way best
through a light touch and a willingness to be flexible rather than from
confronting others. Relationships
If you do not acknowledge your tendency to blow hot and cold, your
relationships can be a constant souce of perplexity to yourself and all
concerned. You are not an emotional type; indeed you can seem quite
dry, unflappable and detached, whilst at heart you are a passionate
sensualist. This can lead you to play the field – a butterfly flitting from
flower to flower, seeking ever new sensual delights – unwilling to
commit yourself, yet becoming ever more deeply dissatisfied as your
need for permanence and possession of your loved ones asserts itself.
You bring both playfulness and common sense into a relationship. Just
remember that a ‘logical’ emotional relationship does not exist. A
perfect match would bore you anyway. Your Greatest Strengths
Practical intelligence; fine reasoning abilities; ability to translate
sensual experience into words and far-reaching ideas; sheer capacity
for being effectively busy and for talking others round to your point of
view. Your Greatest Weaknesses
Tendency to become dry as dust, reducing life’s pleasures to matter-offact ideas; inclination to argue your way through life with bullying
bombast; lack of sympathy for the emotional needs of others (and
yourself) and for the loftier aspirations of the human spirit. Images for Integration
A sculptor carves the figure of a dancer … A wealthy publisher
launches another new project … A restaurateur earns a reputation for
delicious soufflés and meringues … A scientist brilliantly discourses
on the mysteries of nature. Famous Personalities
Fred Astaire (dancer), George Carlin (stand-up comedian), Catherine
the Great (Empress of Russia), Teilhard de Chardin (philosopher and
mystic), Sigmund Freud (psychologist), Edward Lear (author of
nonsense verse), Lyle Lovett (country singer), Eric Morecambe
(comedian), Robert Peary (explorer), David O. Selznik (film
producer), Shirley Temple (actress). S UN T AURUS —16—
M OON C ANCER The Common Sense Book of Baby and Child Care TITLE OF BOOK BY DR BENJAMIN SPOCK You can’t tell people they must consume less when their children are
hungry. We, the fortunate people, must consume less so they can
consume more.
DAVID ICKE Themes
EARTH/WATER Sensitive and determined, or easily hurt and
obstinate; caring; nourishing; resourceful; the world is my family; likes
to be thought well of; fertile; creative; imaginative; sensual; romantic;
enduring loyalty; tenacious.
Whether you are male or female, and whatever you do – be it in
business, catering, the caring professions or indeed at home – you are
undoubtedly one of the great ‘mothers’ of the world. You have a
strongly protective, sensitive and nurturing approach to all that you do.
But are you a self-sacrificing Earth Mother who lavishes endless
loving care upon your offspring? Or are you a strict Scottish nanny
concerned that children learn from an early age to be strong and selfsufficient? Are you an emotional, indeed sentimental, mum or are you
practical and common-sensical? When you connect both these sides of
you, like Dr Spock of baby-book fame, you can become the ideal
parent, teacher and friend. Immensely sympathetic, understanding and
supportive, you are able to encourage and bring out the best in those
people and organizations you care for and with whom you come into
contact.
Your strong sense of the value of things gives you an excellent
business and economic sense, enabling you to spot a bargain and to
conserve and build up your financial resources. This is assisted by your
capacity for getting others to feel protective towards you. Whilst you
tend to lack the more dynamic get-up-and-go self-confidence of the
classic entrepreneur, you have nonetheless a quiet determination which
gets you wherever you want to go. Your home, and no doubt your evergreen garden, will be especially
important to you and you will make your ‘nest’ both secure and
comfortable. You are a naturally good neighbour, and although you
tend to be a rather quiet, private and indeed even secretive person, you
do feel a sense of responsibility for those around you. This can mean
that you are the child who ends up looking after your parents when
your brothers and sisters are off doing their own thing.
You are strongly sensual and tend to be rather allergic to ideas and
theories. You think best in pictures and symbols and by simply doing
and experiencing things, and getting the feel of how they work. You
are naturally creative and artistic with a strongly lyrical, musical and
poetic bent. You can get swept away on a soaring melody, or by a
particular nuance of colour, scent or texture. You can use your body as
a barometer, for it will tend to reflect faithfully your inner moods and
emotions.
Childhood was, and probably still is, enormously important to you.
In an often threatening world, you may well seek to retreat into the
secure and familiar. This may lead you to seek out a steady, routine
occupation which offers long-term security rather than something that
can feed your rich imagination.
When these two sides of you are working in creative tandem, this
is an immensely caring combination. It is an ideal mix for anyone in
the caring, counselling or nursing professions or indeed in any kind of
work where the care and nourishment of others is the central
preoccupation, such as infant-school teaching, catering and hotel work. Relationships
Emotional relationships and family are central to your well-being. You
are strongly domestic, and your capacity for intimacy and nestbuilding blossoms when you have found the right person. You long for
total union and, once you have taken the plunge, you will invest all
your rich emotional and supportive energy into your relationships. You
need to feel sure of your ground, however, before you will commit
yourself. Your romantic and possessive qualities make for stability and
endurance. Your Greatest Strengths
Nourishing, protective and diplomatic approach; reliable, sustained,
supportive concern for others; capacity to translate emotional
experience into works of art. Your Greatest Weaknesses
Tendency to carry the world upon your shoulders; sensitivity to real or
imagined insults; stubborn prejudices; a narrow preoccupation with
your own approach to life; lack of sympathy for ideas and theories
which are outside your experience. Images for Integration
A baker undertakes to feed an orphanage … Dr Spock teaching
mothers how to bring up their children … Tchaikovsky’s Swan Lake Famous Personalities
Penelope Cruz (actress), Sandra Dee (film actress), Gabriel Fauré
(composer), David Icke (sportsman and New Age prophet), Joan Miró
(painter), Ted Mosel (dramatist), Robert Oppenheimer (atomic
physicist), Lynn Redgrave (actress), Peter and Anthony Shaffer
(dramatist twins), Dr Benjamin Spock (childcare specialist), Pyotr
Ilyich Tchaikovsky (composer). —17—
S UN T AURUS
M OON L EO
Whenever you accept our views, we shall be in full agreement with
you.
MOSHE DAYAN True patriotism doesn‘t exclude an understanding of the patriotism of
others.
QUEEN ELIZABETH Gêmeos Themes
EARTH/FIRE Artistic; regal; practical imagination; substantial
personality; fixed opinions; a leader; inflexible; proud; love of beauty;
loyal; affectionate; vain; strong values; materialistic; snobbish;
ambitious; capable; masterful.
Do you want possessions or fame? Are you a charismatic show-off or a
predictable, solid property owner? Do you want to conserve or flaunt
the things you love most? You have what could be called a substantial
personality – the kind that builds empires and runs them for a hobby.
Although you tend to be conventional in values, you are nevertheless
quite outspoken and flamboyant in expression, and you leave no one in
doubt about where you stand, at least on the issues that seem worthy of
your attention.
You are one of the combinations that rarely suffers from an
inferiority complex, and as a result you can do almost anything to
which you set your mind. You do your homework too, and are secure
in what you know. With fixed ideas about how to get things done, you
will definitely do things your way because you want the best and the
longest-lasting result.
You make a good executive or leader of some sort because you
have amazing powers of concentration which take you through to the
end. And you are not afraid to call a spade a spade and to stick to your
guns on principle. No wavering or dilly-dallying for you. Even in the
most humble of positions, you bring a dedication and nobility to your
work that makes others admire and respect you.
There is a quiet introvert within you, which is happy to plod along
in comfortable grooves as long as your security and plans for greater
security remain intact. At one level, your needs are straightforward –
you value the solid, sensible and sensual things of this world and you
want a steady supply of them as well. On the other hand, however, a simple, quiet life is just not quite enough. The darkest side of you
could be a bit like the fisherman’s wife who always wants more – her
grandiose fantasies keep mushrooming until finally it is God she wants
to be! The need for tangible proof of your specialness, greatness and
loveableness can make you a bit like her, and your pride can get out of
hand.
If you find life is getting a little boring, you are likely to do
something a bit risky. Sticking your elegant neck out, you discover that
you have a real ham inside you that loves to sing, dance, and entertain.
And what fun you have doing it! In other words, besides the introvert
you also have a daredevil extrovert inside you that wants to throw
caution to the wind and go on wild spending sprees. That side of you is
also very sociable and you can be a courteous, classy host or hostess
when you choose to entertain. The people you invite to your home –
which is where you like to do your socializing – will be individuals
and friends you truly value. You just cannot fake the way you feel so
why pretend that you identify with the waifs and losers of the world? Relationships
In close relationships you are passionate, loyal, generous and 100percent involved, although that percentage means you can be pretty
demanding as well. Arguments can be real knock-out affairs because
triumph is all-important to you, so you need to be sure that what you
are arguing about really merits your digging-in of heels.
You care very deeply about your roots and ancestry, about the
wellbeing and comfort of your family, and you really enjoy traditional
family get-togethers. In these situations you shine because your
steadiness, playfulness and warmth come out and are appreciated.
Whilst your ability to indulge and enjoy yourself endears you to others,
you need to be aware that they may have different ways of enjoying
themselves so, as in all things, you need to loosen up and develop
some sensitivity. If you can do this, your powerfully magnetic and
capable personality will attract loyal admirers and friends. Your Greatest Strengths
Magnetic, sociable personality; tremendous willpower and leadership
abilities; innate resourcefulness and creativity; instinctive patience and
persistence which allows you to reach your goals with minimum stress. Your Greatest Weaknesses
Arrogance and pride; stubborn refusal to see the other person’s
viewpoint; tendency to express your own opinions with terrific force
which alienates others; the difficulty you have in relaxing, laughing at
yourself and being just ‘one of the guys’. Images for Integration
On a perfect summer’s evening, a performance of A Midsummer
Night’s Dream is held in the palace garden … Keeping up with the
Joneses. Famous Personalities
Thomas Beecham (conductor), Scott Carpenter (astronaut), Moshe
Dayan (Israeli general and archaeologist), Willem de Kooning (artist),
Dwayne Hickman (actor), G. Marconi (physicist), Zubin Mehta
(conductor), Robert Montgomery (actor), Evita Peron (actress), Queen
Elizabeth Gêmeos , Ida Rolf (psychologist), Barbra Streisand (actress and
singer), Victoria Wood (comedienne), Renee Zellweger (actress). S UN T AURUS —18—
M OON V IRGO The State, in choosing men to serve it, takes no notice of their
opinions. If they be willing faithfully to serve it, that satisfies.
OLIVER CROMWELL There is overnight success and there’s longevity … and my thing is
longevity.
MAUREEN LIPMAN
I am probably the most successful actor in the history of movies,
financially speaking. I only wish the world would listen to me more.
JACK NICHOLSON Themes
EARTH/EARTH Responsible; ethical; poise; stability; hard-working;
earthy; lucid; common sense; good teacher and student; graceful;
dutiful; likes practical tasks; discriminating intellect; physical beauty;
skilful; epicurean; artisan.
You are a perennial student of life, methodically adding to your skills,
talents, security and enjoyment. You chart your future with a clear,
rational grasp of what is necessary, and you lay foundations that are
index-linked and geared to letting you enjoy the good things of life
whilst never shirking your duties at work or at home.
Enormously responsible, capable and blessed with lots of earthy
charm, you aim to do the right thing for yourself and for loved ones –
nothing pleases you more than serving those who depend upon you.
One side of you is very fixed and self-assured: you know yourself and
your needs and desires well, and you are confident in what you can do.
You are also clear about what you do not want to do. Another side of
you, however, tends to question and analyse yourself, and doubts that
you have really got it right. This is the side that tells you that you could
always do a little bit better.
You are a sticker, a veritable workaholic and persevering
perfectionist, dedicated to high standards and sterling service. But you
are also quite independent, and prefer to be able to choose when,
where and for whom you work. Ideally, you work for yourself, and you
are a jolly hard taskmaster whose work is never done. Work and
service is what you instinctively centre yourself around, and yet it can at times weigh you down if you let yourself get lost in the sea of
details that you try to master.
You are the great pragmatist. At home in the world of the senses,
you are able to build up realistic priorities and a good sense of reality
by dealing sequentially and logically with the things of this world that
you can touch, taste, see and add up. As a result, you are an excellent
organizer and can manage many types of responsibilities admirably,
from domestic arrangements, gardening, child-rearing and teaching to
writing, dancing, painting, singing and running your own theatre
company. You make it your business to know your medium inside out,
and your professional approach inspires confidence in everyone.
Essentially you aspire to a life of simplicity, usefulness and rational
harmony. You need to create something concrete and enduring,
something that is morally sound, practical and contributes to the
wellbeing of others, and something that is ultimately an expression of
your own worth. When you are fully engaged in the purpose of your
life, however quiet and humble it may appear to be, your love of
excellence and of pleasure come together to create a warmly
humorous, sharp-witted and innately wise personality whom others
admire and respect. Relationships
Emotionally your needs are straightforward: physical affection, loyalty,
thoughtfulness and adherence to the domestic schedule that makes the
most sense for everyone (and especially you). You take emotional
commitment seriously, and can be the most devoted and kind-hearted
of mates. But because you expect others to see the intelligence of
organizing their lives as you do, more spontaneous individuals may
find you rather demanding and strict. And yet you are often attracted to
fiery, irrational types who ‘need organizing.’
You can easily feel offended when others rebel at your ‘oughts’
and ‘shoulds’, for you are only trying to fulfil your obligations. You
can also be quite sensitive and brood about not being appreciated or
taken seriously, for you think about yourself as an alert, discerning
thinker and a sane, constructive member of society. What life may teach you at some point is that there really are different ways of
perceiving things, and that different individuals value different things. Your Greatest Strengths
Earthiness and excellent common sense; practical efficiency and
reliability; resourcefulness and constructive critical eye; your thorough
and professional approach to work; your good sense of timing and
ability to say the right thing at the right time; and your charming,
gracious, humorous temperament. Your Greatest Weaknesses
Fear or abhorrence of chaos; overdependence on rational explanations;
need to control the here-and-now and to have absolute material
security; tendency to rest on your laurels, get into a rut and neglect
your deeper potential. Images for Integration
In her sumptuous garden, the music teacher entertains her now
accomplished past pupils … The treasurer for the Association for
Social Reform invests proceeds of a jumble sale into gilt-edged
securities. Famous Personalities
Michael Barrymore (entertainer), Candice Bergen (actress), Oliver
Cromwell (statesman), Daniel Day Lewis (actor), Lonnie Donegan
(folk singer), Donovan (singer), Hirohito (former emperor of Japan),
Englebert Humperdinck (singer), Maureen Lipman (actress and
comedienne), Shirley Maclaine (actress), Doug McClure (actor), Jack
Nicholson (actor), Sir Laurence Olivier (actor), Michelle Pfeiffer
(actor), Mort Sahl (comedian), Peter Townsend (singer). —19—
S UN T AURUS
M OON L IBRA
A leader who doesn’t hesitate before he sends his nation into battle is
not fit to be a leader.
GOLDA MEIR
Every time I talk to a savant I feel quite sure that happiness is no
longer a possibility. Yet when I talk with my gardener, I’m convinced of
the opposite.
What is matter, never mind; what is mind, no matter.
BERTRAND RUSSELL Themes
EARTH/AIR Rational; charming; love of harmony; aesthetic sense;
romantic; devoted; sentimental; sociable; pleasantly persuasive; a
realist; common sense; sensual; attractive personality; search for
justice; need for companionship; practical idealist; social theorist.
Are you an idealistic artist or an artistic philosopher? Are you an
incurable romantic who is searching for permanent love, but who
keeps finding beautiful human beings less than ideal? Whatever your
walk of life, the principles of justice and harmony will feature strongly
in all you do. You want to get to grips with ideas and translate your
vision of Utopia into a realistic proposition, but will probably discover
the necessity for compromise. This may disillusion you at first, but
later will become central to the way you operate.
Innately sociable and convivial, you are genuinely interested in
other people and indeed need large amounts of kindness and affection.
You want the best for everyone but you make sure that you do not
skimp on yourself. You thrive in beautiful surroundings and in the
company of elegant minds. An innately aesthetic person, and probably
quite romantic as well, you bring a genuine warmth and lively concern to all social gatherings, which makes you downright flirtatious
sometimes. If you are an artist, you will probably create works of art
that are good enough to eat; if you are a chef, dishes that are works of
art. Whatever you do, your creations will express your innate sense of
harmony, beauty and style.
A lively social conscience is another aspect of this combination, as
well as an awareness of the importance of education in the healthy
development of the individual and of society. You are attracted to
progressive ideas that assert the inalienable rights of every human
being, and you can accept the paradoxical fact that everyone is
different and yet the same. Everyone has different talents and
preferences, and yet everyone has the same fundamental needs: a full
stomach, a roof over their heads and lots of love. You believe in a
society that respects both material needs and high moral values, and
your social instinct and pragmatic perseverence may take you into
social-welfare work or the political arena where you can express your
power and idealism.
You learn how to make others see the intelligence of your thinking
by first listening to and valuing their thinking on the subject. But you
probably have a diplomatic knack of making sure the substance of
your view prevails. And you can really impress with the practicality of
your approach: you can economize with flair and use the resources to
hand. Waste not, want not, you always say. You also know that a
happy, convivial, relaxed atmosphere is the most conducive to
constructive communication and compromise. Conflict is anathema to
your being and you employ your natural diplomatic skills to overcome
antagonism in any setting – with the sheer force of your magnetic
personality. Relationships
Relationships are of central importance to you, from the platonic and
professional to the sensual and amorous. You are deeply romantic and
will crave the ideal love relationship, both physical and spiritual. A
meeting of minds and a meeting of bodies is what you are after! You tend to invest an enormous amount in your loved one, and you
may remain unaware of how dependent you are on him or her because
you think of yourself as independent. Although in some ways you are
fairly self-sufficient, independence is not really one of your traits.
Sometimes you can be fussy and fastidious, even a touch cantankerous
when things are not going harmoniously, and you will always be
happier in tandem, with tea for two on the menu.
You like security and creature comforts, and put a lot into serious
relationships – you like to have someone whom you can devote
yourself to and share candle-lit dinners with. As you are always open
to suggestions and better ideas, you are keen to discuss inspirations
with your friends and lover. Your Greatest Strengths
A flair for persuasive diplomacy; practical idealism; gentle wit;
impeccable artistic sensibility; strong social sense; ability to enjoy
people and life to the hilt. Your Greatest Weaknesses
Over-reliance on popularity and social acceptance; reluctance to
engage in conflict; over-emphasizing rational solutions to every kind
of problem. Images for Integration
A loaf of fresh bread in an art exhibition … A computer produces a
beautiful painting … Cream tea for two. Famous Personalities
William Ball (theatre director and producer), Judy Collins (singer and
songwriter), Joseph Cotton (actor), Fernandel (actor), Ella Fitzgerald
(jazz singer), Henry Fonda (actor), Steve Ford (actor), Ernst Karl Kraft
(astrologer), Golda Meir (Israeli politician), James Mitchum (actor), Sergei Sergeyevich Prokofiev (composer), Bertrand Russell
(philosopher), Gary Snider (poet), Rudolph Valentino (actor), Sid
Vicious (punk star). S UN T AURUS —20—
M OON S CORPIO There are three ingredients in the good life: learning, earning, and
yearning.
CHRISTOPHER DARLINGTON MORLEY
If you can’t stand the heat, get out of the kitchen.
HARRY S. TRUMAN Themes
EARTH/WATER Stubborn; confident; passionate; protective; sensual;
possessive; strong appetites; magnetic; staying power; resourceful;
persevering; wilful; shrewd mind; intensely creative; egotistic; forceful
self-expression; subjective views; protective; independent; perceptive;
strategic.
You believe in yourself so deeply that the concept of an inferiority
complex is probably alien to you. Your instincts of self-preservation
and self-defence work powerfully to claim your territory and just
desserts, and only you will decide with whom you will share them.
Your ‘territory’ can include material possessions, your home, ideas,
professional power and people.
You have deep, almost obsessive convictions about what you do, and
you bring such conscientious commitment to your activities, loves and
hates that you can exhaust yourself without realizing it. You possess
both an unflappable, earthy, maternal temperament as well as a
powerful fighting spirit. When working well together, they could be described as the immoveable object and the irrisistible force in an
earth-moving pas de deux.
Your tremendous magnetism and self-confidence make an
unforgettable impression on others. People sense they need you as an
ally because they would really fear you as an adversary! Saying you
are wrong or sorry is not one of your strong points, and your sheer
perversity and entrenched stubbornness may lead you to overestimate
yourself at times.
Passionate sensuality and appetite make you a bon viveur and,
potentially, a very talented artist as well. You live life fully, relishing
both domestic security and emotional intensity. You can taste the
beauty of a rose and feel the strength of the diving roots of a massive
oak. Your character is a kind of personification of the primeval life
force itself, and there is very little you cannot do when motivated. The
one thing that can sabotage your best interests is inertia. This can be a
problem because you can attract what you want and then get into a rut,
mistaking ownership for contentment. You can dominate others easily
and assume their respect and good opinion too readily, turning some
into weaklings and others into enemies.
You cannot understand it when people call you bossy; you just
happen to know best and are most comfortable running the show. In
fact, you can be quite a showman and are a natural self-dramatist,
putting tremendous energy into any kind of performance, be it a
college debate, a party political broadcast or a Broadway opening
night. You need to watch out for negative emotions: they can have a
destructive hold over you, especially anger, jealousy and resentment.
When you have become more self-aware and in control of your
temperament and energies, however, you are capable of immense
amounts of work and commitment. You can be a devoted teacher or
doctor, or a perceptive counsellor, a solid, dependable home-maker, a
shrewd businessperson, an impassioned social leader, a dedicated artist
or musician. If you take to the pen, you could be a merciless satirist of
man’s incongruous habits and morals. Luckily, your compelling charm
makes the deadly accuracy of your criticism more palatable for others. Relationships
There is a paradoxical side to your personality. On the one hand you
aim for material security and are loathe to change your ways, your
opinions, or (heaven forbid) move house. On the other hand,
something in you seeks risk and challenge where you can test your
strength and feel the adrenalin coursing through your veins. This side
of you is likely to express itself in your emotional life.
Passionate and demanding to live with, you may drive your partner
crazy at times because of the complex mixture of independence and
possessiveness which colours your affectionate nature. Sometimes you
are outrageously demanding, but at other times you are equally
generous and devoted. You exude the sunny, peaceful warmth of
spring, but once caught in your emotional web you are a dark enigma
who dares the other to figure you out. Your willpower is tremendous
and your potential for success great, as long as you can harness and
direct your energies along rational, rather than purely emotional, lines.
Aim to control yourself, rather than others! Your Greatest Strengths
Enormous confidence and persistence; administrative power and
organizational abilities; a heightened aesthetic and artistic sense;
creative drive; loyalty and commitment to others; a dramatic and
charismatic presence. Your Greatest Weaknesses
Terrific stubbornness; strongly subjective responses and fixed
prejudices; ruthless desire for power; a difficult temper. Images for Integration
The mating season. Persephone and Pluto. The Phantom of the Opera.
Dennis Potter’s The Singing Detective. Famous Personalities
Janet Blair (actress), Alana Ladd (actress), Gaston Leroux (dramatist
and mystery writer), Christopher Darlington Morley (writer and
journalist), Baba Muktananda (guru), Dennis Potter (playwright),
Roberto Rossellini (movie director), Dame Margaret Rutherford
(actress), Warren Spahn (baseball pitcher), Anthony Trollope
(novelist), Harry S. Truman (former American president), Fred
Zinneman (film director). S UN T AURUS —21—
M OON S AGITTARIUS Agnosticism simply means that a man shall not say he knows or
believes that for which he has no grounds for professing to believe.
THOMAS HENRY HUXLEY
There is no such thing as a great talent without a great will-power.
BALZAC Themes
EARTH/FIRE Magnetic instability; grounded yet high flying;
adventurous yet conventional; practical; persuasive; inspired; sees
possibilities and seizes them; dedicated; hard-working; sense of the
absurd and paradoxical.
Are you Speedy Gonzalez or the Slow and Steady Plodder? Are you a
brilliant wit or a dull, straw-chewing fool? A slothful, fleshy
materialist or a wide-eyed, soaring-spirited gypsy wanderer? Are you
gambler or banker? Conservative or radical?
You are torn between an instinct to roam free and a determination
to find security and make a solid, lasting contribution to the world. As
you repeatedly change horses in search of both ultimate certainties and
high-spirited adventure at the same time, you can find yourself deeply divided and uncertain. You seek to earth the Fire from heaven and put
it to work, but you find all too often that it will not let you rest.
In your search for stability and security, you become a farmer and
are immediately confronted with the changing seasons. You embrace
the solid certainties of geology and are hit by an earthquake. Feel the
solid Earth move! You seek certitude and permanence, yet your
endless enquiries constantly confound yesterday’s certainties. When
you get your own uncertainties together (by accepting you want the
best of both the changing and the unchanging worlds), you can be a
brilliant teacher, conversationalist, counsellor, entertainer, wit, creative
artist or entrepreneur – in fact you can be anything you want. Once
focused, you can be a human dynamo, and wonderfully humorous,
witty and entertaining with it.
As you will have discovered, your quest for solid material
certainties does not make a happy bedfellow for your yearning for
excitement and larger religious and spiritual understanding. In one way
or another, be it through philosophy and the spiritual quest or through
writing, music or art, you will need to put together and formulate a
total vision of the universe which is based on unassailable facts yet
satisfying to your idealism. Constantly seeking, you are a natural
agnostic, applying the criteria of science to counter woolly
speculations, yet at the same time highly sceptical of the limited and
statistical pronouncements of unthinking science.
The danger, if you do not marry these elements within you, is that
you will swing from one to the other and undermine the virtues of
both. A restless changing of jobs, careers, partners, visions or
aspirations can leave you drunk with your own spinning. When you
deliberately try to remain sober and commonsensical, it seems to make
matters worse for there is something of the gambler in you. This all-ornothing streak can temporarily overcome your natural caution and
enable you to burn your bridges (though you will usually ensure there
is something tucked away for a rainy day). You feel an impulsive need
to do things on a grand scale, to live with commitment, to feast on the
world, and to understand what it is to be alive in all possible ways.
You seem called both to explore the reaches of the imagination and
to build secure foundations. You can bring far-reaching visions into manifestation, and these visions can inject your conservative desire for
stability and security with flair and colour. Your vision of tomorrow
and the larger world can give spice to any project you undertake. You
see endless possibilities and want to make them real. In this you can be
the natural entrepreneur who can see economic opportunities at every
turn, an inspiring counsellor and teacher, and a stimulating companion
whatever you do. Relationships
You need strong relationships and you are an excellent, warm,
supportive and generous friend. No sooner have you settled down,
however, than you find yourself restless. You can flit and flirt from one
delightful partner to another, yet casual relationships leave you feeling
hollow. Your ideal partner will be both warmly supportive and
traditional, yet unafraid of new adventures and unusual ideas. You are
a live wire yet a home body, and any relationship must somehow
contain both elements if it is to succeed. Your Greatest Strengths
Down-to-earth capacity to marry common sense and inventive
imagination, inspired flair and a matter-of-fact realism; enthusiasm
with practical politics; a good, if at times wild, business sense. Your Greatest Weaknesses
Restless instability and craving for excitement; reluctance to be tied
down; infuriating unreliability just when you seemed to have mended
your restless ways. Images for Integration
A monk builds a cathedral whilst contemplating the infinite reaches of
the universe … The prodigal son returns to the home farm … Balzac’s
La Comédie humaine … Brahms’ Violin Concerto. Famous Personalities
John James Audubon (naturalist and painter), Johannes Brahms
(composer), Honoré de Balzac (novelist and playwright), Sandy
Dennis (actress), Albert Finney (actor), Thomas Huxley (scientist),
Edwin Land (inventor of instant camera), Liberace (pianist and
entertainer), Ferdinand Magellan (explorer), Glenda Jackson (actress
and politician), Hedda Hopper (gossip columnist), Natasha Richardson
(actress). S UN T AURUS —22—
M OON C APRICORN You’ve forgotten the grandest moral attribute of a Scotsman, Maggie,
that he’ll do nothing which might damage his career.
JAMES BARRIE
A considerable number of persons are able to protect themselves
against the outbeak of serious neurotic phenomena only through
intense work.
KARL ABRAHAM Themes
EARTH/EARTH Shrewd pragmatist; dignified; authoritarian;
dependable; down-to-earth; ambitious; logical; sensual; loyal; loving;
protective; realistic; determined; resourceful; need for security;
traditional; formal; staunch friend; the boss.
Are you a sensible, home-loving, slow-paced, solid Earth Mother (or
Father), or are you an ambitious go-getter? You like to put down roots,
grow, bloom and become a solid member of the community; and yet
you also want to remain upwardly mobile, carving out your own
career.
You are a traditionalist through and through, and definitely not one of
life’s gamblers. You were born with your feet planted firmly on the ground. Realistic, capable, hard-working and even somewhat stoic,
you work with what you can taste, touch and see. Your values are of
the earth and you have a deep need to produce something tangible,
permanent and useful. You also want to shine as a responsible leader
and to be recognized as a creative, powerful individual in your own
right.
Your ambitions are a mixture of wanting the security of a home and
clean socks in the drawer, and the desire for wordly success, authority
and recognition. And your unflappable common sense, innate selfconfidence and excellent organizing ability usually help you to achieve
both. Some days you may just want to stretch out and breathe in the
fresh air, or curl up in a cosy corner in the comfort of your own home
with a cup of tea (or a gin and tonic) and the melodic strains of Elgar.
Despite this, your instinct for competition and conquest never really
goes away. Your mind is ever active and needs something tangible with
which to get to grips, to manage and to influence.
Your image of yourself is of a responsible, serious professional,
and it is into your profession that you will pour your substantial drive.
You carefully and patiently follow your professional goals, later
consolidating all increments of personal power and position with
foresight and shrewd acceptance of responsibility. Social work, politics
and academia are areas which would appeal to your need for challenge,
although you may be quite artistic as well.
You are an honourable, gracious, conscientious person with a solid
sense of self and an almost ducal presence that commands respect. A
shrewd judge of character, you can size up a person readily, keeping
your mental judgements quietly on the backburner for future reference.
Despite a self-restrained manner, you are very approachable,
sentimental and caring, and you show your concern in concrete ways.
People therefore place confidence in you and feel safe in your
tremendously capable hands.
You have incredible control over yourself, especially your
emotions, but when you are with close friends whom you respect and
trust you can relax and enjoy convivial gatherings. There is a very
sensual, artistic, and musical side to your nature. You may surprise
others with quite an earthy, bawdy sense of humour when your guards are down, but you would hate to say or do anything in bad taste. As a
provider you are consistent and generous; as a friend faithful and longsuffering; and as a critic severe and utterly honest. Relationships
You really bloom in a happy, secure, devoted relationship. Somewhat
possessive and stubborn, you know what you want and can be pretty
demanding. Once committed to a person, however, you are very loving
and affectionate and the staunchest of mates. Your needs are
straightforward: lots of physical affection, absolute faithfulness, and
mutual respect.
You do not enjoy emotional complexities although, whatever the
problem, you do not give up easily on relationships. You may get tired,
cross and discouraged, but still you doggedly pursue happiness and
security and may cling to a rather old-fashioned sense of honour.
Family life is extremely important to you and you take your
responsibilities seriously. Sometimes the demands of career interests
may conflict with the needs of family, but you somehow learn to
handle this. You do not easily forget wrongs, but kindnesses you
always remember. And you always try to live up to the best in yourself
– morally, artistically and financially. Your Greatest Strengths
Practical, earthy instincts; a high sense of integrity and dependability;
shrewd business sense and organizational savvy; affectionate loyalty
and paternal concern for those in need. Your Greatest Weaknesses
A tendency to be overmaterialistic and rational, pig-headed and
dictatorial; an over-emphasis on security and fixed routines; a tendency
to see and honour only what you know. Image for Integration
A royal banquet honours the longest-serving headmistress of the oldest
and most prestigous school in the land. Famous Personalities
Karl Abraham (psychoanalyst), James Barrie (writer), Yogi Berra
(baseball player), David Byrne (rock musician), Cher (singer and
actress), George Clooney (actor), Sheena Easton (singer), Joe Louis
(champion boxer), Willie Mays (baseball player), Yehudi Menuhin
(concert violinist), James Monroe (former American president),
Maureen O’Sullivan (actress), Chris Patten (politician), James Stewart
(actor), Jeremy Thorpe (politician), Tammy Wynette (country singer). S UN T AURUS —23—
M OON A QUARIUS When you’re down and out, something always turns up – and it’s
usually the noses of your friends.
ORSON WELLES
May the Force be with you.
GEORGE LUCAS , Star Wars Themes
EARTH/AIR Confident; independent; honest; morally sound; capable
intellect; proud; friendly; helpful; gracious; resourceful; sensible; hardworking; shrewd; tenacious; artistic; trustworthy; faithful; holds fast to
ideals; an innovative pragmatist.
Are you a nuts-and-bolts pragmatist who wants cash on the nail, or a
far-seeing idealist whose philanthropic outlook opens doors for others?
No matter which side is strongest within you, this is a winning combination because you can back up your high ideals and broad
vision with hard work and perseverence.
You do not lose touch with reality; rather, you bring humanitarian
values down to earth and put them to use in a productive way, for
yourself and for others. People respect you because you are utterly
honest and they know you employ the same scrutiny to yourself as you
do to them. You were born with a strong sense of self which is very
hard to dent. This is not because you are defensive; rather it is due to
your staunch humane conservatism and your tenacious loyalty to
sound ideals.
You respect yourself, feel you deserve what you want, and are
willing to work hard to get it. Your creations express your uniqueness
and your strong sense of identity in a very tangible way. The freedom
to be yourself, to work patiently towards the marriage of your ideals
and your bank account, and to enjoy with loved ones the fruits of your
hard-headed genius, is to a large extent what makes you tick.
One of your strongest points is your clear-headed, frank and
forthright manner of communication. You have a sound intellect, grasp
essential facts and figures readily, and tend to tell it like it is. You
enjoy imparting knowledge to others which makes their lives more
rational, productive and ecological in every sense of the word. You
therefore make a good instructor – helpful, friendly and egalitarian,
although you know in the end everyone has to be their own teacher and
live according to their own principles. And certainly you never
abandon yours; they are the central hub around which your life
revolves, and you have a natural way of persuading others of the
soundness of your views.
You do not like conflict and feel, really, that it is beneath you. You
will find ‘civilized’ ways of circumventing obstacles, for which your
amiable, pleasant personality is a great asset.
You are drawn towards areas of work which can express both your
natural love of freedom and your sound sense of material values.
Because of your strong independence, you are well-suited to selfemployment. Because you are gregarious as well, however, you are a
natural for working with the public. You often go for progressive ideas
which serve your fundamental well-being – and that means the body. Indeed, it is quite likely that you are very in tune with the needs and
rhythms of the body, and you could be attracted to practices that
highlight the mind-body relationship, such as t’ai chi or yoga.
You love good food and intelligent company, although you may
swing between gourmet indulgence and religious fasting. Essentially
you want to be in control of yourself. For you, this is all part of being a
competent maverick – and you know that means being in control of
your considerable sensual appetites as well. Relationships
In relationships your instinct is for mental rapport and independence,
but at heart you may find yourself a real romantic, wanting emotional
security and full possession of your partner. Usually, however, you can
look at these opposite sides of yourself with total honesty, and with
loved ones you will earn full marks for your candid self-assessment.
You do not need to fool people; it is simply not your way.
Because you are utterly fair and always respect others’ needs and
views, you have the capacity to be a friend as well as a devoted lover.
You are only attracted to people you respect. You are an ecologist of
the heart and mind, designed to create wealth and then dispense it with
humanitarian noblesse oblige. Your Greatest Strengths
A sound sense of values; an ability to be totally objective and realistic;
integrity and natural rapport with people; an ability to inspire
confidence; commitment to principles; warm, friendly helpfulness
which can make a tangible difference in others’ lives. Your Greatest Weaknesses
Stubbornness and proneness to inertia when things are not going your
way; reluctance simply to flow with the moment and let things happen;
an overconfidence that can come across as conceit. Image for Integration
A country squire holds the summer fête in his garden; all monies raised
are divided equally between the three charities in the village – the
Friendly Farmer’s Trust, the Local Artists’ Guild, and the Quakers’
Orphanage. Famous Personalities
Anouk Aimée (actress), Pietro Aretino (satirist and writer), Burt
Bacharach (songwriter), Anne Baxter (actress), David Beckham
(football celebrity), Charlotte Brontë (writer and poetess), Jean
Houston (psychologist), Peter Hurkos (psychic), George Lucas (film
director), Alessandro Scarlatti (composer), Uma Thurman (actress),
Orson Welles (actor). —24—
S UN T AURUS M OON Plutão ISCES I pity those poor critics who might try to disentangle the Gordian Knot
of my obsessive symbols and images.
FREDERIC PROKOSCH …all the business of life is to endeavour to find out what you don’t
know by what you do …
DUKE OF WELLINGTON Themes
EARTH/WATER Imagination and realism; creative; musical; poetic;
easy-going yet determined; responsive yet reserved; the practical
dreamer; caring sensitivity; love of beauty; the nature mystic;
resourceful. Are you a feet-on-the-ground steady achiever or are you constantly
being swept away on the wings of poetic imagination? Are you the
policeman or the poet, the songwriter or the estate agent, the banker or
the mystic, the capitalist or the socialist?
Your idealistic instincts give you a compassionate concern for the
needs of others, but your common-sense head tells you that you must
look after yourself and ensure your own stability. At heart you are a
dreamer, but in practice you are indeed practical and know you must
earn what your imagination spends with such ease.
Ideally, and you are at heart an idealist, you need to be involved in
work that both gives you security yet enables you to follow your inner
vision. You can drift and dream, but when put up against it you have
an enviable ability to bring in the cash. Money is never likely to stick
to you for long, however, for you know that it is only a means to an
end, and you always have new ends and visions you feel inspired to
pursue. When you get these two sides of yourself together you can
become the turned-on businessman, with a superb sense of strategy, or
the practical poet, musician or artist who can manage your affairs
better than any agent.
You can be very responsive to the needs of others yet you are at
heart a private person, inclined to be withdrawn and given to periods
of inner brooding as well as dreaming. Indeed when things are down
you can get very despondent, and your imagination begins to conjure
up the worst. At such times you can readily eat and drink for comfort
as much as pleasure. Yet just when everyone thinks you have taken a
vow of silence, there you are pouring forth flashes of insight and
revealing your need to communicate your inner experience.
Central to all your work, in whatever sphere, is a strongly lyrical,
feminine, caring sensibility, and a natural understanding of the
relationship between feelings and the body. Whether or not you are in
the helping or healing professions, you understand that illness is often
an expression of mixed-up emotions, and you have a gift for
reconnecting people with themselves and their feelings. Likewise you
feel yourself connected to the Earth and to Mother Nature, and are
likely to have special places to which you go, either in reality or in
your imagination, in order to centre yourself. This is one expression of your flair for giving symbolic expression to your feelings through
some form of art, be it music or accountancy (even this can become a
fine art when in your hands!).
You are a hands-on person who learns best by doing and
experiencing and working things out for yourself. Whilst you may
have an intuitive flair for science, you can find abstract ideas and
theories as such dull and uninviting. This can make you feel
academically inadequate. To learn a subject you need to feel yourself
emotionally engaged by it.
You directly experience the power of the imagination to give form
to dead matter. Thus you will flourish best in any kind of work which
can draw upon both your practical skills and your rich imagination.
Whatever type of work you undertake – across the spectrum from
business and banking to music or mysticism – you have an instinctive
understanding of the creative, healing power of poetic imagery and
imagination. You believe in making dreams come true. Relationships
You are solid and dependable, and when you make friends it is for life.
You deeply need a partner, and seek to recreate through him or her the
certainties and securities of the womb. You can be torn between the
romantic idealist and the simple sensualist. Any sign of sympathy and
inner understanding from others is a real turn-on, for warmth and
physical affection are food and drink to you.
Though you fall in love easily, once committed you are a loyal, and
indeed possessive soul and will not readily relinquish your prize.
Falling in love brings out the magic and poetry in your heart. Even if
you are the very dullest bureaucrat, Cupid’s dart transforms you into a
starry-eyed lover. Your feet may still be on the ground but your heart is
dancing with the stars. If, however, you fail to keep in touch with the
magic of your true love, he or she can readily become your brother or
sister, and you can find yourself ‘just good friends’ after all. Your Greatest Strengths Quiet, self-contained strength; capacity for practical sympathy and
understanding; resourcefulness and willingness to work hard and long
to make your seemingly idle dreams come true; social conscience. Your Greatest Weaknesses
Naivety; deep stubbornness, which you cover with an apparent
flexibility; sudden despondent moods, which can sink into self-pity;
resistance to logical argument when it does not suit you. Images for Integration
Through the power of the imagination a man is healed. A poet prepares
his accounts in verse … The Mona Lisa. Famous Personalities
Anna Maria Aberghetti (musician and songwriter), Anne Boleyn
(second wife of Henry VIII), Leonardo da Vinci (artist, scientist and
polymath), Ellen Glasgow (writer and novelist), Audrey Hepburn
(actress), Janet Jackson (pop star), Norman Lamont (British politician,
former Chancellor of the Exchequer), Charles Mingus (jazz musician),
Samuel Morse (inventor of Morse Code and portrait painter), John
Muir (naturalist, explorer and conservationist), Ryan O’Neal (actor),
Duke of Wellington (soldier and politician). Chapter Six
SUN IN GEMINI S UN G EMINI —25—
M OON A RIES Show me a man who enjoyed his schooldays and I will show you a
bully and a bore.
ROBERT MORLEY
Where is My Wandering Boy Tonight ?
NOVEL BY DAVID WAGONER Themes
AIR/FIRE Freshness and clarity; enthusiasm; quick; alert; energetic;
forceful; decisive; impatient; restless; versatile; witty; dextrous;
communicative; argumentative; persuasive.
Hate motorcars or love them, there is something of the racing
champion in you. You have speed, flair and a self-assertive pugnacity
which is constantly jockeying for position. In you, nerves and
adrenaline combine or conflict. Are you all restless talk, or are you
Action Man or Woman? Are you passionately impulsive or endlessly
curious? Do you think and then act, or act and then think? Are you a
knight errant or a quick, beguiling trickster? Are you a rough-tongued
toughie or a smooth-talking persuader?
When you combine your intense willpower and convictions with
your strong communicative ability and intelligent curiosity, you can
become a great persuader and salesperson with a touch of poetry and a clear, inspired vision. Indeed you can become a purposeful, ambitious
intellectual. You expect to have your own way and are a natural leader
and spokesperson in your chosen field. Your quick, intuitive mind
leaps to conclusions and always has a plausible reason for your every
impulsive utterance and action. Indeed you are a whizz with words,
wit, satire and pointed jokes, and can be a veritable escape-artist and
rationalizer when it comes to talking your way out of situations and
arguing that black is white.
You like to travel, to be up-to-the-minute, on the move and on your
toes. Twenty-four-hour rolling news and current-affairs programmes
were dreamed up for and by the likes of you. With your quick
intelligence and enthusiasm you make a vivid speaker and inspiring
teacher, though you get impatient with those less nimble-witted than
yourself. You have the gifts of a formidable lawyer, a natural writer,
broadcaster, politician or debater. In short, this is an ideal combination
for any job where you have to think on your feet. Nonetheless you are
probably at your best when you develop an area of expertise in which
you can be an authority, for you need to be your own person, to be able
to say what you think and not pull your punches.
Your eternal youth, explosive energy and exuberance will be the
envy of many. When it comes to putting over your ideas on something
in which you believe, your power-assisted words can hit the world like
sustained gunfire. Yet for all your quickness, curiosity and with-it,
streetwise dexterity, you have about you a certain naive, bright
freshness and spontaneity, which no amount of negative experience
can dull.
You say what you see, hear and think, though seldom what you
feel, for feelings are not your strong suit. Although you ‘feel strongly’,
even passionately, about things, you do not empathize well with other
people. You consider their problems and pains to be something they
need to sort out themselves, unless you happen to share their problems,
in which case you could soon be mounting a one-man crusade with the
assistance of your clear, incisive wit, passionate rhetoric and scathing
indignation. Your forthright, pugnacious approach and strongly held
views make you a formidable adversary but can also make you, to your
indignant surprise, some bitter enemies. Yet at the end of the day you can shrug this off with a witticism, for often humour and a good belly
laugh are your best medicine. Relationships
For you, relationships are either intellectual or passionate impulses that
you do not really understand, even though you can play the troubadour
and spin a love lyric to try and express them. You are essentially selfcentred, so can be insensitive to the needs of others and impatient with
the complexities of human needs. You may find it difficult to grow up.
The men among you, after playing the field, may settle for a good
mother figure who will give you the stability you need. You ladies may
find yourselves having little patience with conventional feminine roles
and morality, and can take to supporting feminist issues. Man or
woman, you are likely to find yourself repeatedly falling headlong into
love, only to wake to a sense of impatience once things get into a
routine. Variety is the spice of your life, and if you are after long-term
stability, you must seek out a partner as spicey and quick-witted as
yourself. Then the both of you will never be bored, even if you never
really understand each other. Your Greatest Strengths
Fresh, alert mind; enthusiasm and spontaneity; zest and vitality; moral
and intellectual courage; gift for language; powers of persuasion. Your Greatest Weaknesses
Egotism; monopolizing conversation; impatience with lesser minds;
insensitivity to feelings of others; partiality; tendency to ride
roughshod over others. Images for Integration
A nimble-footed streetfighter dodges his way to victory over all
comers …The eternal freshness of a Constable landscape. Famous Personalities
Sir John Cockcroft (nuclear physicist), John Constable (painter),
Christiana Crawford (writer), Helen Hunt (actress), Angelina Jolie
(actress), Gerald Kaufman (politician), Robert Morley (actor), Bill
Moyers (journalist), Albert Neuhuys (painter), Geoffrey Rippon
(politician), Jackie Stewart (World Champion racing driver), David
Wagoner (novelist). S UN G EMINI —26—
M OON T AURUS If I had learned education I would not have had time to learn anything
else.
What do I care about the law? Hain’t I got the power ?
CORNELIUS VANDERBILT
Let me say …that the true revolutionary is guided by a great feeling of
love.
CHE GUEVARA Themes
AIR/EARTH Sensual yet intellectual; flirtatious yet faithful; practical,
applied intelligence; reasonably unreasonable; practical communicator;
artist; business and entrepreneurial flair; determined and loyal.
Are you a fixed point or the turning world? You love to be on the
move, yet you love to be still. You are really with-it, yet deeply
conservative. You have the bright-eyed vitality of fresh-sprung spring,
but do you belong in the town or the country? Do you want to sit and
savour the wine and stroll across the fields and hills, or must you be
nipping off, late again, for your next engagement? Do you want to
build up your material security or are you really interested in pursuing bright ideas, talking and developing your mind? Although you can be
impatient with your need for tranquillity, you can also rebel against
your nervous haste and restless quest for fresh stimulation by slipping
into low gear. You are often an enigma to yourself.
When you can allow your natural understanding of the material
world and your appreciation of the value of things to work together
with your clever mind and your need to communicate, you have all the
makings of a successful scientist, businessperson or indeed writer,
poet, musician or painter. The important thing for you is to be able to
talk about and communicate your feelings and experiences, and to
translate them into permanent form. There is a need to be in touch with
your sense perceptions and also to question and explain them. You are
at your most creative, and most content, when you are combining your
natural understanding of the sensual world with your quick-witted
ingenuity. Things really come together for you when you are planning,
shopping for and cooking a meal, or when you are translating
perceptions into poems or paintings or music.
You have a natural understanding both of the laws of nature and of
finance, and you know how money can be effectively accumulated and
put to work. You enjoy the operations of your five senses – they tell
you about the world you find so beautiful and interesting. Like a child
in a toy shop, you experiment with what you find, and your ingenuity
always helps you put your understanding to good use. You have a
shrewd sense of the value of things and of people, and a strong
capacity for highly practical, factual evaluation of situations, and for
coming to objective judgments. Relationships
Your relationships are vital to your wellbeing. Friends and partners are
your source of stability, security and feedback. Despite your occasional
wanderings, you can be deeply loyal and utterly dependable to those
who have earned your respect. Since you thrive on mental stimulation
and live-wire dialogue, however, you are quickly bored by overly
stable, secure, reliable types. You have a high level of sensuality and are constantly tempted by
the idea of new relationships. This, combined with your need for
stability, means that you find it difficult to be either faithful or
unfaithful. At one and the same time you can be deeply possessive yet
thoughtlessly fickle, wildly flirtatious yet lovingly loyal.
As a stable, thinking type you tend to be out of touch with your
deeper feelings and intuitions. Consequently, you may find wild,
hysterical and unstable types fascinatingly attractive, and become
involved with partners who disturb you rather than comfort you, who
are a challenge rather than the touchstone you so much want. Your Greatest Strengths
Deep common sense; capacity to turn ideas into realities and to
translate experience into words; practical flexibility; stability;
intelligent support and generosity. Your Greatest Weaknesses
Tendency to get overly absorbed in your experiences; lack of sympathy
for the feelings of others; talking over and over the same ground;
scepticism about and resistance to matters spiritual. Images for Integration
A country boy lives it up among the city bustle but goes back to the
farm at night … A master chef gives a dinner party for her intellectual
friends … The cancan from Offenbach’s Orpheus in the Underworld. Famous Personalities
Elias Ashmole (antiquarian), Björn Borg (tennis champion), Charles Gêmeos (the ‘merry monarch’), Joan Collins (actress), Gerard de Nerval (poet),
Ian Fleming (author, creator of James Bond), Michael J. Fox (actor,
Back to the Future ), Stephen Frears (director), Che Guevara (guerilla
leader and revolutionary), Burl Ives (folk singer), Jacques Offenbach (composer), Vance Packard (author, The Hidden Persuaders ), Isabella
Rossellini (model and actress), Kristin Scott Thomas (actress),
Marshall Tito (Yugoslav president). S UN G EMINI —27—
M OON G EMINI One of my chief regrets during my years in the theatre is that I couldn’t
sit in the audience and watch me.
JOHN BARRYMORE
Ideas shape the course of history.
JOHN MAYNARD KEYNES
As I grow older and older And totter towards the tomb, I find that I
care less and less Who goes to bed with whom.
DOROTHY SAYERS Themes
AIR/AIR A thinker; expressive; vivacious; joie de vivre; childlike;
lively; inventive; flirtatious; cerebral; self-analysing; moody;
translator; mimic; juggler; fidgety; nervous; contradictory; critical;
fast-talker; lots of contacts; sociable; on-the-go.
You are a thinker and a talker, a restless collector of facts and people,
driven by a thirst for knowledge and novelty which takes you in to and
out of many relationships. Variety is the veritable stuff of your life –
mentally, emotionally and socially. You love to meet new people and
to find out what makes them tick; to you, almost everyone and
everything is interesting in some way. In finding out about others, you
discover more about yourself because, essentially, you are many
people all rolled into one.
You cover a lot of ground very rapidly and your particular gift is
your ability to communicate cleverly an impression of your whole experience with a few vivid images. As a quick-silver lateral thinker,
you observe, register and express – and then you are off again. For this
reason you make an excellent neighbourhood or professional roving
reporter: you promptly cull the essentials of a situation, pick out the
distinguising feature or gesture and then communicate it. The media
and writing of any kind will employ your talents well. You are also a
good middle-man: something is always reminding you of something,
and you can make fruitful links between friends and acquaintances of
completely different worlds in an utterly natural, effortless manner.
Because you are such a Mercurial mimic and can use words so
effectively, your reports can feel a bit brisk and cutting to more
emotional types, but you never mean to hurt anyone’s feelings. You are
like a child discovering the world and then unselfconsciously reporting
back. You love games and anything that challenges your mind, but you
may often find that you are too mentally aware and clever for your
own good because your constant mental activity exhausts your nervous
system.
You can also be very clever with your hands. Making things –
whether cupboards and cabinets, paintings and etchings, model trains
and airplanes, or knitting sweaters – will help you to ground your
nervous energy and balance your up-and-down temperament. Relationships
The realm of feelings is difficult for you, not because you have none,
but because you have very little patience with anything that pulls you
down into the murky, watery realms. And also, quite simply, because
you do not like things you cannot rationally control.
Your suave, charming, sophisticated nature may suddenly show its
immature, naive side when faced with the complexities of feelings and
close relationships. You can appear cold and turned off when your
partner feels too emotionally demanding, as though you are going to
suffocate with boredom. Interestingly enough, however, you tend to
end up with emotional types who perhaps provide a nurturing,
supportive environment in which you can safely explore your
multifaceted, fascinating self. You will either let your mate do all the feeling for the relationship
or, in time, and given plenty of space, you will eventually learn to
recognize and respect your own feelings, and to discover that they are
not as dark and threatening as you had feared. In fact, you discover
that they provide more interesting fodder for self-reflection, and that,
rather than trapping you, they give you the key to understanding and
enriching your life in a deeply satisfying way. Your Greatest Strengths
Quick, agile mind; lively sociability; openness to experience; ability to
learn, teach, communicate and bring different people and ideas
together in a fruitful way; friendliness and outrageous sense of fun. Your Greatest Weaknesses
A tendency to live in your head, with the result that nervousness
depletes your energy; childlike self-absorption; proneness to live a
double standard and to find plausible excuses for not looking at deeper
motives. Images for Integration
A butterfly in a garden tires of the bright-blue delphinium and
suddenly discovers the most exquisite red rose … A young child
entertains his friends by standing on his head whilst eating an ice
cream cone and playing marbles … A circus trapeze artist writes his
autobiography …Escher’s Two hands drawing each other. Famous Personalities
John Addey (astrologer), John Barrymore (actor), C.C. Beck
(cartoonist), M.C. Escher (artist), Steffi Graf (tennis champion), Josie
Lawrence (comedienne/actress), Stan Laurel (comedian), Christopher
Lee (actor), John Masefield (poet), John Maynard Keynes (economist), Kylie Minogue (singer and actress), Salman Rushdie (author), Dorothy
Sayers (writer), Brooke Shields (actress), Queen Victoria. S UN G EMINI —28—
M OON C ANCER If I have to lay an egg for my country, I’ll do it.
BOB HOPE
My music is best understood by children and animals.
IGOR STRAVINSKY
If Galileo had said in verse that the world moved, the Inquisition might
have let him alone.
THOMAS HARDY Themes
AIR/WATER Intimate communication; friendly; chatty; kind; quick
learner; nervously charming; sensitive; family life important; sibling
relationships; poetic; artistic; communicating a feeling; clannishness;
acute perception; private and cautious but great interest in people.
Do you think things over carefully and then make up your mind with
your heart? Are you often unsure as to whether it is your thoughts or
your feelings that are in charge? They work in a closely intertwined
way, illuminating and reinforcing each other, so that your personality
functions like a finely tuned radar/response system, reflecting back to
the world what it receives.
You are expressive, nervous, never settling for long, as though your
whole manner of living were an ebbing and flowing ‘stream of
consciousness’. Insatiably curious, quick-witted and charmingly
sympathetic, you are the first in the neighbourhood welcoming party to
greet the newcomers with a bag of home-grown tomatoes and an
invitation to your barbecue. You are warm and ultra-sociable, and could be quite gifted at working with people in social welfare or
mental-health organizations where your light-hearted human touch can
do so much good. Equally, you can work with children in early
education. Your insight into people is certainly one of your greatest
gifts.
So versatile and sensitive is your personality that, without clear
direction or emotional stability, you rapidly lose confidence and waste
creative energy by muddling through nervously. The minutiae of
personal life can distract you too readily for your own good so that you
easily become the town gossip. Like a wide-eyed child, you are
interested in many things and have an innate restlessness which can
make you feel uncertain about what you should be doing.
You are not quite content with where you are and whom you are
with until you can settle your mind and truly focus on something that
absorbs you utterly. You want to be stimulated, forever learning,
always needing to express your impressions and intuitions. If you can
discipline yourself, your artistic and/or literary talents will surely
develop. This is the only way you will transform that divine discontent
into a creative momentum.
You have a well-developed sixth sense about many things, and
your uncanny intuition makes you a good psychologist or fiction
writer, for you have a deep understanding of emotional needs and of
the way the human mind works. Although you are generally a
conventional sort of person who cherishes traditional values, you are in
your own quiet way a non-conformist and will insist on being true to
yourself and protecting your best interests. You can be quite shrewd in
doing so for you do not wish to rock the boat, but you will always find
ways of uncovering the important facts and assessing their significance
in a flash. Relationships
Essentially you are a romantic who falls in love easily but
apprehensively. You are sensitive, impressionable and need lots of
affection and intimacy. Your moodiness could drive your partner wild, and you too, because you do not always understand where your
feelings come from.
One of your greatest emotional dilemmas is the speed with which
you can shift from being content on your own in your private world, to
needing to share your experiences with your loved one. You want to
know that you are safe in your own familiar niche, and domestic
stability is very important for your best development. You are both a
private and a people person, for you need interaction with others to
inspire your creativity. You have a unique sense of irony and fondness
for the foibles of human nature, and when you feel secure in your
private world you can contribute your view of things through writing
or through one of the arts. Your Greatest Strengths
Receptive mind and sympathetic ear; capacity for ‘diffuse awareness’
– being aware of many things at once; clever self-expression and
gentle manner with others; genuine interest in people and devotion to
family life; romantic imagination. Your Greatest Weaknesses
Oversensitivity to external stimuli, especially criticism; tendency to
spread yourself too thin and to question and doubt yourself too much;
defensive reactions and proneness to nervousness – especially in the
absence of domestic tranquillity; a fear of leaving the family domain
and thus a tendency to remain attached to old emotional biases and
myths. Images for Integration
A brother and sister and other neighbourhood friends play rounders in
the garden until mother calls them in for Sunday lunch … A university
student comes home for the summer. Famous Personalities
Don Ameche (actor), Boy George (singer), Thomas Hardy (novelist
and poet), Bob Hope (actor-comedian), Grant Lewi (astrologer and
writer), Paul Lynde (actor-comedian), Thomas Mann (novelist), Enoch
Powell (politician), Beryl Reid (actress), Henri Rousseau (painter and
writer), Nancy Sinatra (singer), Igor Stravinsky (composer). —29—
S UN G EMINI
M OON L EO
I celebrate myself; I sing myself.
WALT WHITMAN
Whoso would be a man must be a non-conformist.
RALPH WALDO EMERSON
In spite of everything, I still believe that people are really good at
heart.
ANNE FRANK Themes
AIR/FIRE Colourful conversationalist; warmly convivial; childlike
sense of fun; positive; graceful; intellectual; good dramatist and
storyteller; regal bearing but unstuffy; love of beauty; good at
improvisation; rebellious; generous.
You are the eternal child whose fantasies of royal blood ensure that
your confident social performance rarely sags. An amusing raconteur
and possibly a talented weaver of magical images, you love being the
centre of attention and the complete master of your listeners’ emotions.
You embellish your life, your loves and your stories with imaginative
skill. Timing and exaggeration are your God-given gifts and you use them to great effect – to entertain others and to impress for your own
advantage.
You assume your natural right to be exactly who you are. When young
you are intellectually precocious; later on you are astute, but always
full of enthusiasm, fun and probably mischief. In a sense you are a
born performer, and your flair for self-dramatization is one of the
things that makes you popular. People find you approachable, broadminded and usually irresistibly charming, although when you feel
insecure or unloved you can get pretty infantile and haughty. Likewise,
your charm and diplomacy can disintegrate around bores, and maybe
this is because there is nothing you would hate more than to be
considered one yourself. Undoubtedly, you have a biggish need to be
loved, adored and appreciated, and when you are, you turn on like a
gorgeous wind-up doll – except that your passion and romance is hotblooded and very real!
You are an ‘ideas’ person, a natural salesperson with an eye to the
main chance – witty and quick off the mark. A cheerful, laid-back,
insouciant manner may actually hide a very determined, ambitious side
of you which has strong principles and knows exactly what you want.
Thus you are a natural in a position of power – such as in teaching or
social organizations – where both your creative expertise and your
ability to deal confidently with people can combine.
Although you can be flexible and tolerant and interested in a wide
variety of human perspectives, you will not compromise yourself on
important issues, and you will argue with a sense of impassioned
authority when it comes to standards of excellence and morality.
Impatient of shoddiness in thought, language and personal decorum,
you strive always for grace and clarity in your personal expression, and
thus can be a real inspiration to others.
You are a person of strong but not overbearing personality, and by
temperament always an individualist. You do not like to be pigeonholed, for you instinctively know that the longer you live the more
your abilities surprise you. But your honesty and sense of integrity are
unshakeable, as is your dignity, warm courtesy and innate generosity. Relationships
You are just as fussy about your love life as you are about your
intellectual and artistic achievements. You want the best, and when you
find him or her you bestow upon your lover your devoted heart. Like
the romantic troubadours, you give yourself to your beloved body,
mind and soul.
Love and affection are very important to you. When it comes to
matters of the heart, you may have an innocently radiant charisma,
opening yourself with all the vulnerability and tenderness of a child.
You need to admire your loved one and will be happiest when an
intellectual rapport keeps the interest going on many levels. And yet
you have so much energy and such a lively social side that your mate
will have to be resigned to sharing you with your other creative
pursuits and with your many friends. You are the mobile, youthful
artist, the creative communicator, the friend and mentor of all those
who wish to create and enjoy the best. Your Greatest Strengths
Quick mind and fertile imagination; flair for creative self-expression;
optimistic and enthusiastic disposition; ability to stand up for the best
without oppressing inferiors; friendly and spirited sense of fun and
adventure which inspires others and keeps you ever popular. Your Greatest Weaknesses
Your need for flattery and to hold centre-stage; childlike haughtiness
and stubbornness which surfaces when you feel unappreciated;
extrovert tendency to spend so much energy socializing that you fail to
develop your abilities to their fullest. Image for Integration
A king holds court and surprises his audience by joining the mandolin
player in a duet of song and story. Famous Personalities
Zola Budd (runner), Ralph Bellamy (actor), Helena Bonham Carter
(actress),
Mary
Cassatt
(artist),
Jacques-Yves
Cousteau
(oceanographer), Clint Eastwood (actor), Anne Frank (diarist), Joe
Montana (quarterback), Paul McCartney (musician), Alison Moyet
(singer/songwriter), Ralph Waldo Emerson (philosopher and essayist),
Walt Whitman (poet). S UN G EMINI —30—
M OON V IRGO Ask not what your country can do for you – ask what you can do for
your country.
If we cannot now end our differences, at least we can help make the
world safe for diversity.
JOHN F. KENNEDY
Whence do We Come, What are We, Where are We Going ?
PAINTING BY PAUL GAUGUIN Themes
AIR/EARTH Analytical; nervous; mental energy; sense of service;
clarity
of
expression;
conscientious;
practical
expertise;
communication skills; restless worrier; divine discontent; intellectual
and artistic aspirations.
You are probably thinking, ‘This astrology business is all very
interesting, but why should I believe any of it?’, for you combine a
restless curiosity with a strong critical sense. You want to know about
everything, to have, as it were, superior knowledge. Since time is
precious, however, you become a speed reader rather than a profound scholar, and your priorities focus on what makes sense and is useful,
and will be of service to yourself and other people.
You enjoy posing questions, even though you know the agony of
never being satisfied by the answer that will follow. Are you flippant
or serious, a communicator or an organizer, a theorist or a pragmatist?
Do you prefer the lively city centre or the quiet garden suburb, a
comedy show or a socially concerned documentary? If you are honest
(and half of you can be as strictly honest as the other half can bend any
facts to fit your case), you will have to answer ‘Yes’ to both sides of
those questions and admit that you really are a paradox. You are
unlikely to admit this, however, because you do not really like being
told anything, preferring to work out and follow your own views.
Your natural critical bent can make it difficult for you to feel happy
for very long in any of your projects or relationships. When
unsatisfied, you start to overanalyse yourself and everyone else. This
leaves you depleted, restless, and drifting from one great idea to the
next, but constantly feeling discontented and needing to try one more
thing, one more relationship. But when you finally do get your need to
communicate together with your desire to be of practical service, you
can be immensely effective in helping to make your community a
better place.
Your worst enemy is perfectionism and elitism, and when you
overcome that and realize that what you create is ‘good enough’, your
cleverness, agility and good business sense will be a recipe for success.
Versatile, objective and realistic, you need to be working in those areas
where your gifts for analysis and communication can be given free
rein, and where you can help find the answer to your endless childhood
and adulthood questions of ‘Why? Where? Who? How?’
Busy, busy, constantly active with lots of nervous energy, executive
skill, wit and dry humour, you like to keep on the go but have a way of
exhausting yourself with good intentions. Your best environment is the
‘nervous system’ of society, be it in transport, communications, the
media or teaching, and you will hanker to be the queen bee rather than
the worker. You can be a great gatherer and purveyor of information,
and you belong among the intellectuals and artists of this world – or so
you believe. You will flourish in any area where facts need to be accurately processed and evaluated in the shortest possible time. You
can work with zest, for example, in such areas as journalism or on the
news desk of a radio or television station, or on a City trading floor.
Yours is also a strongly logical, scientific combination with a
natural talent for questioning and discovering the causes of things, and
for sorting information into order. Working with computers, or in
accountancy or economics would suit this aspect of your character. In
artistic endeavours you have a gift for translating your immediate
living experiences of the world into words, images, songs, carvings or
canvas. Relationships
Although you can be shy, you love to flirt and enjoy the fun of the
chase. In any long-term relationship, mutual interests and plenty of
intellectual stimulation are important for you. Others may accuse you
of lacking warmth and romantic sympathy, but this is untrue. You often
feel awkward about showing your feelings, but in fact you have plenty
of feeling and can be very generous and devoted when you feel loved,
respected and understood. You love to be of help and to feel needed,
but can easily feel taken advantage of and swing into a self-pitying
mood.
Emotional relationships will always be a challenge because you
need space to pursue your own varied interests as well as just the right
amount of tender, loving care. You need a partner who is neither too
cloying nor too distant, and very good looking! You are a perfectionist
in love and life. Your Greatest Strengths
Fine, analytical mind; wit and sense of fun; flair with technical skills
and precise communication; heightened aesthetic sense; practical
commitment to helping others. Your Greatest Weaknesses Permitting anxieties to arrest your creative talents; a rather clinical
insensitivity to the emotional needs of others; tendency to find fault
and criticize negatively, and to jump discontentedly from one thing to
the next. Images for Integration
A specialist in nervous diseases gives a lecture in aid of local charities
… An art critic gives a brilliant master class … Gauguin’s Arearea. Famous Personalities
Courtney Cox Arquette (actress), Francis Crick (molecular biologist),
Paul Gaugin (painter), John F. Kennedy (former American president),
Rockwell Kent (artist and writer), Philip Larkin (poet), Robert
McNamera (politician, financial analyst and banker), Eddy Merckx
(cycling champion), Alain Resnais (film director), Rosalind Russell
(actress), Richard Strauss (composer), Sir Alan Walters (economist). —31—
S UN G EMINI
M OON L IBRA
I wasn’t really naked. I simply didn’t have any clothes on.
JOSEPHINE BAKER
Henceforth the adequacy of any military establishment will be judged
by its ability to keep the peace.
HENRY KISSINGER
Read my lips.
GEORGE BUSH SNR Themes AIR/AIR A wandering spirit; charming; diplomatic; bright; clearheaded; persuasive; graceful wit; intelligent; flexible; the gift of
friendship; sociable; entertaining; spontaneous but tactful; clever; deft
communication.
Highly civilized, charming and persuasive with a deep desire for
justice, you seem to be one of those enviably suave and confidently
easy-going people who breezes through life without a care. And yet, if
you look underneath the surface polish, you often grapple with some
awkward questions. Do you want to spend your life cultivating
yourself, the beauty of your home and your career, or do you want to
be off, restlessly travelling and enjoying the world and, at least
theoretically, solving its problems? Should you tell the truth as you see
it, or diplomatically smooth over the cracks? Are your relationships for
life or do you seem to get bored with people quicker than most? Do
you want to celebrate life or do you want life to celebrate you and your
talents? None of these questions are impossible to reconcile, and
especially for you, for when you get your act together you can be a
master of diplomacy and the ‘middle way’.
Just as you can usually solve your own inner conflicts with insight
and clever thinking, so your breezy charm and humour, your gift for
the soothing phrase and your obvious impartiality and integrity can
disarm most opponents and bring understanding between bitter
enemies.
Although you are strongly idealistic and deeply concerned with
furthering individual and social justice, you are not as altruistic as you
may appear. You are likely to be well aware of your own worth, and
will demand the respect and loyalty you feel you deserve. In fact, you
are quite shrewd and can figure out complex situations quicker than
others can, which enables you to adjust to people and events, and to
place yourself advantageously.
Your ambition is an adaptable and unobtrusive kind. If you are
honest with yourself, however, you would like a little bit of spotlight
and challenge, and you use your considerable charms to further your
career. In the end, this self-interest is a valuable counterbalance to your
ever-obliging tendency to say ‘Yes’ and to want to see the other person’s viewpoint, which can, if left unchecked, leave you without a
life of your own.
Your appreciation of beauty and justice can attract you to work in
areas such as the law and politics, but also to conciliation, arbitration
and counselling. You are, in fact, suited to any area in which you can
deploy your objectivity and your desire to connect with people and
learn from many views. You also need to use your mercurial skills for
analysis, quick thinking, writing and communicating. This makes you
a natural negotiator and go-between. You will especially enjoy
anything that involves travel, for you love the stimulation of new
faces, new landscapes and other perspectives. But you are also an
explorer of ideas, and may gravitate towards scientific enquiry and
information, and communication science. On the other hand, your deep
appreciation of beauty will draw you to the arts. Whatever the field of
your work, you have a natural gift for teaching and inspiring others.
You readily express your enthusiasm for your chosen subject.
Quick to see the possibilities in things, you can be good in any
business that depends upon keeping alert to changing tastes and
fashions. Your verbal gifts make you a natural salesperson, and you
will especially flourish in any area that brings you into touch with
people and keeps you stimulated with new ideas. Relationships
These are of immediate importance in your life, and you are likely to
draw a large circle of friends around you, and make a loyal and
understanding partner. When it comes to the relationship, however,
you may hesitate to commit yourself, as you can easily get bored. You
can find yourself divided between settling into the one real relationship
that you feel you need to make your life complete, and your restless
quest for variety and mental stimulation.
The world is your oyster and offers so many possibilities. No
sooner have you found Mr or Ms Right than, well, another even more
interesing and socially desirable candidate sails into view. In personal
relationships you may find that the beautiful romance you crave is
somehow devoid of the passion you read about. This can give you an irrational attraction to the dark and deeply emotional types whom you
do not understand yet waken you to your hidden side. Your Greatest Strengths
An immense capacity for friendship; appreciation of beauty and grace;
natural tact and diplomacy; ability to see and argue the other person’s
viewpoint; colourful imagination and eternal sense of fun. Your Greatest Weaknesses
A restless desire for change and ever-new vistas; reluctance to face the
darker side of life; eagerness to smooth over difficulties and
differences rather than confront them; childlike insistence on
skimming the surface and living by your wits. Images for Integration
An elegant hostess puts on a party and exhibition to help a worthy
cause … A shuttle diplomat brings together warring factions …
Elgar’s Enigma Variations – ‘to my friends depicted within’. Famous Personalities
James Arness (actor), Alice Bailey (occultist), Josephine Baker
(singer-entertainer), George Bush (former American president),
Edward Elgar (composer), Sir James Guthrie (painter), Henry
Kissinger (American statesman and diplomat), Norman Vincent Peale
(author of The Power of Positive Thinking ), Martha Washington
(hostess, wife of George Washington), Duchess of Windsor (wife of
Edward VIII). S UN G EMINI —32—
M OON S CORPIO The Bible tells us to love our neighbours, and also to love our enemies;
probably because they are generally the same people.
G.K.CHESTERTON
You can be the best athlete in the world but if you aren’t in control of
your emotions, you won’t achieve anything.
LIZ MC COLGAN Themes
AIR/WATER Extrovert yet introvert; passionate yet superficial; vitality
and sensuality; breezy but intense; communicative yet secretive; quickwitted and deep-hearted; colourful and paradoxical.
Are you jokingly serious or seriously joking, or somewhere in
between? Your life seems to be a breeze until you start noticing the
monsters from the deep coming up for air. Then life begins to seem
more like an expedition across hostile territory than a jaunt to visit
friends.
You are a provocative and paradoxical individual who can be
determinedly trivial and passionately eloquent. Your core issues can be
expressed in the following questions: are you ruled by your head or
your passions? Are you an amusing lightweight or a penetrating
intellectual? Are you passionately committed to what you do, or do
you change your allegiances with your shirts? There is a mixture of
intensity and dexterity about the way in which you move, talk and
communicate that has everyone guessing. Which will you be next –
flip and comic or the passionate protester? You have an ease of
expression and intensity of concern which can either contradict or
complement each other. You can be loftily remote and detached from
your feelings and yet entirely consummed by them.
When you are in work and situations that allow you to draw upon
both your passionate intensity and your versatility and communicative
skills, you can be an ebullient, quick-witted, provocative operator with
a tart, sharp wit and colourful, if sometimes cynical, view of the world. Then you are able to get your own way in whatever you decide to do,
from creating a masterpiece to selling sausages.
You have a particular gift for selling, be it as a dedicated teacher,
educationalist or politician putting over bright ideas; an artist
communicating your complex soul vision; or as an actual salesperson
of anything from zip fasteners to aardvarks. Add a dash of challenge
and intrigue and this combination will sing whilst it works as a
penetrating research scientist, psychotherapist, financial or other
journalist, a detective, a spy or a special agent or investigator of any
kind. Alternatively, you have many of the skills of a top barrister, able
to argue your case with a wit, persuasion, intelligence and purposeful
drive which can devastate lesser minds. Who can blame you if such
versatility leads you on occasion to scatter your energies and close
attentions?
Finding a deep happiness is not always easy, as you can be
restlessly torn by the conflicting messages of your head and heart.
Your instincts tell you that life is a private, painful and messy place
where dog eats dog, and the devil takes the hindermost. Meanwhile,
your mind tells you that the world is, or should be, an entirely
reasonable, logical and rather fun and enjoyable place.
Wrestling with, and communicating, your insights and the
paradoxes of your deep inner experience is essential to your larger
health and contentment. The more you are driven to highlight, clarify
and express the uncertainties and obscurities, and can wrestle with a
single phrase or concept, the happier you will be. Relationships
These bring out the best and worst in you, highlighting as they do your
capacity for passion and pretence. You have considerable magnestism,
but gadfly gifts make you both a persecutor and victim of the flames of
the sex war.
Your paradoxical nature, which veers so readily between depths
and superficiality, is particularly tantalizing and infuriating in
partnerships. One moment you are passionately involved and totally
committed; the next you are playing the field. When someone captures both your heart and mind, however, you can rejoice in delighting them
with your multifaceted approach and the sheer poetic power of your
whole soul. Your Greatest Strengths
Forthright devotion and dedication to your convictions; investigative
gifts; robust humour and penetrating satirical wit; colourful language
and verbal skills; ability to communicate great depth of feeling with
flair and passion; stoicism. Your Greatest Weaknesses
Your often ferocious temper and scathing tongue; restless and erratic
approach to life; self-doubt; manipulation of others by words and
sexual innuendo; resistance to requests for change despite your own
changeableness and inconsistencies. Images for Integration
A long-distance runner … A string quartet plays with lightness and
dark intensity … Father Brown solves a murder … A kaleidoscope
reveals ever-changing images of people and passions. Famous Personalities
Paul Ableman (novelist), G.K. Chesterton (critic, novelist and poet),
Miles Davis (the ‘Evil Genius’ of jazz), Elizabeth Hurley (actress),
Nicole Kidman (actress), Barbara McClintock (Nobel prize-winning
genetics researcher), Liz McColgan (Olympic track athlete), Michael
Portillo (politician), Terry Waite (special envoy), John Wayne (actor),
Patrick White (novelist, poet and dramatist). S UN G EMINI —33—
M OON S AGITTARIUS As a child I became a confirmed believer in the ancient gods simply
because as between the reality of fact and the reality of myth, I chose
myth …myth is the truth of fact, not fact the truth of myth.
KATHLEEN RAINE
I was born at the age of twelve on a Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer lot.
JUDY GARLAND Themes
AIR/FIRE Inquisitive; intellectual; independent; flamboyant
communicator; outspoken; impatient; friendly; reverence for ancient
learning; love of journeys; seeking; open to experience; emotionally
immature but spontaneous; the eternal student; the scholar.
Are you just along for a nice ride or are you going somewhere
important ? Do you want information or a profound education? In this
pairing, the eternal child combines with the moral teacher to create an
exceptionally alert, ever-questing, precocious and friendly personality.
You possess tremendous mental agility, ingenuity and perception,
and can make lateral leaps of understanding that leave others far
behind. You use logic combined with intuitive understanding with such
swift ability that you can win debates and talk others – and yourself –
into almost anything. This is the combination of the wily spiv or the
impassioned professor, the used-car salesman or the leader of the
Peace Corps. It all depends on the discipline and mental training you
receive, for you have great potential and just need to harness and direct
that intellectual curiosity and gregariousness so your best talents can
develop.
Being warm, enthusiastic and always ready to have a go, you
attract many friends and enjoy getting to know a wide variety of
interesting people. But you will most admire and want to identify with real thinkers, poets and great idealists, people who soar beyond mortal
limitations and make their mark through vision and understanding.
You are restless and probably love travel, and if you do not actually
take off around the world, you will travel in your mind and explore
ideas, possibilities and people. Sports, dance and outdoor activities are
also likely to take up much of your time. You love to be with people,
observe them, learn from them, entertain them, fall in love with them,
but not be tied down by them. Freedom of movement is absolutely
essential to you, for both your solar and lunar natures give you the urge
to ‘be where it’s happening’ and to experience life to the full. You want
to understand ideas and then re-express them, even perform them in
your own individual and dramatic way. Relationships
You are generous and open, romantic and resilient, and eager for love,
adventure and friendship. The latter will always be an important
ingredient of any serious relationship, and intellectual rapport will be
crucial.
Your eternally seeking nature is likely to take you into more than
one serious relationship (not necessarily all at the same time). You
thrive on stimulation and ‘feeling good’, and so may tire of people
when the dust settles onto the nitty-gritty dynamics of relating. If
things begin to feel like too much of a treadmill, you might be off to
look for greener pastures. Likewise, if a relationship gets too
emotionally swamping, you may react by stepping back and preaching
with high-minded rationalization about ‘positive thinking’ and your
need ‘to be true to yourself’.
You wriggle out of tight corners and near misses like Peter Pan,
with a cloud of innocent misdemeanours and harmless indiscretions
trailing behind you. This is in part due to your eternal youthfulness
which can get in the way of mature and committed relating. Your vivid
imagination, your gift of the gab and your insatiable curiosity may also
have something to do with it. Without mental discipline you can be too
credulous and reckless, and end up wasting much of your creative
potential on adventure and good stories. Nevertheless, you really are a natural communicator, and in your
heart of hearts want to discuss Important Issues rather than mere
chitchat. When you learn that freedom of intellectual movement is
always there for the taking, and that it is enhanced rather than limited
by rigorous self-discipline, then you will be able to enjoy the journey
of a committed relationship without chafing so much at the
restrictions. Your Greatest Strengths
Vivid imagination; mental dexterity; intuitive leaps; voracious appetite
for people and experiences; optimism; good ideas; insight into people;
flair for communication and enthusing others. Your Greatest Weaknesses
Tendency to talk too much and somewhat indiscreetly; impatience with
feelings and taking responsibility for yourself; tendency to breeze
through life using your quick wit rather than your higher intellectual
faculties; your need to know it all. Images for Integration
The Pied Piper leads his merry band of youths to the amphitheatre on
the hill for an afternoon of music lessons, philosophical teachings and
baseball … A young man goes abroad to attend university and
becomes a foreign correspondent. Famous Personalities
Gemma Craven (actress), Rennie Davis (American political activist),
Bruce Dern (actor), Nick Drake (singer/composer), Douglas Fairbanks
(actor), Judy Garland (actress and singer), Guy Lombardo (big-band
leader), Barry Manilow (singer), Kathleen Raine (philosopher and
poet), Prince Rainier (of Monaco), F. Weingartner (composer). S UN G EMINI —34—
M OON C APRICORN Try to arrange your life in such a way that you can afford to be
disinterested. It is the most expensive of all luxuries, and the one best
worth having.
DEAN INGE
My own experience of myself is that I write quite slowly, and
painstakingly …I guess what may be different about me is that I work
every day, for long hours. I stay with it.
JOYCE CAROL OATES Themes
AIR/EARTH Serious yet carefree; sociable yet solitary; a cynical
optimist; clarity of thought; quick-witted; humorous; devoted friend;
practical helpfulness; intelligent; clever; good business mind; teaching
skills.
Are you a high-spirited socializer or a solemn loner? Do you come
alive on breezy, flower-strewn summer days or is your season the bare,
crisp clarity of mid-winter? By choice you are a light-hearted,
communicative extrovert, yet your natural instinct is to take a more
serious and ‘responsible’ view of life. You start out with amusement
and intention to enjoy, but your observations soon move you into
pragmatic mode for you are a born organizer with a big need to run the
show, even if the show feels like a burden after a while.
The tug between these very different sides to you can be a difficult
one, and you may spend a lot of effort hiding your more pessimistic
and anxious side through a conscious brightness and flip laughter. Your
up-beat Pollyanna side insists that there is always a silver lining when
actually you are feeling perfectly dreadful. You can talk with real
interest about almost anything, yet you find it almost impossible to talk
about your own pain, doubts and fears. But when the gad-about and the sceptic within you shake hands, you come alive with creative
intelligence. Your shrewdness and quickness of mind make you a great
problem-solver. You can apply yourself to any challenge with a deep
sense of concern yet with a sparkle in your eye, a gift for
understatement and a witty word to wash away any tears.
When you work equally with both your light and heavy sides, your
dry, clear-headed mental precision helps you become a successful
professional and invaluable friend. You can get to grips with basic
facts and principles and then work hard to apply them. A dab hand at
any kind of routine, you can be relied upon to find all the short cuts to
make for maximum efficiency. You can be extremely methodical and
may well have a special aptitude for subjects like maths, accounting
and science, and also for business and administrative work.
Your mind is focused but speedy, which enables you to observe
others with a pungent wit and objective clarity. Your gift for simple
explanations of complex issues makes you an excellent teacher. And,
when coupled with your interest in people, your social conscience
gives you a special gift for bringing out the best in the underprivileged
and handicapped.
Whilst you know how to enjoy yourself, there is a solid strand of
ambition in you which wants to get on and improve your lot in life.
This leads you to place more emphasis on your career and promotion
prospects than on personal fulfilment. You are the type who pursues
higher education and self-improvement even into old age. Any role
that offers both movement and a soupçon of power will attract you, but
in the longer run you are likely to be too critical and cynical to take the
stuff of politics over-seriously.
On the artistic side, your combination of lightness and seriousness
can make anything you create both immediately enjoyable and yet real
food for thought. Visually you enjoy both light, bright colours and
earthy browns and blacks, and the more these combine and contrast,
the better. But it is with fine-tuned words of every shade that you are
most likely to excel and find a voice to speak your own clear truth. Relationships These are an area of ambiguity for you. You have a roving eye but a
love of solitude. You can be shy and yet saucy. Your elegant selfrestraint can attract mysterious, emotional types who find your
mischievous self-control equally mysterious. Emotionally you seek
serious commitment, yet intellectually you need variety, stimulation
and challenge. You need mental rapport with your partner but, at the
same time, you prefer it if he or she is no slouch on the dance floor.
You have a strong family sense and will be devoted to loved ones
in a sensible, practical way. But you may sometimes mask emotional
insecurity with an overly paternal approach to loved ones. They will
not always want to be organized as expertly as you are capable! Your Greatest Strengths
A quick, clear, factual mind; conscientiousness and reliability; gift for
working with people and assessing their needs; speed at picking up
practical organizational skills that you can use in all areas of your life. Your Greatest Weaknesses
A tendency to hide your needs from yourself, and to replace real
sympathy for others with ‘common sense’; impatience with the
emotional realm, which you either cannot fathom or gracefully
sidestep. Images for Integration
A scientist captures, examines and names a new species of exotic
butterfly … A philosopher points to the deeper realities behind the
transient world … A socialite becomes mayor of the town. Famous Personalities
Luis Alvarez (experimental physicist), Joseph Brodsky (poet), Ninette
de Valois (dancer), William Douglas-Home (playwright), Rainer
Fassbinder (film director), George III, William Ralph Inge (clergyman and philosopher), Dean Martin (actor), Elsa Maxwell (actress, pianist
and journalist), Stevie Nicks (lead singer with Fleetwood Mac ), Joyce
Carol Oates (novelist and playwright), Jane Russell (actress, comedian
and dancer), James ‘Jim’ Thorpe (athlete). S UN G EMINI —35—
M OON A QUARIUS The age of chivalry is never past, so long as there is a wrong left
unredressed on earth.
CHARLES KINGSLEY
Though leaves are many, the root is one; Through all the lying days of
my youth I swayed my leaves and flowers in the sun; Now I may wither
into the truth.
W.B. YEATS
Childhood decides.
JEAN -PAUL SARTRE Themes
AIR/AIR Bright and light yet sober and serious; clear-headed;
intelligent; witty; the eternal youth and the wise old man or woman;
the outsider; the reformer; a restless energy and curiosity; prophetic
gifts.
Is your game Trivial Pursuit or chess? Do you want to go dancing or to
study philosophy? Are you a skittish, quick-witted, ever curious,
talkative livewire, or are you an impartial observer, scientist and poet,
determined to follow your vision of the larger Truth wherever it may
lead?
Whatever your actual age, you are possessed by a restless, bright
bird of youth which constantly vies for your attention with a serious,
wise old owl in you. Thus on the one hand you have a need for endless variety and stimulation; on the other your instinct is to look for the one
root Truth which encompasses all others, and which will help you
make the world a better place. In short you have the light, breezy,
adventurous and flirtatious qualities of spring combined with the
reflective, cool mood of dark mid-winter.
Your Middle Way, through which these approaches can be
resolved, is an equable autumnal observation post. From here you can
relish the fruits of spring and plan forward, with a spectator’s wisdom,
for the demands of winter, and in this you can at times be uncannily
prophetic. This gives you an enviably broad view of life, which
combines your deft, childlike lightness of touch with your deeper,
serious sense of purpose.
As one of life’s Great Spectators, you can display a deep
understanding of your chosen career, enabling you to achieve almost
anything you want. Thus you are a great talker and theorizer and you
can do remarkably well at whatever you give yourself to
wholeheartedly. You especially like people, or at least their minds, and
are fascinated by what makes them tick. This can attract you to
psychology and sociology, and yet also towards the creative arts,
especially music. You are likely to have the natural sense of words and
rhythm of the writer, poet and musician. You respond to life with a
freshness and vitality. Above all, you aspire to know the truth, the
Whole Truth, and you love talking about it and trying to give it
expression.
If you are drawn to business, your objectivity and cleverness
enable you to spot opportunities. Needing plenty of interaction with
people and lots of movement, you are best as an organizer, go-between
and negotiator, leaving the practical work to others. Whilst you can
turn your hand to anything, the important thing as far as work is
concerned is to make a virtue out of your flexibility and to ensure that,
one way or another, you have several screens to your computer.
Philosophically, and this is a philosophical combination, you are
likely to identify with the view that, as human beings, we are naturally
free, and that it is only our false assumptions that prevent us from
doing or becoming whatever we want. What you may fail to recognize
is that it is in fact your ultra-reasonable approach to things that limits your potential freedom. Your very reasonableness cuts you off from
your own unreasonable emotions, yet understanding such emotions
enables you to cross the last frontier in your potential growth. Indeed,
you may deny that you are plagued by any such feelings. But you,
more than most, have a way of romanticizing the idea of personal
growth. You take readily to paths of self-improvement, as long as they
are intellectually sound. Relationships
In your mind you may long for passionate intensity and total selfsurrender, yet in practice you are more likely to find yourself drawn by
friendship and mutual understanding. You need intelligence in your
loved ones, and talking and communicating are essential. You also
need plenty of space and a sense of personal freedom if you are not to
feel stifled and claustraphobic. This can attract you to seemingly wellthought-out ‘open’ relationships, yet you should beware of such overly
intellectual human arrangements. Although they may make perfect
logic, they can be a way of avoiding emotional vulnerability.
Ultimately such cerebral solutions can only leave you feeling empty,
cheated and removed from that mysterious inner marriage you so long
to consummate. Your Greatest Strengths
Quick, alert, objective mind; the sheer breadth of your intelligence;
ability to see the large view; versatility and adaptability; humanitarian
feeling; friendly, open tolerance. Your Greatest Weaknesses
Getting ‘all up in your head’ and talking far too much; allowing your
mind to run too fast and neglecting the realities of your life; lack of
connection with the painful, dark aspects of yourself. Images for Integration
Sherlock Holmes … A scientist suddenly sees the caterpillar, chrysalis
and butterfly as one single being … Wagner’s Der Ring des
Nibelungen. Famous Personalities
Laurie Anderson (singer), Mel B (‘Spice Girl’), Pat Boone (singer), Sir
Arthur Conan Doyle (writer), Edvard Grieg (composer), Charles
Kingsley (writer), Donald Maclean (spy), Anton Mesmer (pioneering
medical hypnotist), Marilyn Monroe (actress), Sally Ride (first
American woman astronaut), Jean-Paul Sartre (philosopher and
novelist), Oswald Spengler (philosopher and historian), Richard
Wagner (composer), W.B. Yeats (poet). —36—
S UN G EMINI M OON Plutão ISCES Well, my deliberate opinion is – it’s a jolly strange world.
Journalists say a thing that they know isn’t true, in the hope that if they
keep on saying it long enough it will be true.
ARNOLD BENNETT
I like men to behave like men – strong and childish.
FRANÇOISE SAGAN Themes
AIR/WATER Sentimental; versatile; chameleon; moody; rich
imagination; poetic; vacillating; sociable; adaptable; talkative;
nervous; casual; blow with the wind; dreamy; sympathetic; literary
ability and artistic sensitivity; submissive but cunning. Do you try to make logical sense out of Beethoven’s 9th? Do you
chatter away eloquently and suddenly find yourself overcome with
worry about something you remember you said the day before
yesterday? You think on your feet, wear your heart on your sleeve,
explain your inner mental workings to the world, and then wonder why
you feel so exposed, depleted, and even betrayed.
You are a sociable seeker of knowledge and wisdom but have
trouble in sorting it all out and expressing exactly what you mean.
How can you assimilate all those ideas? Sometimes you just do not
know, and so you decide to sleep on it and have a dream. Your
intellectual curiosity has a way of going to sleep on you, and you need
to recharge your batteries frequently with peace and quiet.
You are an introvert in extroverted disguise, and yet it is not a
disguise – it is really you. You are a master of improvisation and
imitation, and your subtle perception of people’s idiosyncracies can
make you a good actor. But because you so easily understand and
identify with passing feelings and ideas, often you are not sure in the
end what you feel and who, exactly, you are.
You are ultra-sensitive, highly aware of your world, and keen to
interact and communicate with people. The problem is that you are so
impressionable that you tend to try out many different ideas and
attitudes, some of them contradictory, because each has its own inner
logic that deserves a hearing. Logic versus sympathy is your struggle.
Left brain versus right. There is great literary or artistic potential
inherent in this attitude but only if you can establish an interior
dialogue between your head and your heart which forms the essential
core of yourself. This will enable you to develop the one thing you
badly need: concentration. Without this you are prone to breeze along
on the surface of a pleasant life with the sense that a potentially
profound life is just around the corner, but somehow always eludes
you.
You would make a fine counsellor or group co-ordinator, as you
have lots of compassion and want to understand and express the
intangibles about people and what makes them tick. You are a natural
student of the non-rational and do not have to be convinced that ‘there
are more things in heaven and earth, Horatio, than are dreamt of in your philosophy’. You have plenty of empathy, an ability to work with
symbols and images, and a strong need to communicate. But you will
find that your communication with others is more effective if you
communicate with yourself in private more often. Stress and nerve
problems may calm down miraculously if you develop a musical or
artistic talent. Words are not the only way to communicate, and your
desire to express the inexpressible requires an art form, not a chat. Relationships
What you lack in concentration you certainly make up for in affection,
imagination and sociability. You feel deeply for others and will
eloquently defend the underdog. A strong need for tenderness and love
makes you vulnerable to others, and open and eager for emotional
experience. Somewhat fickle and hard to pin down emotionally, you
may tend to get going when the going gets rough. You may lean on
your loved one for support, yet be quite fault-finding and hard to
please at the same time.
Idealistically romantic and mentally critical, you have many ups
and downs in relationships until you find something solid to occupy
your active mind. There is something eternally youthful about you,
fanciful and fun-loving, effervescent and brimming over with
expectations. As a result you may be good with children, for you are a
child yourself with fantasies, hopes and dreams that feed your soul. Your Greatest Strengths
Vivacious empathy; quick, versatile imagination; sensitivity to art and
all forms of beauty; compassionate, gentle and charismatic sociability;
originality in communication; eternally youthful readiness for
adventure. Your Greatest Weaknesses
Lack of boundaries, which can lead to a superficial emotional life;
tendency towards mental confusion when overstimulated; jack-of-all- trades attitude which can result in a lack of confidence in yourself;
tendency to withdraw in self-pity when you feel misunderstood. Images for Integration
A weather vane on a church spire sparkles in the sunshine as the wind
twirls it around, turning it into a mysterious sky gem … Peter Pan
marries Tinkerbell and they live happily ever after in Never Never
Land. Famous Personalities
Richard Benjamin (actor), Arnold Bennett (novelist), Cilla Black
(singer and television personality), Raoul Dufy (artist), Rupert Everett
(actor), Allen Ginsberg (poet and writer), Mikhail Glinka (composer),
Sally Kellerman (actress), Jerry Kozinski (writer), Prince (pop singer),
Françoise Sagan (writer). Chapter Seven
SUN IN CANCER
—37—
S UN C ANCER
M OON A RIES
One is happy as a result of one’s own efforts, once one knows the
necessary ingredients of happiness-simple tastes, a certain degree of
courage, self denial to a point, love of work, and, above all, a clear
conscience. Happiness is no vague dream, of that I now feel certain.
GEORGE SAND
We flatter those we scarcely know, We please the fleeting guest, And
deal full many a thoughtless blow To those who love us best.
EDNA WHEELER WILCOX Themes
WATER/FIRE Sociable; sensitive; restless; impatient; a tenacious
survivor; moody; shrewd; insightful; active imagination;
individualistic; creative and heroic spirit; poetic; feminine but feisty;
defensive but forthright.
Are you vivaciously gregarious one day and the next intensely
agoraphobic? Do you come out fighting or do you protect those who
need your care? In fact, you do both very well. Sensitive, romantic and
insightful, you have a colourful, artistic and somewhat volatile
temperament which exudes charisma and mischief as well as
tremendous capability. You are moody and can easily develop a chip
on your shoulder if you imagine you are ill-treated or if you do not get the affection and attention you crave. But you are just as likely to
direct any militancy towards defending family and loved ones as you
are to staging a campaign for yourself.
You feel passionately about individual rights, about the need for
everyone to contribute something unique, and about your own right to
self-expression. The fact is that you may often feel a conflict between
your devotion to home and family responsibilities, and your need for
blowing your own trumpet; between your need for security and
intimacy, and your need for freedom and excitement. One side of you
is reflective, intuitive, always feeling out the emotional climate of
environments with uncanny accuracy. This side of you wants security
and oodles of tender loving care. The other side of you is gregarious,
impulsive, almost pugnacious in its demand for self-expression. You
both fear and thrive on disagreement, and this complexity – a kindly,
compliant feeling for others hiding an agressive, competitive interior –
can result in stress and nervous ailments if you are not careful.
Your combination is potentially extremely powerful, as it contains
not only the epitome of feminine intuition, but also masculine assertion
and individualism, as well as equal components of tenderness and
bravado, selfless caring and ‘me-first’ courage. You want to nurture
others and to engage with them dynamically, and that can be both
exciting and unnerving for all concerned, including yourself. You want
to be made a fuss of, and to be your own person. You want to protect
and establish security, but to be first as well.
Your love of home life is marked, as is your need to spend time in
your private creative world. You guard your privacy jealously; but you
also want to get out into the world. Domesticity is not enough for you,
and always seems to present a thorny issue which weighs heavily on
your freedom.
Rather than getting all the family support you would like, you often
end up supporting parents or family yourself in some way. Your
creative strengths seek a challenge, and if you want that challenge to
be all your own, you may need to stay far away from old family
matters that so easily tug at your patriotic heart. Nevertheless, your
recipe for contentment is to integrate your drive for independence with your need for roots. It may not always be easy, but with your
enthusiasm and ingenuity there is little you cannot achieve. Relationships
You have a lot of love to give, but you can be demanding,
temperamental and quite jealous if you suspect your loved one is not
100-per-cent devoted. You are afraid of getting hurt, but still you thrive
on risk – at least a little. Passionate and romantic, you instinctively
adore the challenge and excitement of love, but you consciously need
commitment and continuity.
This soft – tough dilemma within you may also cause you to ‘swap
roles’ at times: sometimes you feel masculine and assertive, other
times feminine and submissive. Sometimes you want peace and
intimacy, and other times you want a fight – and even then you are not
sure if you want to win or lose! Your emotional life can be a bit of a
roller coaster; just try to make sure that you are behind the steering
wheel. Your Greatest Strengths
Quick, shrewd mind; ability to use both receptivity and self-assertion
to good effect; individualistic approach to life; emotional commitment
to personal values and relationships; sensitivity to people’s needs;
social flair; original, magnetic style. Your Greatest Weaknesses
Self-absorption and oversensitivity to criticism; impatience and sharp
tongue when you reach the end of your tether; tendency to hide behind
a brisk, authoritative manner when at your most vulnerable; a sort of
divine discontent that makes you stir up trouble when there is none. Images for Integration A suffragette takes to the barricades in aid of her cause … A quiet
home-body becomes a sports champion. Famous Personalities
Pamela Anderson (actress), Bernard Buffet (artist), Barbara Cartland
(romantic novelist), Arlo Guthrie (folk songwriter and singer), Sir
Edmund Hillary (mountaineer), Don Knotts (actor), Regine
(discotheque proprietor), Diana Rigg (actress), George Sand (novelist),
Edna Wheeler Wilcox (poet). S UN C ANCER —38—
M OON T AURUS God grant me the Serenity to accept the things I cannot change,
Courage to change the things I can, and Wisdom to know the
difference.
REINHOLD NIEBUHR
Skill without imagination is craftsmanship and gives us many useful
objects such as wickerwork picnic baskets. Imagination without skill
gives us modern art.
TOM STOPPARD
Maturation is a continuous process of transcending environmental
support and developing self-support, which means an increasing
reduction of dependencies.
FRITZ PERLS Themes
WATER /EARTH Down-to-earth yet imaginative; emotional but
realistic; affectionate and supportive; love of friends and family;
intuitive and instinctive wisdom; mothering or smothering; traditional;
sensitive to the needs of others; artistic sensibility; musical; responsible; dependable; tenacious; practical idealist.
Are you a cosy, intimate, family person who can suddenly become
quite stubborn, even tyrannical and autocratic about how domestic life
should be organized? Do you treasure the people in your life but
sometimes find that they do not want to be treated like treasure? Do
you tune in easily to others’ needs but then find you wish they were
more self-reliant and able to clean up their own mess?
You feel deeply about your relationships, especially your family,
and you tend to be a good role model because you are caring and
responsible, romantic without being silly. You can be vulnerable, but
no matter how much you have depended on others, you will find selfrespect and contentment from developing and relying on your own
abilities. Nevertheless, you are loving, caring, ready with kind words
and helpful deeds. You thrive on being needed, but you are also able to
claim time to nourish your own artistic and intellectual gifts. You love
what you do and do what you love, and you make sure you enjoy it all
as well. ‘Make the world one happy, prosperous family’, could be your
motto. To you this means loving and working well and stopping to
smell the roses, too – a simple philosophy which you believe would, if
practised, make the world a saner place.
Although your values are rooted in the past, you are usually
absorbed in the here-and-now, attending to feelings, practical problems
and needs, developing and nurturing talents and opportunities. All your
senses are extremely sharp, and powerful memories are evoked by
their stimulation. You have a lot of basic common sense and can be
quite shrewd and strategic. Indeed, material security is important to
you, and you have luxurious taste – if you want something, you will
find a way of getting it. You tend to be well-organized and methodical
but not in a fanatical way – you are too emotional by nature to turn
your back on the moods that fill out the canvas of your daily life.
You have a natural understanding of people and their needs, and
would make a good psychologist or counsellor. And you are such a
naturally helpful, supportive individual that it is suprising how quickly
you can sink into sullen moods and passive resistance when things are
not going your way. But you come to know yourself well, find your own best therapies (music, drama), and are not without an ironic sense
of humour.
If you are in business, you will have a flair for providing the public
with what it wants (you could make an excellent hotelier or
restaurateur). As a creative artist, your sensitive response to the world
usually appeals, and so you tend to be popular and successful. You are
too realistic to be oversentimental and too sentimental to be a total
realist. In other words, you are very human, and whether you are a fulltime mother, manager, musician, nurse, doctor, gardener, actor or in
business, you are always encouraging healthy growth and
development.
You make an ideal teacher because you instinctively understand
that maturation is a slow, organic process, and that everyone must first
learn that he or she should grow according to the inner blueprint rather
than to society’s ideal. You have a strong sense of both the past and the
present, and this enables you to translate experience into practical
understanding. Relationships
Your relationships are pretty central to your life, and you need lots of
physical affection and devotion. Romantic, deeply caring and
wonderfully responsive, you naturally seek permanence in a
relationship, and will happily create a sense of home and security for
those you love. But relationships for you may have a decidedly
maternal ‘feel’ to them, and it may be important for you to remember
that there is a very thin line between mothering and smothering. You
get comfortable in relationships and do not like things to change –
intimacy and dependability are what you want. But just a frisson of
excitement keeps your imagination heightened and your interest
engaged. Your Greatest Strengths
Powers of dedication and perseverance; shrewd perception; artistic
imagination; practical idealism; belief in the worth of every individual; capacity to listen to others’ needs. Your Greatest Weaknesses
Fussy, overprotective concern for your nearest and dearest; tendency to
be lazy and stubborn; subjective prejudices; your expectations about
how others should look after you. Images for Integration
A family photo album … A flourishing family business … A painter
captures the taste and smell of a landscape. Famous Personalities
Bill Blass (fashion designer, businessman), Ernst Bloch (philosopher),
Donald Carl Johanson (anthropologist), Frida Kahlo (symbolic-realist
artist), Frances McDormand (actress), Reinhold Niebuhr (theologian),
Fritz Perls (founder of Gestalt psychotherapy), Marcel Proust
(novelist), Jean Jacques Rousseau (social philosopher), Tom Stoppard
(playwright), Meryl Streep (actress), Lord Woodrow Wyatt (socialist
politician). S UN C ANCER —39—
M OON G EMINI I never met the companion that was so companionable as solitude.
HENRY DAVID THOREAU
Happiness is as a butterfly, which, when pursued, is always beyond our
grasp, but which if you will sit down quietly, may alight upon you.
NATHANIEL HAWTHORNE Themes WATER/AIR Strong family sense; emotionally expressive; restless;
good storyteller; vivacious; clever; musical; good memory for personal
detail; self-reflective; moody; childlike sense of fun; devoted; shrewd
thinker; friendly; eternal student; good teacher; sympathetic; sociable;
sensitive conversationalist.
Are you ruled by your heart and emotional needs or by your mind and
your need for freedom? Whether you are ruled by one or the other, one
thing is for sure: you are a particularly talented individual with a
warm, sensitive, almost elf-like nature who can tune into people like a
bee in a field of tulips.
In this combination, the defensive, emotional negotiating skills of
Cancer blend with the quick-witted, imitative opportunism of Gemini
to produce an extremely sensitive, emotionally responsive and
colourfully expressive personality. You are genuinely interested in
people, and your perception of them – their needs, their differences,
their fascinating quirks and funny habits – is often disquietingly
accurate. This talent makes you either a natural counsellor or stand-up
comic.
You are good at sensing where a person is at intellectually, and
zeroing in with Cancerian compassion and deft skill, striking up a
conversation and offering the necessary insight – all to the delight of
the recipient. Then, like Tinkerbell, you are off again, but not for long,
as you carry your concern for others with you, and the prospect of
enjoying the pleasures of friendship will prompt your return.
You get to know a remarkable number of people and you take great
interest in all of them – and if you do not it is only because you find
them too boorish and unnecessarily rude. Sensitivity and nuance count
a lot for you. You seek to understand people and have a way of
affirming them and adapting to their needs, which makes you popular
and loved. People generally find you both witty and kind-hearted, both
comical and caring, both fun and comfortable to be around.
You make a wonderful teacher, mainly because you love to learn
yourself, and your curiosity combined with your excellent memory and
imagination mean that you can do well in the academic world. You
may have a facility with music, mimicry, languages, writing or painting, but whatever it is, you have a strong need for creative selfexpression. Like a child who delights in the discovery of his abilities,
you relish the creative process and can make the hardest things seem
simple and fun. You may be very well tuned into children because the
child in you is such a dominant force.
Inwardly you are less sure of yourself than you seem. This is partly
due to your openness and sensitivity to others, which can sometimes
deplete your energies and make you feel indecisive. You need peaceful
time alone when you can cultivate intimacy with yourself, keep a
journal, observe both life and your thoughts about life, and express
yourself artistically. In some ways you are just a kid at heart, and you
may remain somewhat emotionally immature all your life. You shrink
from heavy, ponderous entanglements; you lighten everyone’s load by
launching into song, poetry or hilarious imitations. Relationships
You may chat away and give the impression that you breeze easily
through life, side-stepping difficult situations by turning things into a
joke (sometimes at your own expense). Yet you do, in fact, have very
deep feelings, which you may hide from the dangers of the world. Your
feelings can be imposed upon and you have probably been hurt by this.
As a result, your naivety soon transforms into shrewdness, even though
you still remain vulnerable and warm-hearted, ready to give and to
help friends and family as much as you can.
Romance feeds your soul, so you may deduce that the more
romance the better! You need mental affinity with your partner;
without that you get bored and may think of something and someone
else. In a close relationship you will sometimes be the carer – maternal
and understanding; other times you will need to be the child – to run
around, play the field, meet up with your friends and generally enjoy
the more light-hearted side of life. Your Greatest Strengths Whimsical charm; understanding heart; accurate perceptions of others;
quick wit and poetic mind, which together enable you to teach and
communicate with others with warm enthusiasm and intuitive
versatility. Your Greatest Weaknesses
A tendency to scatter your energies by becoming overstimulated; to be
emotionally indecisive and immature; to let nervousness eat away at
your confidence; your knack of making a joke when things get
difficult, which although temporarily helpful, just sidesteps the issue
you need to examine. Images for Integration
A performance of a puppet show at an infant school Christmas play …
A family plays a game of charades … Young children enacting a play
wedding in the garden. Famous Personalities
Ned Beatty (actor), Dianne Feinstein (politician), Nathaniel Hawthorne
(novelist), Cheryl Ladd (actress), Lord Mountbatten (Supreme Allied
Commander), Clifford Odets (playwright), Sally Priesand (first
American woman rabbi), John D. Rockefeller (industrialist and
philanthropist), Henry David Thoreau (essayist and poet). S UN C ANCER —40—
M OON C ANCER But I want first of all to be at peace with myself …I want to live an
inner harmony, essentially spiritual, which can be translated to
outward harmony.
ANNE MORROW LINDBERGH We deprive the dying by shutting them out, by isolating them from the
activities of life. The dying are grateful for the chance to talk, to share
and explore their experience, and to be liberated from the conspiracy
of silence.
ELISABETH KÜBLER -ROSS
My Old Kentucky Home
SONG BY STEPHEN FOSTER Themes
WATER/WATER Emotional; kind-hearted; romantic; helpful;
perceptive; timid; defensive; secretive; clannish; imaginative; artistic;
attached to the past; shrewd; protective; sympathetic; love of security;
mother complex.
You are ultra-sensitive – and how! Your inner world is your inner
sanctum and you protect it religiously. It in turn provides you with an
almost religious vitality which, at its best, pours nourishing energy into
all your creations and relationships.
Profoundly emotional, you can feel, and make others feel, the
whole rainbow of emotions – elation, despair, compassion, loneliness,
inner peace – and thus one of your potential gifts is your mastery of
many moods and your capacity to inspire others through art, poetry,
music or, more importantly, loving. But if you do not master the
moods, they master you, which means that you are often at the mercy
of huge mood swings.
You crave sympathy, affection and understanding, and you give the
same generously in return, provided you feel safe and secure. Being
extremely sensitive, your tendency is to over-react to real or imagined
rebuffs or callousness. Quite simply, you are afraid of being hurt and
no one in the world can completely protect you from the perils of life.
Thus, like your mascot the crab, you will use your innate shell of selfprotection for all its worth, poking out your toe to test the water before
you enter into the fray. But even though you are defensive and even cagey, you are by no
means weak; in fact, you are extremely shrewd in business matters
with, possibly, a serious interest in collecting valuables – stamps,
coins, antique furniture, art – on the side, which will reinforce your
sense of material security (a very important consideration). If you are
typical of this combination, you will rarely go around with an empty
wallet. Even if you are quite wealthy, you are pound wise, rarely
foolish, and have an eye for value rather than an urge for spending
sprees.
You have a retentive memory and an interest in all things old – and
you often have an especial interest in your own ancestry and following
up interesting family links. You are therefore a natural historian, and
even if you eschew book-learning and dusty academics, you will be
interested in those aspects of culture that knit people together.
You love your home and all things associated with it. A safe,
private place is absolutely central to your creative development. Your
roots go deep, whether you like it or not. This is why at some point
you will benefit from carefully examining their psychological hold
over you. You may need to open up a bit, and not let your clannish
consciousness limit your experiences. Like a chain in the ancestral
succession, you will pass on the family imprint, the funny complexes,
the intuitive wisdom and strength to your own family and students, as
the case may be, in your uniquely personal way. Relationships
An extremely subjective person, you assess and evaluate things
emotionally all the time. You brood about things and then you
overflow with the feelings that have been welling up inside. You seek
security, affection and nourishment, and emotional exchange with your
loved one is the life-blood of your soul. You nurture and protect and
need nurturance and protection in return. But you have to be careful
that possessiveness does not choke your cherished intimacy to death,
for no one wants to be loved by a Jewish mother forever.
Emotionally, the waters ebb and flow between you; your feeling
antennae are always at work, picking up undercurrents of meaning, possible danger signals or tantalizing promises of delicious satisfaction
(food, money or love!). But, once committed in a relationship, you are
there for richer or poorer. Your partner will just have to put up with
your mysterious moods. You are not to be fathomed by logic; you
know it – and the sooner he or she learns it, the better for your
domestic harmony. Your Greatest Strengths
Emotional perception and tenacity; poetic imagination and
expressiveness; excellent memory and intuitive economic sense; warm
concern and devotion to family and friends. Your Greatest Weaknesses
Oversensitivity and moodiness; shyness and tendency to worry and
sulk inside your shell; strong desire to be needed and appreciated; deep
attachment to the way things were. Images for Integration
A gosling peeks out of its shell as mother goose chases away the farm
cat … A theatrical family performs A Midsummer Night’s Dream in
their own garden. Famous Personalities
Giorgio Armani (fashion designer), Bella Abzug (politician), Henry
Cabot Lodge (politician), Tom Cruise (actor), Phyllis Diller
(comedienne), Jacques Delors (politician), Harrison Ford (actor),
Stephen Foster (songwriter), Woody Guthrie (songwriter), Elisabeth
Kübler-Ross (psychologist), Anne Morrow Lindbergh (writer and
poet), Courtney Love (rock singer), George Orwell (writer). —41—
S UN C ANCER
M OON L EO
It was morning, and the new sun sparkled gold across the ripples of a
gentle sea.
RICHARD D. BACH
Love does not consist in gazing at each other but in looking outward
together in the same direction.
ANTOINE DE SAINT -EXUPÉRY Themes
WATER/FIRE Dramatic sensitivity; compassionate; devoted; clannish;
artistic; magnetic; imaginative; proud; aristocratic; trustworthy;
affectionate and adoring; love of family; deep feelings; private but
radiant; warmly hospitable; shy but with inward greatness; attractive
personality.
Are you a timid, kind-hearted introvert, or a radiant, dignified
extrovert with an instinct for centre-stage?
You may seem at times to be a shy, vulnerable, romantic individual
who only wants to please, but underneath you have a voracious
appetite for adoration and respect, and will not stop until you get it.
Without a doubt, you have a very warm feeling for others, and
domestic security with plenty of happy togetherness is high on your
list of priorities. When it comes to cooperation with others, however,
you have your limits because you are profoundly individualistic and,
albeit in a charming manner, you will insist on doing things your way.
Ultimately the most important thing for you is believing in yourself
and being true to your standards and aspirations. Most of all, you need
to fulfil your creative potential, which is like an intimate companion
with whom you share your life. You nurture it, protect it, and then you
show it off, and whatever walk of life you are in, you tend to be a fine
performer. This gives you a lot of self-respect and a touch of vanity as
well, and your emotional sensitivity combined with your underlying imperiousness tends to impress others and makes them take you
seriously.
You are a devoted member of your flock, and you zealously and
jealously protect and promote whomever you are devoted to. When it
comes to developing your own talents, however, you seem to know
that you have to pull away in order to grow into your greatest self.
Others may think you are a bit of a show-off but that is not the case:
you simply have a deep sense of the importance of your own creative
talents, and you will feel only half alive if you do not honour them.
Although you are pretty sensitive to criticism or rebuffs, you are just as
committed to honesty and personal integrity; and despite your vanity,
you eventually learn to laugh at yourself. Relationships
You love to open your home to friends but you do not always like
waiting on them. If you sense you are being taken advantage of, your
hospitality goes sour. You need to express your creativity but you need
to be protected too.
Romantically you are both passionate and compassionate,
extremely loving, generous and vulnerable as well. Sometimes you
want to nurture, protect and fuss over your loved one; other times you
want the same in return; and still other times you want to dazzle and
impress, and simply be adored. You are a bit demanding in love
because at all times you want to know you are held in high esteem, but
you need romantic surprises, too; it is as though you want to be
continually wooed in new and wonderful ways, while feeling
fundamentally secure.
Your emotionally ardent and colourful personality is both open and
hidden. Your natural instinct is to test the water before jumping in, but
your heart will always want to play. This may also apply in your
business life where your intuition and ingenuity make you a shrewd
customer – approachable and personable but sophisticated in the ways
of the world. You have a keen eye for value and may be an avid
collector of art and artefacts. Your strongly individualistic and traditional values will be expressed in whatever it is you buy, do or
love. Your Greatest Strengths
Grace and aristocratic charm; warm devotion to family and friends;
artistic sensitivity and love of excellence; fine intuition; subtle sense of
drama; business sense and organizational abilities; a personal
commitment to your aspirations and faith in yourself. Your Greatest Weaknesses
Tendency to play the primadonna and to reject criticism in a proud,
self-absorbed way; to cut off from others if they do not tow the line; a
voracious need to rule the roost and to have others jolly well like it. Images for Integration
After serving a sumptuous five-course dinner, the hostess leaves the
washing-up to her guests while she serenades them on the piano with
Moonlight Sonata … A child ventures forth from her family to seek
her greatness. Famous Personalities
Claudio Abbado (conductor), Richard D. Bach (writer), Eleanour
Clark (writer), Van Cliburn (concert pianist and conductor), Antoine de
Saint-Exupéry (writer), Tom Hanks (actor), Susan Hayward (actress),
Kris Kristofferson (songwriter and singer), George Michael (pop
singer and songwriter), Nancy Reagan (American First Lady), Ken
Russell (film director), Eva Marie Saint (actress), Carlos Santana
(musician), Phoebe Snow (singer), Ringo Starr (Beatles’ drummer). S UN C ANCER —42—
M OON V IRGO It was becoming clear to my mind that men regarded women as a
servant class in the community, and that women were going to remain
in the servant class until they lifted themselves out of it.
EMMELINE PANKHURST
…tradesmen could always stall Mrs. Osborne while attending to
more demanding clients … and then she would be too timid, too
embarrassed, to call him again …
JOHN ANTHONY WEST , Osborne’s Army Themes
WATER/EARTH Imagination and analysis; reflective and attentive;
caring and helpful; concerned; sympathetic; loyal; dutiful; timid;
proper but forgiving; shrewd; fussy; discriminating intellect; domestic
organization; protective; self-controlled; introvert; perceptive;
integrity.
Are you a sensitive, sympathetic, emotional person whose razor-sharp
mind tries to make logical sense out of all your moods? Do you yearn
to be appreciated and understood but end up sitting back shyly and
analysing others? Are you the permissive, compassionate parent or the
strict Scottish nanny? Do you find yourself criticizing because you
care?
You are an essentially self-contained but very responsive
individual, alert and sensitive to your environment, prepared to love
and embrace the world you find yourself in but tending to analyse and
rationalize your needs so that they do not become overwhelming. Your
sensitive antennae make you a bit nervous; you hold yourself back, and
you develop ways of protecting yourself from the big, bad world. But
that same sensitivity, coupled with your mental accuracy and capacity
to put feelings into words, can make you an excellent teacher,
counsellor, social worker, or writer – an observer and ‘fixer’ of the
human condition. You need to understand your world in order to feel
secure and good in yourself; you need to know what is expected of you; to be able to know and name your allies and your enemies; and to
know the rules, because the rules will, as it were, set you free.
One moment you may feel inspired, ambitious, creative and
wanting to embrace the whole world, to see the largest possible picture
of the meaning of history and evolution; and the next minute you find
yourself splitting hairs over who is to blame for lunch being late. You
can be both wonderfully kind, helpful and carpingly critical, both
genuinely sympathetic and sarcastic. But the latter trait generally
surfaces as a defence during the times you feel threatened, unloved and
depressed. Your moodiness can be hard to live with.
Coarseness offends you deeply, and you will learn to overcome
your shyness in order to make a stand for yourself and for the
principles and mores by which you live. When you have garnered
enough courage to see its supportive effect, you can become positively
pedantic, even puritannical at times, so you need to guard against
stuffiness and a too strict adherence to the letter of the law. In fact, it
does not take much for you to respond with the warmth and empathy
of your Cancerian solar nature. Lucky for you and your family, you are
a pushover for the soft touch.
Your gifts are imagination and analysis, emotional insight and
conventional common sense, creative initiative and the desire to serve.
When these work together you are one of the quietly dynamic and
devoted workers of this world, combining dedication and service
which would find a natural expression through the healing and caring
professions. When you care about something you can become a pretty
vociferous crusader and campaigner, surprising even yourself with
your boldness and refusal to accept lame excuses. Relationships
Your sympathetic, loving nature truly blossoms when you are in a
happy, committed relationship, although nothing will ever be quite as
perfect as you would like. Domesticity brings out the best in you
because you can fuss about things and then put them right; you can
design your life around yours and your family’s intimate needs. You have a real yearning to give, to love and care for someone, but
also a real fear of ridicule – humiliation is almost a physical experience
for you. You feel dwarfed by unkindness, and so by nature you are not
a person who enters relationships lightly. When you feel you can trust
someone, when you feel you can bask in their understanding and
encouragement, you open up and reveal your special qualities –
insight, devotion, purity of heart and humour. You want the continuity
of an intelligent and compassionate love, and you give the same – and
more – in return. Your Greatest Strengths
Clear-headed and conscientious concern for others; refined charm;
social adaptability; capacity to combine imagination and efficiency;
unflagging moral integrity; ability to serve with both compassion and
common sense. Your Greatest Weaknesses
Tendency to nag and worry too much; proneness to self-criticism
which results in anxiety and depleted confidence; narrow-minded and
self-righteous clinging to rules and right procedure in order to establish
your security and authority; a weakness towards being subservient and
self-effacing. Images for Integration
The ‘perfect’ mother … A health visitor weighs an infant with tender
precision … A wine taster makes pointed comments, restrained
accolades. Famous Personalities
Alberto Ascari (champion racing driver), Beck (rock star), Bill Cosby
(actor), Gina Lollobrigida (actress), Lord (David) Owen (politician),
Emmeline Pankhurst (feminist activist), Peter Sissons (television presenter), Barbara Stanwyck (actress), John Anthony West (writer and
novelist). —43—
S UN C ANCER
M OON L IBRA
My mission in life is to give hope, pleasure and assistance to others.
SYLVESTER STALLONE
My ideal would be to have wonderful dancers come to me and I’d
make work on them and then they’d go away and perform it brilliantly
forever.
TWYLA THARP
The Group
TITLE OF NOVEL BY MARY MAC CARTHY Themes
WATER/AIR Social awareness; graciousness and charm; elegant
simplicity; popular appeal; oversensitivity; observant; perceptive; keen
student; tentative but eager for attention; romantic; kind-hearted;
artistic style; adaptable but strong; defensive but devoted; idealistic
and emotional; perfectionist; indecisive.
Do you think of yourself as a romantic, sensitive, caring soul who
nevertheless balks at the first sign of emotional demand from others?
Do you study your environment carefully, let chic conversation and
company stimulate and educate you, but make sure you do not give too
much away about yourself?
You are an interesting mixture of the quiet maverick and the
outgoing artisan, the warm friend and the wily businessman. You need
to be part of the world but you are reluctant to engage with it at the gut
level because your instincts tell you it is dangerous – to your
emotionally vulnerable side, which wounds easily. You have strong and original ideas about things, and an ambition to express yourself
and to be recognized, appreciated and rewarded. In order to do this and
to protect yourself as well, you tend to adopt a far more detached
stance than is really the case.
You find ways of placing yourself in favourable positions, and you
know how to appeal to people, for you have a lively, appealing
personality with a kind of provocative, beguiling quality that invites
people into your orbit. Others may at times be baffled by the
contradictions in your nature – your blend of warm idealism and
possessiveness, independence and protective self-interest gives out
confusing signals. But in the end your conviviality, adaptability,
perceptiveness and unique viewpoint make the struggle to get to know
you worthwhile.
Although you need and love a stable home life, your real interest is
in society. You tend to be a socially progressive thinker, intellectually
precocious and interested in all manner of things to do with human
culture, from art, music and history to commerce and social
organizations. Whilst you appreciate old-fashioned values, you also
develop a love or at least a fascination for the unusual and the exotic.
Your social conscience and patriotic conviction to ideals could take
you into politics where your concern for the underdog and your desire
for justice can express itself eloquently. It is in large organizations that
your voice has a particularly persuasive appeal – you sense the mood,
you observe and see what is required, you focus on others with
unnerving accuracy, and you manoeuvre things as best you can,
making sure you are in a safe, cosy place yourself.
Your powers of observation and analysis could make you an
excellent writer or artist. You have refined, aesthetic taste in things as
well as in people, and can even be a bit elitist, intellectually snobbish,
with a kind of upper-class clannishness that puts you in the favoured
family of friends. But even with your best friends, you are never quite
sure how close you want to be, how much you can trust. Your
emotional Cancerian side wants to belong, but your idealistic Libran
side wants comfortably detached egalitarian relationships. This uneasy
alliance within you may compel you to keep your own company a lot of the time, whilst all the while hankering for the stimulation of the
world and the Beautiful People. Relationships
Your relationships are your greatest challenge, for you want them, and
yet they never turn out quite as you had imagined. Your mixture of
heart and mind can either make for rich and rewarding relationships or
for a split between what you feel you need and what you think should
be happening. You can never quite decide what your role in
relationships is – do you want to be adored and petted; are you the
devoted, parental partner; or are you an equal looking for courtly
romance and mutual respect based on intellectual affinity? This
dilemma gives you a kind of divine discontent when it comes to
commitment, and a proneness to nit-pick when indecision and
dissatisfaction get the better of you. And if you stay too much on the
surface of this dilemma you are liable to manipulate emotionally those
you love and end up brooding, lonely and mistrustful.
When you can understand your different needs you can direct your
analytical talents to yourself and see that it is okay to be both needy
and friendly, emotional and intellectual, self-protective and outgoing.
Once your caginess softens you become a compassionate, affectionate,
considerate mate – but one who will always need plenty of space for
other friends and opportunities. Your Greatest Strengths
Natural sense of justice; artistic imagination; fine intellect; powers of
observation and articulate self-expression; compassion and concern for
the welfare of others; love of beauty and harmony; highly original
style; scrupulous efforts to be fair and honest with everyone. Your Greatest Weaknesses
Nervous defensiveness and mistrust of others; a perfectionist attitude
that makes you nag and complain when things are not ‘right’; tendency to unwittingly stir up trivial arguments that become storms in a teacup; proneness to rationalize away all your dependence on others and
your idiosyncracies and self-protectiveness. Images for Integration
Mother Goose recites a poem, surrounded by adoring fairy-tale
creatures … A family holds a lucrative sale of its artistic heirlooms to
the neighbourhood. Famous Personalities
Alexander the Great, Louis ‘Satchmo’ Armstrong (jazz musician),
Harriette Arnow (novelist), Arthur Ashe (tennis player), George W.
Bush (American President), St Francesca Cabrini (founder of
orphanages and hospitals), Pierre Cardin (fashion designer), Antonio
Gaudi (architect), Janet Leigh (actress), Mary MacCarthy (writer),
Sylvester Stallone (actor), Nikola Tesla (inventor), Twyla Tharp
(dancer and choreographer). S UN C ANCER —44—
M OON S CORPIO If an idea cannot be expressed in terms of people, it is a sure sign it is
irrelevant to the real problems of life.
COLIN WILSON
The human body is private property.
JONATHAN MILLER Themes
WATER/WATER Intensely emotional; perceptive; self-protective; selfcentred; secretive; investigative mind; romantic; sensual; magnetic;
dramatic; compelling personality; possessive; resourceful; tenacious; daring.
Do you love wolfhounds but go for cuddly lapdogs, too, or even
pussycats? Are you soft and sentimental but sometimes as sharp as a
surgeon’s scalpel? Do you long for devotion, security and recognition
but privately ward off any threat to your personal freedom?
You are brooding emotion incarnate, very subjective in your
outlook, a trifle overprotective and suspicious, and fully confident that
your intellect and perceptive powers will enable you to make rapid
progress on the upward path. Tenacious determination to prove
yourself and secure the dignity and position you feel you merit makes
you often appear formidable, proud and haughty. But whilst you are
capable of going great lengths not only to survive but to win, there
really is not an unkind cell in your body. You genuinely care about
your world and the people in it, and your humanity is strong and
potent, reaching out to help and transform the darker corners of human
existence.
If you are part of the establishment you will defend it to the death.
If you are an outsider you will attempt to probe into every social
assumption and reveal the truth behind the façade, the mysterious
behind every commonplace occurrence. The secret and emotional are
everything. You love suspense and mystery, and are drawn to
understanding and grappling with the dark side of life, the inordinate
and the ugly, in order to see the redeemable, transforming spark of life
that lies behind it.
Deeply fascinated by what makes people tick, you have something
of the detective and the psychoanalyst in you, which could manifest
powerfully in medical or psychological work. But even if you do not
have a career, a part of you will always be preoccupied with hidden
realities and creatures from ‘inner space’. You guard your own inner
space with great vigilance, and you likewise respect other people’s
privacy. You truly come alive, however, when you have been entrusted
with a secret or given a search warrant to look inside a troubled mind
(or bank account). All your analytical powers become concentrated
and uplifted by your reverential, single-minded, determined attitude to
discover the truth. You are unafraid of the dark and undaunted by the truth. If you
work in a healing profession you bring a genuine caring concern and
gentle intensity to those ailing in a psychotic underworld. You can
contribute the love and wisdom of the tender mother together with the
exacting discipline of the doctor or policeman. Under your scrutiny
and guardianship all your creative projects should flourish, whatever
they may be. Just remember, you have the temperament of a fanatic (as
do most outstanding artists!) so try to loosen up a bit and learn to let
go. Your loved ones will not run away from you – they will love you
more for the trust you give them. Relationships
Emotionally you are somewhat complex because you want both
security and intrigue, and the two do not really go together. You need
to feel special and adored, but you also like to live on the edge.
Sometimes you are so deeply engrossed in your personal feelings that
your survival instinct can suffocate the loved one you are trying to
protect (or hold on to).
Your emotional control may be strong, but no matter how you try
to hide and protect yourself, your feelings exude a powerful message
and very tangibly affect the atmosphere. And moods are something
you have in abundance. If you feel threatened or insecure, a brooding,
hard-bitten mood can take over and will only be appeased by bags of
affectionate reassurance (and an expensive gift might help, too).
Indeed, you probably have lavish taste, and a shrewd business sense as
well, but you also have an original wit and satirical sense of humour
which, along with your natural dignity, has a compelling influence on
others. Your Greatest Strengths
Personal magnetism; emotional strength and courage in times of crisis;
acute perception and analytical imagination; intensity of your
devotional nature and commitment to others; caring, healing
capacities. Your Greatest Weaknesses
Defensiveness, moodiness, and possessiveness; proneness to react with
fanatical prejudice, to cling to the past, and to live through other
people if your own creative aspirations have not been developed. Images for Integration
Under a full Moon an exorcist performs a life-giving ritual; the
possession fades away and a child’s life is saved … Whilst preparing
his genealogical tree, a young man discovers the lost grave of his
great-great-grandmother. Famous Personalities
Eric Ambler (writer of detective stories), A.J. Cronin (novelist and
physician), John Cusack (actor), Cynthia Gregory (ballerina), Lena
Horne (singer), Jonathan Miller (neuropsychologist, actor and writer),
Theodore Prostakoff (musical prodigy), Rembrandt (artist), Nelson
Rockefeller (American politician and art patron), Colin Wilson
(writer). S UN C ANCER —45—
M OON S AGITTARIUS I look upon the whole world as my parish.
Beware you be not swallowed up in books! An ounce of love is worth a
pound of knowledge.
JOHN WESLEY
He had no longer any need for home, for he carried his Gormenghast
within him. All that he sought was jostling within himself. He had
grown up.
MERVYN PEAKE , Titus Groan Themes
WATER/FIRE Traditional yet progressive; reserved yet talkative; kind;
idealistic; intuitive; imaginative; colourful; restless; changeable; the
romantic traveller; careful yet adventurous; dramatic; emotional
volatility; an ear for music; an eye for patterns and harmony; a love of
beauty.
Do you follow your cautious, conservative heart and hanker after the
good old days, ways and values? Or are you a natural progressive,
seeking to push back the wide frontiers and open new doors?
Change and excitement is what you love and fear. Drawn to the
bonds of home and childhood, your impulse is nevertheless to risk the
next horizon. Sensitive, sometimes shy, you easily come out of your
shell and can be a lively, witty, provocative talker. When you
communicate on topics dear to your heart, you express a kind of
poignant enthusiasm and a fervent but restrained defiance: you know
what you think, feel, and believe and, with courtesy and
thoughtfulness, you will speak your piece.
When early childhood prejudices become married to your
instinctive sense of moral certainty, you can become surprisingly
conservative and set in your ways. You are an impressive and
impressionable person, vulnerable but courageous, considerate but
forceful, careful but wholehearted. The contrast within you is between
your desire for emotional and economic security, the need to belong,
and your impulse for adventure and individual self-expression.
You desire intimacy and attach yourself to your goals and your
loved ones with immense loyalty. But you are also independent,
outspoken and sometimes argumentative. When your extrovert and
introvert qualities are combined they give you a dramatic, original
flair, a wry sense of humour and a feel for the poetic and fantastic. You
may be quite ‘psychic’, capable of spontaneously getting the real
meaning behind words and behaviour. Your mixture of openness and
sensitivity when working well gives you a remarkable capacity for
getting the best out of people, whether you are an employer, teacher,
preacher or healer. There is much of the traveller and explorer about you, yet intuitively you know that you always take your home with
you.
Having a strong sense of family and concern for social issues and
the community, you are one of life’s born carers. But you want to lead
more than a useful life; you want to lead a meaningful life. Therefore
some sort of abstract ideal will inform all you do, and no aspect of
your life will escape the invisible but all-embracing circle of your
moral integrity. You feel strongly about things, but you do not like to
waste time. You are a person of action and deed, and have the ability to
grasp the big picture and then tenaciously follow up on the details and
carry things through. You respect social institutions that preserve the
safety of the individual, but you have little patience for the red tape
that must be got through if you choose to work in the professional
fields. Your spirit is independent, visionary, and you work best if you
set your own limits. Relationships
For you, these can be a source of great joy and frustration. You are a
sociable person, even quietly flirtatious, and a warm, loving, generous
partner. Yet you can be emotionally possessive, craving intimacy
whilst expecting total personal freedom. Your charm comes from your
combination of vulnerability, honesty and outspokenness. Whilst you
can appear to be extremely open and up-front, there is something
deeply private about your real feelings, which you may keep a secret
even from yourself.
You are very emotional and prone to mood swings; despondency is
very debilitating for you, and it often descends upon you when a loved
one has not lived up to some romantic ideal. You want your partner to
be both a parent and a playmate. As one of life’s romantics, you see the
immense possibilities in your loved one and your life together, and you
are liable to be disproportionately disappointed when he or she turns
out to be a mere mortal. Yet you are not interested in superficial
relationships, and when you really get involved, you give it your best
shot, and devote yourself heart, mind and soul. You are good-humoured and philosophical about problems. You
learn from any rough rides, and bounce back. As long as you are
assured of love and affection, you will face the music and dance. Your Greatest Strengths
Colourful, poetic imagination; enthusiasm and capacity for
encouraging and bringing out the best in others; natural optimism and
breadth of vision; wholehearted commitment to both people and your
ideals. Your Greatest Weaknesses
Impatience and carelessness with detail; alternating need for
excitement and privacy which keeps people guessing about where you
stand; capacity to justify your personal prejudices with detached
argument; the sarcasm that hides your vulnerability and dependency. Images for Integration
Philosophy and friendship round a large, old kitchen table … In your
home on a yacht you cruise the seven seas … A racehorse gives a child
a ride. Famous Personalities
Josephine Beauharnais (Napoleon’s first wife), Jody Brady (child
actress), Jean-Baptiste Corot (painter), Lord Kitchener (soldier), Gian
Carlo Menotti (composer and librettist), Milan Milisic (poet, dramatist
and traveller), Eddy Nelson (singer), Peir Luigi Nervi (architect,
engineer and academic), Mervyn Peake (writer of Gormenghast
trilogy), John Wesley (preacher). S UN C ANCER —46—
M OON C APRICORN Courage is grace under pressure.
What is moral is what you feel good after.
ERNEST HEMINGWAY
Every man thinks God is on his side. The rich and powerful know he is.
Saintliness is also a temptation.
JEAN ANOUILH Themes
WATER/EARTH Gentle disciplinarian; capable and caring; tenacious;
shrewd; responsible; considerate; patient; introvert; reflective;
authoritative; maternal; sense of humour; dutiful; strong family person;
professional; perceptive.
Intuition and precision, warm sensitivity and a sharply pragmatic mind
combine to make you a very appealing and trustworthy friend and coworker. The gentle understanding of the good mother and the shrewd
resolve of the worldly father make a marvellous mix for reaching
others and influencing your public.
Intensely loyal, responsible and devoted to loved ones, your idea of
heaven simply never departs from the realm of work and purposeful
caring, tending to your duties as professional nurturer. Your uncanny
perception of others’ needs and your sense of loyalty make you appear
a very serious person. Being also very cautious, prudent and private
means that this serious persona does indeed correspond to an inner
reality. You are serious, you are ambitious and rise swiftly to the call
of duty and the needs of weaker mortals, and you apply yourself with
great diligence to the task of personal attainment and the establishing
of your own security. Underneath that Scottish-nanny exterior of
common sense and tenacity, however, you have a rich sense of humour
and a great capacity for fun and tenderness.
With family and intimate friends you are a pillar of strength and an
indefatigable confidant. In fact, a very big part of you needs to be needed. Deeply self-reflective and self-demanding, you know yourself
well and this helps you to know others well. You are consequently a
natural counsellor – compassionate, honest, articulate, as well as a
shrewd, diplomatic businessman.
In the wider world of the marketplace, you are the soul of courtesy
and affability. While appearing to smooth the way for others you can,
however, drive a hard bargain and quietly look out for Number One.
People easily respect and like you, for you sympathize with basic
human needs and motivations while, at the same time, gently
cultivating maturity – in yourself and others. You are also respected for
your excellent sense of propriety, and because you know the wisdom
of good boundaries.
Home life and family interests play an important role in your life.
You need roots and may enjoy charting the intricate course of your
family’s geneology. Where did you come from, and where are you,
personally, going? The pull between total devotion to parenting and
home-making, and your need for a wider, more professional form of
success and recognition, will occupy your mind a great deal at some
point in your life. At times your private ambitions may seem at odds
with your more popularist side. You know how to appeal to the
masses, how to communicate, inspire and help; but you are also deeply
concerned with standards and with fulfilling your Own Personal
Mission. Your need for affection is as great as your need for success
and recognition. Relationships
You will thrive in a secure partnership where you can share your
enjoyment of intimacy, affection and home-making. Although you are
romantic, you value security and continuity and you are not interested
in fast-paced, highly-charged relationships. You need time and trust in
order to blossom, and peace and quiet with your loved one in order to
develop your best qualities as a lover, a parent or a friend. You can be
over-sensitive and cautious, and if you err it is usually through overnurturing and protecting. Whilst you require a certain amount of
independence in a relationship, you are happiest when you know that someone is at home waiting for you. Besides much tenderness, you
require from your mate admiration and respect – and a promise of
undying loyalty. Your Greatest Strengths
Intuitive, shrewd mind; innate sense of responsibility and concern for
others; good business sense; organizational abilities; sense of
economy; gentle diplomacy and patience; instinct for leadership; firm
but tender parenting; hard-headed but soft-hearted benevolence. Your Greatest Weaknesses
Your need to be needed; oversensitivity; tendency to close off from
others when you feel slighted; a somewhat insatiable desire for love
and recognition; your need for authority and control. Image for Integration
An ancient water mill works away in rhythmic fashion, meting out just
the required amount of fluid force to grind the corn that nourishes and
sustains the village. Famous Personalities
Jean Anouilh (writer), Karen Black (actress), Gareth Gates (pop star),
John Glenn, Jr (astronaut), Ernest Hemingway (novelist), Robert J.
Laski (political theorist), Sue Lawley (radio and television presenter),
Joseph Papp (theatre director and producer), Rupert Sheldrake
(biologist), Cesare Zavattini (novelist and screenwriter). S UN C ANCER —47—
M OON A QUARIUS …to reminisce about the past and speculate about the future. ADAM FAITH
Literature could be said to be a sort of disciplined technique for
arousing certain emotions.
IRIS MURDOCH Themes
WATER/AIR Feeling v. thinking; past and future; humanitarian;
concern for public welfare; generous spirit; family of man; sociable;
kind-hearted; nurturing the world; openness and honesty; mentally
acute; encouraging; popular, wholehearted and direct; visionary;
tolerant; protects the under-dog, shrewd; a love of symbols.
Are you sometimes a careful, cautious, old-fashioned crab with a
romanticized view of the past, but at other times your quirky need for
‘space’ rears its funny head, upsetting the proverbial applecart? Do
you like traditional Sunday lunches and family get-togethers, but end
up bringing along all your stray friends and analysing the world’s
problems? Are you torn between the old and the new, the conservative
and the radical? Are you a feeler or thinker, an artist or scientist, poet
or mathematician?
If and when you can roll these into one you can become an
understanding and forgiving friend of the world, a progressive
traditionalist. You have a flair for reading signs and symbols, be it in
interpreting dreams or reading the flight of birds. Combined with your
gift for translating your feelings into words, this can find its most
fulfilling expression through poetry and song.
The clannish instinct of Cancer can be widened and universalized
in this pairing so that your immediate concerns are broad social issues.
You are interested in people and have great insight into the workings of
the human mind and heart. Although you are a strong family person
with interest in your ancestors and heritage, you tend to treat your
friends and colleagues as an equally important, extended family, and
there is nothing you would not do for most of them. When you work at
it, you can combine personal warmth and abstract thought in an admirable, effective way. Feeling deeply about other’s pain, joy and
aspirations, you do not go overboard with the sloppy stuff but, like a
true friend, you enter into the spirit of the idea and help others to
understand things more clearly.
Your personality is ideally suited to working with people, either in
the caring and healing professions, or in politics or teaching. Your
personal integrity and ability to communicate your vision with
unselfish feeling can often work a kind of magic on your audience,
making popularity almost a birthright. Although you can be a shrewd
businessman and are proud enough in a noble sort of way, essentially
you are a humanitarian and you match your sentiment with actions
which leave no one in doubt about your values and trustworthiness. Relationships
You are very much a people person and are inclined to collect a wide
range of aquaintances, but you may not necessarily find it easy to let
others get close to you. Emotionally you like continuity but also enjoy
unconventionality in your partner. You are passionate but zany,
devoted but equally detached, which means that it is possible for you
to have a relationship that combines emotional fulfilment with
stimulating friendship.
Desiring intimacy and attachment, you nevertheless have a need
for a wide variety of friends and contact with people with whom you
share ideals and viewpoints. Therefore you naturally respect your
partner’s need for the same thing. Sometimes, however, your tolerant,
egalitarian outlook glosses over your emotional hurts and hang-ups,
which then fester down in the cellar. Suddenly you find yourself
moody, cantankerous, arrogantly going your own way. You are
paradoxical – not nearly as rational as you think you are, and not half
as irrational as you feel. Basically you just need to apply some of your
considerate, humanitarian care to yourself. And you are a natural selfpsychologist, although it will always be easier for you to explore other
people’s feelings and to help them. For all your gregariousness, you
are a very private person when it comes to your own needs. Essentially, you are continually defining your individuality and
integrity, and you do it best in your dealings with people. Your Greatest Strengths
Ability to reach out to your public and communicate your ideas with
force and conviction; compassion and respect for the rights of all
people; fine intellect; vivid imagination; tenacious loyalty to friends
and family. Your Greatest Weaknesses
Tendency to fly into the sanctuary of your mind when you are beset by
emotional problems; propensity to ‘mother’ the world and to take on
too many burdens, and to attract eccentric people and situations that,
although they bring excitement, actually mitigate against your essential
peace of mind. Images for Integration
A mother and child skip down the street, arm in arm, to attend the
Vision for World Peace charity fête at the park … The world as family
… A science museum inside a restored medieval castle … Carl Orff’s
Carmina Burana. Famous Personalities
Dan Aykroyd (actor and director), Mary Baker Eddy (founder of
Christian Science), Leslie Caron (dancer-actress), Princess Diana
(Princess of Wales), Adam Faith (singer and actor), H. Rider Haggard
(novelist), Leibnitz (philosopher), Carl Lewis (athlete), Tobey Maguire
(actor), Iris Murdoch (novelist), Carl Orff (composer), Esther Rantzen
(television personality), Linda Rondstadt (singer), Jerry Rubin
(activist), Donald Sutherland (actor). —48—
S UN C ANCER M OON Plutão ISCES If you hate a person, you hate something in him that is part of yourself.
What isn’t part of ourselves doesn ‘t disturb us.
HERMAN HESSE
I require a spot that has beauty!
CAMILLE PISSARRO
The hills are alive with the sound of music, with songs they have sung
for a thousand years.
O what a beautiful morning!
O what a beautiful day!
RODGERS AND HAMMERSTEIN Themes
WATER/WATER Affable; funny; loveable; kind-hearted; a cagey crabfish; slippery and secretive; sensitive; whimsical; romantic
imagination; charitable and compassionate; blow with the wind;
popular; dreamy; intuitive; poetic; musical.
You are a remarkably intuitive, sympathetic and adaptable person.
Essentially emotional and acutely receptive to the hidden messages in
people’s behaviour, you can easily act as an emotional barometer of
your environment. This is sometimes to your own advantage and
sometimes not, for you can become swamped with feelings that are not
your own. You are so affable and sensitive, so kind and helpful by
nature, that your own real opinion or position on anything often
remains hidden or disguised. You do not really mind; in fact, you
instinctively feel that it is far more advantageous not to show your
cards. You like to please but you also like to be pleased, and very often
you manage to combine both needs. Kind-hearted and responsive, but
shrewd and self-protective at the same time, you are able to wriggle
out of unsafe situations in a quiet, invisible way. Yet your sympathies
extend to all the victims of life and people sense your non-judgmental
acceptance and undying spirit of camaraderie. You are often a great
comedian, and your subtle powers of observation and mimicry could
pay off in some way. But even if it does not bring a big financial
reward, your popularity is assured because people like being around
your soft-spoken, quietly humorous, sympathetic savvy. Although you
are often nervous and fidgety, you are just as tenacious when you
decide on something that is right for you. By stealth, intuition and
shrewd manoeuvre, you usually end up exactly where you want to be.
Emotionally you are very sentimental, moody and vulnerable,
prefering to fit in harmoniously rather than to create waves, although
this is not to say that you do not have strong ideals. Your inner life and
moral integrity is most real to you and there is no question of you
transgressing personal values. But you are an expert diplomat and most
times you will choose to give in to others rather than to argue points
that may lead to disharmony. You are the crab-fish, silently slithering
sideways out of the line of fire.
Although you are quite sociable, your need for quiet, reflective
periods on your own is also very pronounced. A simple life amidst
rural beauty where you can commune with nature would suit you just
fine. Or better yet, right near the sea where the sparkling scintillation
of light would inspire your artistic side. Balancing your vocation for
people with your need to nourish your own creative imagination and
self-expression is the great challenge in your life. Relationships
You have enormous love and warmth to give but you are cautious
about exposing yourself. Once you feel secure, loved and appreciated
you overcome your shyness and can literally flood your loved one with
devotion and affection. Terrifically romantic and idealistic, you may
have to be careful about your tendency to self-deception. You thrive on intimacy, and your love of giving plus your sense of the pathos of life
and love mean that you can get yourself into relationships that deplete
rather than enhance your well-being. A strong, earthy partner could be
very beneficial to you. Family life, which you will enjoy, should also
help to make you feel more rooted in reality, and therefore more
capable of realizing your own potential.
Your receptive ear will always encourage others to unburden their
souls, and your talent for protecting and comforting people may take
you into the counselling or caring professions. At any rate, your
responsive, sympathetic way with others means many will seek you
out as a confidant or sounding board for their ideas and dilemmas. You
make a good muse, but you will not be possessed. Your Greatest Strengths
Uncanny insight into people; unaffected humanity and capacity to give
your time, energy and warm, encouraging words of wisdom; artistic
sensitivity and appreciation for the intangible realm of emotions and
images; adaptability and diplomacy in the face of almost any difficulty. Your Greatest Weaknesses
Shyness and suspicion of others’ motives; a propensity to daydream
and to put people on pedestals; a tendency to wallow in self-doubt
instead of kicking into gear when you have an artistic inspiration; a
fear of getting hurt or being fooled, which can keep you withdrawn
and keep real relating at bay. Images for Integration
An artist teaches recuperating patients to paint the images of their
dreams in soft water colours … A lone sailboat offshore at sunset. Ol’
man river … he jes’ keeps rollin’ along. The musicals of Rodgers and
Hammerstein. Famous Personalities
Buckminster Fuller (inventor and philosopher), Oscar Hammerstein
(composer with Rodgers [below] of musicals), Deborah Harry (rock
singer), Herman Hesse (novelist), Helen Keller (blind and deaf writerlecturer), Gustav Mahler (composer), Camille Pissarro (impressionist
painter), Della Reese (singer), Richard Rodgers (composer with
Hammerstein [above] of musicals), Ginger Rogers (dancer and
actress), Robin Williams (actor and comedian), Richard Wilson (actor). Chapter Eight
SUN IN LEO S UN L EO —49—
M OON A RIES There are two things that will be believed of any man, and one of them
is that he has taken to drink.
BOOTH TARKINGTON
When a woman has twinkles in her eyes, no man notices if she has
wrinkles under them.
DOLORES DEL RIO Themes
FIRE/FIRE Self-confident; intuitive; abundance of ideas; passionate
and adventurous; courageous; dictatorial; reckless nobility; social
conscience yet self-centred; ambitious; hero-worship; vanity; great
integrity;
whole-hearted;
idealistic
dedication;
satirical;
unconventional.
Do you want to shine as part of the group or dazzle the world in your
own right? Are you a knight in shining armour or a bit of a Don
Quixote, looking for conquests that will define you but often ending up
a victim of your need for appreciation?
You have a large, warm-hearted, extroverted personality that is
always eager to embrace life, love and success – in big doses. There is
something about you that assumes the divine right to live life to the
full, and your intensity and impatience, along with your personal ambitions, will pull you ever onwards into new projects, fresh
relationships and greater challenges.
You are something of a gambler and have a daring and dramatic
spirit which propels you forward to make your mark, a sense of
personal destiny which can only be exciting and noble. And you are
prepared to fight for that glorious destiny if you have to, although you
would rather simply steal the show and convince everyone with your
intelligence, originality, courage and fabulous style.
One of your most beguiling qualities is that you are totally lacking
in guile and pretence. Although your own personal destiny is what
interests you, paradoxically you at first look for people you can admire
and make into personal heroes. Strongly influenced by a favourite
teacher, friend, poet, sports champion or movie star, you can then
emulate them and learn through experience how to be great. You love
the process of creating, as well as the applause that comes at the end.
Indeed, you rely on those adoring strokes and affirmative responses
more than you like to admit. Life without people would be colourless
and boring for you. Social interaction is your life-blood – you can be
the life of the party, a real ham and an eccentric, ready to take up the
most outrageous dare. But when your extrovert escapades dry up, so
do you. You may, in fact, drive yourself to exhaustion and then
collapse like a child, home from an all-night rave-up.
Yet despite your headlong rush into the experience of life, you are
not necessarily irresponsible. Daring and highly idealistic dreams work
away inside you and make you want to improve things, to show people
the way, and you may simply take charge – for a while. Intensely selfmotivated, you do not respond well to orders from others, even though
you can be quite bossy yourself. There is a touch of the preacher inside
you, and you approach your work with great enthusiasm and
commitment. You need space to do your own thing, to learn from your
own mistakes, and to learn how to impose your own brand of selfdiscipline. Your innate self-dramatizing tendencies make you a natural
for the theatre, business, lecturing, the media – areas that involve
group interaction and provide scope for your original and iconoclastic
ideas. Relationships
These are of intense importance for you, as you seek to experience life
and be consumed by it. Romantic, kind-hearted and intensely devoted
to your sweetheart, you will show your love in charming, even
chivalrous, dramatic ways when you have found the one. But you can
be brusque and demanding without realizing it, for your high standards
and varied interests are never far from your mind and often cause you
to talk too much and listen too little.
That high-powered energy never stops long enough to focus
sensitively on your partner’s needs, or on the boring household tasks
that have to be done. An earthy partner will help you to slow down and
pay the bills; a watery partner will fascinate you with their mysterious
depths – and you will find, if you give it time, that you also have those
same depths and emotional needs. Your Greatest Strengths
Personal courage; raw ambition; leadership abilities; intuitive
imagination; powers of persuasion; optimism; integrity; honourable
ideals; an uncomplicated desire to make your mark upon the world –
and leave the world a better place. Your Greatest Weaknesses
Overestimating your abilities; lack of objectivity and therefore a
proneness to let grandiosity trip you up; rashness with others;
recklessness and lack of self-criticism; tendency to let your ordinary
human, emotional needs get lost in the heat of your noble endeavours. Images for Integration
A knight errant dedicates his next grand adventure to the mistress of
his heart, and then rides off into the sunset in a cloud of dust … A
young child wakes in the morning with wide eyes and great
excitement, as a whole day of play lies ahead. Famous Personalities
Antonio Banderas (actor), Melvin Belli (attorney), Richard Belasco
(actor), Dash Crofts (rock musician), Dolores Del Rio (actress),
Ludwig Feuerbach (philosopher), Jerry Garcia (rock musician),
Whitney Houston (singer and actress), Jackie Kennedy Onassis
(widow, socialite and publisher), Alan Leo (pioneer astrologer),
Jennifer Lopez (singer), Kevin Spacey (actor), Roger Sperry (Nobel
prize-winning neurologist), Booth Tarkington (novelist). S UN L EO —50—
M OON T AURUS Whether you think Jesus was God or not, you must admit that he was a
first-rate political economist.
GEORGE BERNARD SHAW
For most people the fantasy is driving around in a big car, having all
the chicks you want and being able to pay for it.
MICK JAGGER Themes
FIRE/EARTH Love of grandeur; generous; magnetic; stubborn;
traditional; sensual; dictatorial; egocentric; administrator; regal; seeks
a powerful position; pragmatic; dependable; capable; productive;
materialistic; artistic flair; the showman; loyal; self-seeking.
Does your need for permanence inhibit your love of risk? Does your
fiery individualism get pulled into traditional grooves that make you
reluctant to try new things?
You have a powerful and confident, splashy sort of personality,
which combines the heights of extravagance with the pragmatism of
financial common sense. Your life is shaped by large ideals and you
make sure that you are the physical embodiment of your motivating fantasy – and it is usually a lucrative one which shows your best
profile. You can be vain and uncooperative, but also courageous,
dynamic, completely sincere and honourable. Sometimes your flair for
self-dramatization works against your painstakingly cautious side
which needs security and a full stomach. When the two sides of you
are working well together, you combine creative talent and shrewd
commercialism, and when you really get going you can create great
things in the artistic field or in the business world.
You are generous and fiercely loyal to those you love. In the main,
however, life starts and finishes with your needs, desires and goals.
Due to your unabashed and forthright honesty, people usually feel
comfortable around you. There is no doubting your position – it is as
plain as day. People will also know that you rarely budge. As a result,
they will most likely find other ways of working around you, as
arguments can be unpleasant.
Intensely stubborn and sure of yourself, you are not especially easy
to deal with if things are not going exactly the way you want them to.
And if your pride really gets out of hand you can fall into negative
moods and sullen inertia, and waste creative energy moaning about
unimportant things. More than anyone, you need to make sure you
have got your priorities right, and your view of life, love and money in
proportion. Your powers of attraction are formidable and you will get
what you value, sure as night follows day. Relationships
Emotionally you are intense but not overwhelmingly romantic or
vulnerable. You look for reliability in a mate, as well as someone who
is beautiful or handsome and interesting enough to enhance your own
self-image. You are a bit elitist, wanting the best in people, paintings,
poetry and provisions, but when these essentials are secure and you
feel you can be familiar with comrades, you can really let your hair
down and win the hedonist of the year award if you want to.
In intimate relationships you can be demanding and your vanity
may drive your sweetheart crazy at times. And yet you are constant
and diligent with your affections, and can surprise your partner with sudden displays of devotion – such as spur-of-the-moment tickets to
the opera or a candlelight dinner at the most expensive French
restaurant in town. Your appetites are large and fixed, and it takes a
fairly strong individual to influence you at all, let alone curb your
habits into more human proportions.
Everything you do is a result of your own values and free will. But
you are such an essentially positive and dependable person that you
more than make up for your proud grandiosity with your unwavering
integrity and capability. You have a great capacity for either enjoying
life or getting stuck in the mud – or rather in molten lava, which
interestingly enough repels all life at first but later gives rise to lush
rebirth in nature. You can be just as creative in a deeply permanent
sense when your Leo Sun and your Taurus Moon work cooperatively
within you. Your Greatest Strengths
Moral and emotional commitment to yourself and your goals; personal
charisma; staying power; ability to think big; capacity for hard work
and also to enjoy the good things of life; strong sense of responsibility
and unflappableness in times of crisis. Your Greatest Weaknesses
Tendency to be intensely subjective and biased, proud and inflexible
with inferiors; to be overtly selfish and withholding if offended; and to
speak out scathingly without thinking when a little diplomacy would
win people over and magically move the obstacles that seem to stand
in your way. Image for Integration
Old King Cole was a merry old soul, and a merry old soul was he; he
called for his wife and he called for his pipe and he called for his
fiddlers three. Pygmalion, My Fair Lady. Eliza Doolittle is transformed into a Duchess. God creates mankind out of the dust of the earth. A
master potter turns dull clay into an exquisite vase. Famous Personalities
Bill Clinton (American President), John Dryden (poet and dramatist),
Alexandre Dumas (dramatist and novelist), Ted Hughes (poet
laureate), Mick Jagger (rock musician), Arthur Janov (psychologist),
C.G. Jung (psychologist), E.F. Schumacher (philosopher and
economist), George Bernard Shaw (playwright and critic). —51—
S UN L EO M OON G EMINI For I dipt into the future, far as human eye could see Saw the Vision of
the world, and all the wonder that would be.
ALFRED , LORD TENNYSON
Love is at the core of my poems. I try to incarnate spiritual reality and
spiritualise or humanize material reality … A poet is, after all, an
animal with the sun in his belly.
RAYMOND ROSELEIP
Women must try to do things as men have tried. When they fail, their
failures must be but a challenge to others.
AMELIA EARHART Themes
FIRE/AIR Creative mind; warm spontaneity; humorous; both intuitive
and analytical; friendly; restless and sociable; clever and resourceful;
high aspirations; imagination; organizing ability; youthful spirit; proud
and independent; romantic; honourable but playful. Are you the cool-headed charmer who can pull out the right phrase and
the perfect smile to impress your new friend, colleague or boss? Do
you sense that you will have to take your ambitions seriously but find
you rebel against getting too serious and purposeful?
Even though you want to be active and live an important and
eventful life, you are essentially a big-hearted kid who looks for the
new, the amusing or the sensational in whatever environment you find
yourself. This keeps you on the hop, looking for purpose and play at
the same time. But you figure things out quickly, make new ideas your
own with astonishing facility, and instinctively move into interesting
and influential positions where you can express your social and
communicative talents, as well as handle responsibility with casual
aplomb.
You are adaptable as well as ambitious, and this makes you a
perennial student, always mentally geared up to apply the usefulness of
an idea and to try out a new method. And if you have been strictly
forbidden to do so, you will enjoy it even more.
You certainly find people interesting and have a nose for gossip
and the analytical discussion of a wide variety of things – from
children and preferred educational approaches to love and literature.
But a clear eye for the things that really matter, plus a talent for
expressing what you mean persuasively and with real feeling, make
you an excellent manager or teacher – you will shine in any area where
the challenging energy flow of group dynamics must be handled
intelligently and firmly.
You quite like being in charge – for a while – but it is quite likely
that eventually you will find hierarchical relationships too rigid and
stultifying for your taste. You also like being admired and being
popular. That always helps to silence that self-deprecating little voice
inside you that is never quite sure what you are thinking, feeling, and if
the right choice has been made.
You have an intelligent certainty about you when you explain
yourself and your views and goals, but your noble integrity always
falls short of pomposity as you would simply get bored with being
right all the time. You enjoy travel and change and know that you can learn a lot from others. This makes you ideally suited for work that
involves variety, quick-thinking and communicating.
You are an opportunist in the most positive sense, as your
optimism, intuition and mental/verbal speed usually come together just
in time to save you from disaster, and put you in exactly the right
place. Indeed, you can be extraordinarily well organized and do
exceptionally well at anything that presents a challenge and grabs your
imagination.
Essentially you are a thinking activist who combines a
philosophical social conscience with an irreverent, light-hearted
disdain for anyone who takes life too seriously. Faced with life’s
problems, you shrug your shoulders with a perceptive wisecrack, and
then determine to do your bit to make the sun shine again upon the
darkling world. Relationships
‘In the Spring a young man’s fancy lightly turns to thoughts of love’ –
or so says Lord Tennyson, a fellow Leo – Gemini. This describes
something essential about your romantic style – you love that new
feeling of falling in love, and your penchant for variety can make you a
difficult person to catch and keep. You are deeply affectionate and, in
your unique way, very loyal to loved ones. If a new person embodies a
familiar or favourite ideal, however, you will want to add this
individual to your wide circle of loved ones.
You have a childlike innocence which does not wear well in
relationships. As your lively, inquisitive mind never stops for long, you
may need to take care that you do not deplete yourself emotionally.
Unbeknown to you, your constant busyness could be a ploy to avoid
the more subtle levels of relating with others.
When you have nothing left to analyse, and have to face your
feelings, you can slip into quite a despondent mood, like a young child
who discovers she is lost. When you remain out of touch with your
feelings, a kind of cynicism creeps into your bright personality, so that
you seem to veer from having a trusting confidence in the goodwill of
others to a disdain for those who have broken faith. Intimate relationships will
independence. challenge your assumption of supreme Your Greatest Strengths
A fine mind; quick wit; open-hearted friendliness; organizational
abilities; optimism and resilience; the original way in which you
combine high ideals with a love of adventure and an instinct for
opportunity. Your Greatest Weaknesses
A tendency to rationalize; general restlessness and fickleness in
emotional affairs; proneness to manifest all the undesirable qualities of
the rebellious child when it pleases you to do so. Images for Integration
On a bright summer’s day a butterfly turns into a radiant being …
Children singing ‘Happy Birthday to you’ at a celebrity birthday party. Famous Personalities
Kate Beckinsale (actress), Amelia Earhart (pioneer aviator), Norris and
Ross McWhirter (twin authors of Guinness Book of Records ), Benito
Mussolini (Italian dictator), Raymond Roseleip (poet), Clive Sinclair
(inventor and entrepreneur), Alfred, Lord Tennyson (poet). S UN L EO —52—
M OON C ANCER Child! do not throw this book about; Refrain from the unholy pleasure
Of cutting all the pictures out! Preserve it as your chiefest treasure.
HILAIRE BELLOC The secret is to be true to yourself.
BERNICE RUBENS
I don’t want to live – I want to love first, and live incidentally.
ZELDA FITZGERALD Themes
FIRE/WATER Emotional; vulnerable; ardent; self-dramatizing; funny;
poetic; intuitive; individualistic; big-hearted; love of family life;
sociable; sensitive; understanding; maternal/paternal; proud; colourful
and receptive personality.
Are you the loveable, radiant star of the show or are you too busy in
the kitchen making pâté de foie gras to play elegant host or hostess?
Are you domineering and self-assured, or impressionable, moody and
shy?
You may sometimes want a safe, simple life where you feel
emotionally contained and able to pursue your own creative interests.
Then, however, the compulsion to strive for a more central, leading
role rears its challenging head, and you know you have it in you – so
out into the spotlight you go. So immense is your creative energy as
well as your warm feeling for others that you can become both the
artistic home-maker and the home-loving artist/writer/entrepreneur.
Your personality is large and welcoming, colourful and theatrical
because you have such an uncanny knack of dramatizing your vivid
impressions and selling yourself in the most genuine, heartfelt way.
Both the paternal and the maternal urge is strong in you. You need
to use your will to project and establish your identity in the world, and
to use your instincts to nurture and protect your emotional and material
security. The Sun and the Moon are in their ‘home’ signs here, so that
potentially you have the creative vision of Apollo and the lunar
wisdom of Diana all rolled into one. This can make you pretty
overpowering at times, and indeed you need a partner and a family on
whom you can lavish your emotions. Your bearing is often aristocratic, sometimes haughty,
oversensitive and self-absorbed, but you always seem to have enough
affection to go around so that no one feels left out. You also manage to
remain approachable and compassionate because you are so aware of
your own vulnerability and need to be loved. Thus you make a warm
and understanding friend, and you enjoy expressing your feelings with
original flair and thoughtfulness. You are protective, possessive and
clannish, a stalwart member of your family, group and nation, and
utterly devoted to your ideals. Deeply honourable and dependable, you
bring an attitude of devotion and romantic style to all you do.
You may have a good head for business because you possess an
instinctive knowledge of security needs as well as a shrewd
understanding of people, their desires, fears and foibles. Your refined
taste for comfort and beauty is part of the impetus for success – you
know your own mind and do not easily budge from your preferences
and high standards. Aesthetic sensitivity is strong, and combined with
your innate tenacity and quiet ambition means that you could be quite
successful in the arts.
Even though you readily turn a bright face to the world, you do not
always feel confident and strong. You have a lively sense of
individuality, but your potency is sometimes too dependent on
emotional familiarity, and the range of your self-expression too
circumscribed within repetitive emotional patterns. Inwardly you shy
away from encounters with the big, bad world, and early in life you
may need to find ways of handling challenges that normally push the
panic button. This will not be hard for you because your creative drive
is tremendous and your individuality needs recognition. Relationships
You are the classic romantic – ardent, generous, tender, touchy, loyal,
and just a little self-dramatizing. Your need to be adored is matched by
your capacity to adore and lavish love and devotion on your partner.
And when you find the right one, you want to build a happy empire
together with a sign out front saying, and really meaning, ‘home sweet
home’. Having both a healthy sense of your own needs and a genuine sensitivity to others makes you a ‘relationship’ sort of person: you
engage with your lover powerfully, you reveal your vulnerability and
take risks, you get hurt and overreact, but your robustness helps you
bounce back and give as good as you get. In love you are both nononsense and sweet, and your nature exudes a demand for sincerity
and commitment. Whoever falls in love with you will have their work
cut out, because you love passionately and possessively, and also
because you enjoy being a little complex and like to be ‘figured out’
when in the grip of a bad mood. But despite the anxieties that in the
end propel you to come to know yourself well, you know you’re worth
it! Your Greatest Strengths
Vulnerability; openness to other’s experiences; deep sense of integrity
and personal loyalty to standards and to loved ones; rich imagination
and colourful expressiveness; hugely creative spirit. Your Greatest Weaknesses
Engulfing emotionalism; tendency to be so self-absorbed that you
drown out or distort all signals from the environment; proneness to
sulk when you do not get your way. Images for Integration
A young child sits on a throne, and with great dignity and tenderness,
crowns his father and mother king and queen … A man and a woman
walk hand in hand along the edge of the sea at high noon on a
summer’s day. Famous Personalities
Ethel Barrymore (actress), Hilaire Belloc (writer), Halle Berry
(actress), Clara Bow (actress), Yvonne Cawley (tennis player), Claude
Debussy (composer), Guy de Maupassant (writer), Zelda Fitzgerald (writer and wife of F. Scott Fitzgerald), Llewellyn George (politician),
Geri Halliwell (‘Spice Girl’), Omar Khayyam (poet), Princess
Margaret, Annie Oakley (markswoman), Ira Progoff (psychologist),
Kenny Rogers (country singer), Bernice Rubens (novelist). S UN L EO —53—
M OON L EO Was this then how youth, how life should truly be? No endless poring
over books and dusty manuscripts, but acting out the glory of the word
made flesh? Such tenderness! Such breathless apprehension of the
mystery in things! And afterwards, such peace!
LINDSAY CLARKE , author of The Chymical Wedding
To be a poet is a condition rather than a profession.
ROBERT GRAVES
Children are our most valuable natural resource.
HERBERT HOOVER Themes
FIRE/FIRE Warm; enthusiastic; magnetic; authoritative presence;
demonstrative; generous; arrogant; single-minded; visionary; poetic;
intensely creative; dramatic; vain; open; playful; proud; flair for
showing your best side; magnanimous.
You are larger than life. Into the Big Time, you simply dazzle yourself
and others with the magnitude and charisma of your bearing. You tend
to forget details, however, believing this to be someone else’s job.
Everyone has a place and a purpose, and yours is centre-stage. And
when you have finally found the centre of your own true,
magnanimous, creative self you really will get to the core of your life
and be able to inspire a lot of other people on the way. To discover and nurture your vision of yourself may require a
certain amount of introversion, and so you may be a rather moody
person a lot of the time. You can be fiercely happy and full of vitality
or you can be stern and tyrannical, compelled by the absolute inner
certitude of your perceptions. Your tremendous magnetism dominates
your environment, and it will do so either beneficently or despotically,
depending upon whether or not your ego dominates you.
The Leonine ego is not easy to satisfy, as it gives you a need for
very tangible expressions of your creative power, and to feel that you
are in control. This could take you onto the stage where you can
command absolute attention, or into an executive position in the
business world where both your creative intellect and your personal
magnetism will have a potent influence. If your life is centred in the
family, you will make a wonderful parent who takes pride in your
children and delights in watching them grow into unique individuals,
although there may be times when you are unsure as to who is the
child and who is the parent.
Your sense of self, the self you aspire to become, is mythological
in its proportions. Either consciously or unconsciously, you are always
on a journey towards self-recognition. In the process you are likely
both to alienate and stir many people. Although you have a strong
social conscience, you are an individualist and need to stand out from
the group in some way. You appear and desperately want to believe
that you are completely confident and the authority on whatever it is
that occupies your attention. Underneath, however, you tend to be
always keenly aware of others’ response to you, and your reliance on
your audience’s reactions is the key to your essential vulnerability.
You tend to be so absorbed in your own ideals and activities that
you forget that the outside world does not revolve around you in the
same way as your inner one does. Nothing is quite so important to you
as your own world, and it is this intense subjectivity and inability to
detach from your own committed view of things that gives you
problems in relationships. A childlike naivety attaches to your warm,
radiant personality, and you genuinely feel hurt when accused of wilful
self-importance. Your life feels meaningless if everything about it is
not an extension of yourself. Relationships
Emotionally you are generous, passionate, fiercely loyal, trusting,
chivalrous and romantic. You offer deep devotion to your loved ones,
but in return require equally massive doses of love, tenderness and
admiration – and an understanding from your mate that you have
Important Things to think about. You can also be jealous and
demanding, difficult to please, and strangely cold and imperious if you
do not receive the kind of attention and gratitude you feel you deserve.
Although you are a warm and affectionate person for whom love is
a very important part of life, you are not always easy to live with. But
when you can add some earthy wisdom and a sense of humour to your
noble integrity and high standards, you are an exciting and uplifting
individual to be around. You generate optimism and hope for others,
and they love you for that and much, much more. Your Greatest Strengths
Generosity; creative intuitions; powerful intellect; dignity and nobility
and insistence on seeing the same in others; courageous moral sense;
ability to uplift magically the spirits of all those with whom you come
in contact. Your Greatest Weaknesses
Vanity and arrogance; self-centredness and inflexibility; tendency to be
gullible and to let flattery impair your judgment; temperamental
tantrums when things do not go your way. Images for Integration
A child in an Edenic paradise builds a beautiful sandcastle in the
sunshine with all the creatures of nature in joyous attendance … In full
pageantry, the new king is crowned before his kingdom. Famous Personalities
Brian Aldiss (science-fiction writer), Dame Janet Baker (mezzosoprano), Lindsay Clarke (author), Robert Graves (writer and poet),
Max Heindel (metaphysician), Herbert Hoover (former American
president), Peter O’Toole (actor), Martin Sheen (actor), Patrick Swayze
(actor), Charlize Theron (actress), Barbara Windsor (actress). S UN L EO —54—
M OON V IRGO I was not made for group activity, I just wasn’t.
ROBERT REDFORD
A good review from the critics is just another stay of execution.
DUSTIN HOFFMAN Themes
FIRE/EARTH Dedicated; ethical; intellectual; kind-hearted and
purposeful; highly moral; capable; striving for excellence; noblesse
oblige; choosy; critical; temperamental; restrained charm; articulate;
discriminating taste; the artisan.
Are you the imperious king or the humble servant? There is a lot of
both in you, and sometimes you struggle with that fact. You have a
radiant, regal, strong spirit and a self-effacing, timid, over-critical inner
voice that keeps you looking and working for perfection.
You are the actor’s actor, the introverted orator, the mystical
scholar, the devoted housewife, the magical trainer of young minds.
You have an independent, idealistic nature and will do exactly what
you believe is right, but underneath you are not quite as sure of
yourself as you seem, and you rely on others’ good opinion more than
you care to admit.
Your desire for excellence can make you a bit prudish, highminded, aloof, self-contained and nervous. If only you could relax more you would be able to influence others strongly with your
dedication and talents, and with your aesthetic sensitivity and
controlled charm which is just waiting to get out. When you feel
nervous, your efforts to delegate may come across as officious and
schoolmarmish. Nevertheless, your tremendous integrity, kindness,
consideration and thoroughness in all you do usually inspires respect
and admiration in others.
You know you have something important to contribute, but as you
hate pretension you tend to analyse and re-analyse yourself until your
confidence ends up severely dented. When, however, you get your
Virgoan precision channelling your Leonine vision, you really know
what you want and go straight for it. It is then that what you produce in
a practical sense will define you in a spiritual sense, as you aim to put
your best self into all your labours with great attention to detail.
A certain chastity of mood and inner tenacity gives you moral
force, and this makes you a good teacher, counsellor – and friend. You
always try to live up to an inner ideal, and through patience and
doggedness you show others that true fulfilment lies in selfless service
to this ideal. For you, the root of dignity must lie in humility, although
it may take some time to realize that this is the answer to your inner
self-contradictions.
You need a creative outlet, some kind of a stage. This can be either
grand or humble – the smooth running of a household or a theatre
company – but it must give you the opportunity to pour your whole
self into the challenge. And a sort of old-fashioned sense of noblesse
oblige does not let you rest until you have ploughed some of your
intense, individualistic energy into altruistic ventures, like the Boy
Scout leader who inspires virtue and courage in others by just being
himself. You aim for excellence but you instinctively know that
practice makes perfect and that perfection takes a lifetime. Relationships
In matters of the heart, too, chronic nit-picking can undermine your
creative energy, and being too exacting with others can cause friction
in close relationships. You can be warm and demonstrative, caring and protective, and yet incredibly fussy and touchy about some of the most
minute domestic details.
Requiring lots of attention and very particular care from your loved
one, you also need room to run things your own way, and can feel
easily wounded if others do not bow to your superior knowledge. Your
innate diplomacy and courtesy can freeze into huffiness if this
happens, and you can suddenly withdraw your warmth under a
fastidious, fault-finding defence.
When you get lots of devotion and emotional pampering, you are
happy and trusting, and your Leonine confidence radiates its
benevolence. You are something of a recluse, even though your social
manners are of the Emily Post variety when you do mix with society.
But still, your private life and personal career are more important to
you than group movements. Your devotion is to personal goals and
standards, but when you are appreciated for the person you have
become through stamina and talent, you radiate largess and deep
contentment. Your Greatest Strengths
A sound, analytical mind and articulate expression; devotion to duty
and aspiration to personal excellence; ability to inspire others with the
results of your practice-makes-perfect creed. Your Greatest Weaknesses
A tendency to be too pedantic, high-minded and critical; to hide your
insecurities under a pushy and defiant exterior; and to sulk in a selfpitying way when you feel slighted. Image for Integration
After the ball, Cinderella polishes the floor until its shiny surface
perfectly reflects her happy, contented face. Famous Personalities
Princess Anne, Vida Blue (baseball player), Ann Blyth (singer and
actress), Emperor Claudius, Rajiv Gandhi (politician), Dustin Hoffman
(actor), Myrna Loy (actress), Madonna (singer), Ricardo Muti
(conductor), Frederic Raphael (writer), Robert Redford (actor and
director), J.K. Rowling (writer). S UN L EO —55—
M OON L IBRA He passed a cottage with a double coach-house A cottage of gentility!
And he owned with a grin That his favourite sin Is pride that apes
humility.
ROBERT SOUTHEY
Only a fool would assert that there is no more on Rembrandt’s canvas
than paint, nothing on Mozart’s music-paper but notes.
BERNARD LEVIN Themes
FIRE/AIR Gracious; charming and expressive; out-going; intellectual
curiosity; authoritative but cooperative; diplomatic nobility; artistic;
powerful imagination; love of luxury; romantic idealism; regal
friendliness; polished individualism; imperious but tolerant; animated
communicator; refined sociability.
Are you an independent, confident, even imperious sort of person who
gets caught out by just how much you care about other people’s view
of you? Do you think of yourself as very individualistic, even a
maverick, and then find yourself conforming to custom with seeming
conviction and finesse?
You have a prestigious, compelling presence, even when you are
just clowning around, and a natural ability to command both respect
and affection from your friends and colleagues. In the nicest possible way you assume the position of the leader because you have a strong
independent streak and believe in your lofty, worthy ideals, but you
also gravitate towards collaboration and an impartial examination of
the facts.
You can be bossy and yet your bossiness is so diplomatic that it is
convincing, even impressive. Although you want esteem and tend to
identify with honourable goals and people, you can work alongside
others you respect and you really want the best for everyone. You have
style, and you instinctively know that ‘manners maketh man’ and that,
if for some reason they don’t, they go a long way in making life worth
living.
When you come into your own, you develop a strongly aesthetic
approach to life and are naturally creative. You need a very positive,
active medium through which to express yourself, such as drama,
teaching or running your own business. Anything to do with beauty
and harmony will interest you, such as decorating, design and painting.
Your interest in social equality may take you into politics or the law.
You have a strong sense of yourself and will stubbornly follow
your own personal code of ethics, yet you also enjoy being part of a
group that has a common purpose or bond. You cherish ideals of
liberty and equality, but if there are some distasteful tasks to perform
you can move very smoothly into the role of delegating – well, you
think, someone has to give the orders around here or we would have no
harmony at all!
Although you seem to enjoy an easy, breezy approach to life, there
is quite a serious side to your personality, and you can be suprisingly
controversial and provocative. You are willing to stand up and be
counted, and perhaps make it look easy. You have a natural
appreciation and enjoyment of the good things of life; you will assume
that they should be yours by birthright. And through cunning charm,
calculated boldness, and intelligent manoeuvre you manage to have
plenty. Relationships You are a very social being – warm-hearted, romantic, eager to engage
with another and to create ‘magic’ together. In your imagination you
give your all for love, but in practice you are often more rational, very
pragmatic, reasonable and helpful. You have bags of charm and can
give and receive affection easily. But you need more than affection;
you also need verbal love games and the sharing of ideas and ideals.
You want to share an elegant domestic life with your loved one,
and your home needs to be stimulating, full of books, music,
conversation and interesting people. But you need to beware that an
unconscious preciousness does not blind you to the fact that others do
not always agree with you. You have a sensitive ego and you will be
challenged in a close relationship to express yourself wholeheartedly
and vulnerably whilst acknowledging how much you depend on your
loved one’s response.
When you can tame your wilful, rebellious, independent side, or at
least get it into a manageable size, emotional relationships will go
more smoothly and you will discover how easy it is for you to make
things work. A bit of flattery and tenderness goes a long way for you.
If you are absolutely convinced that he or she feels honoured and ‘over
the Moon’ to have you, you will gladly do the washing up. Your Greatest Strengths
Integrity and love of justice and honour; appreciation of beauty and
excellence and the good things of life; diplomatic charm and
organizational skills; idealism and desire to give people the benefit of
the doubt; the unique artistic style you bring to all you do. Your Greatest Weaknesses
Vanity and unconscious snobbery; self-righteousness when it comes to
social behaviour and morality; proneness to develop lazy habits;
tendency to lean on others without always acknowledging their
support. Images for Integration
Jeeves the butler welcomes Bertie home with a jolly party of artists,
important personages and eccentric friends … A monarch discusses
poetry with a visiting diplomat …The Actors’ Guild stages a political
rally. Famous Personalities
Helena Blavatsky (occultist), Fidel Castro (Cuban statesman and
communist prime minister), Wilt Chamberlain (champion basketball
player), Julia Child (television chef and cookery writer), John Derek
(actor), Paul Dirac (physicist and mathematician), Knut Hamsun
(Nobel prize-winning Norwegian novelist), Bernard Levin (writer,
satirist and music critic), Robert Southey (poet), Esther Williams
(actress). S UN L EO —56—
M OON S CORPIO
I love a lassie. Keep right on to the end of the road.
SONGS OF SIR HARRY LAUDER
I do believe in the evolution of consciousness as the only thing which
we can embark on, or in fact, willy-nilly, are embarked on.
CONRAD AIKEN Themes
FIRE/WATER Imperious; extraordinarily magnetic personality;
fiercely loyal; hard-working; arrogant; self-dramatizing; strong
appetites; stubborn and possessive; defiant; powerful instincts; fanatic when motivated; star quality; deep integrity; shrewd; ambitious.
Are you a classy show-off who wants the best and is ready to believe
everyone loves you, or are you a complex and intensely guarded soul
who hides a tangled inner world of doubt, longing and emotional
strategies? Do you have a noble, sunny identity and aspirations to
excellence which, however, seem to be undermined by a more
brooding, suspicious, emotional nature?
You are a magnetic, fascinating and powerful individual, and your
bark is just about as bad as your bite. Likewise, however, your power
to create, to spread beneficence and to reap substantial reward for
yourself is equally great. It is all a matter of mastering your powerful
desires and fears, which have a way of taking over and running the
show, as well as your innate talents and your instinct for conquest and
control.
You are not a good loser. You aim to win and, by hook or by crook,
you will. But by becoming more aware of what is going on inside you
– your motives, fears and suspicions – you will be able to find a more
workable balance between your powerful, extrovert tendencies and
your cautious, introverted side. This is easier said than done, however,
because you are the sort of person who naturally goes to extremes, and
there are times when this extremist quality, coupled with your innate
stubbornness, creates not a little havoc in your personal life.
Nevertheless, you are a survivor, incredibly persistent in pursuit of
your goals, and often very ingenious and imaginative in the way you
get around problems. People may be fascinated by the mystique that
surrounds your personality, and sometimes taken aback by the sheer
force of your ‘want’-power.
You appear, at first, to be completely out-going and up-front, but
you have ways of letting it be known that there is a world of secrets
within, that one cannot read this book by its cover. This secret
dimension can be a great source of power to you, especially when you
are assessing the environment for important facts and favourable
trends, and quietly organizing your plan of action. But it can also
burden you unnecessarily if you harbour fears, resentment, anger and
jealousy for too long. Your creative powers are truly considerable, and you more than anyone therefore need to develop the power of positive
thinking, as well as a more detached awareness of your voracious and
vulnerable ego.
Powerful emotions will either help or hinder your path to selfexpression. The more you can honestly confront what is eating you,
without feeling that you are losing face, the more you are likely to end
up the hero of your own story. You simply will not be rushed – you
will work at your own pace and must be your own boss, even if you
are in the employ of someone else.
You have a lot of pride and feel you know how you want things
done. Interference from others, even though it may be well-intended,
usually gets a negative response from you – how dare anyone rain on
your parade? You will over-react even if you actually do want some
help, or at least support, because you do not feel comfortable in any
kind of dependent position. You were made for leadership, autonomy
and the lap of luxury! Relationships
You are a person of enormous passion and emotional complexity, and
whoever loves you has their work cut out. Although you need security
and can be undyingly loyal (and obsessively possessive), you may be
unaware that you tend to have a double standard when it comes to
relationships. You bitterly resent any encroachment on your own
freedom, but at the same time demand absolute fidelity and, if
possible, obedience, from your loved one.
You enjoy drama, even a touch of danger, and you need to be
aware of your tendency to throw tantrums and create unhealthy scenes
just to stir things up. You need a partner who is just as interested in
sexual passion as yourself, and who does not mind being tested from
time to time. On the whole, you are likely to find more happiness in
love if you learn to relax and trust more, keep fewer secrets and admit
that you feel pretty vulnerable and out of control at times. It will make
you, paradoxically, a stronger person and a more sensitive lover. Your Greatest Strengths
Creative talents; inscrutable belief in yourself; willpower;
indefatigueable determination to succeed; deep personal loyalties to
principles and loved ones; personal charisma and astuteness which
makes you a natural leader – if you ever choose to lead anyone other
than yourself! Your Greatest Weaknesses
Arrogance and tendency to over-extend yourself; lack of detachment;
fanatical desire for personal success and survival; temper tantrums and
stubborn resentment when things do not go your way; proneness to let
phobias and a cynical attitude to life limit your potential for happiness. Images for Integration
The conception of a divine child takes place during a total eclipse of
the Sun … A fateful, passionate love affair between the queen and a
mysterious, wandering peasant. Famous Personalities
Ben Affleck (actor), Conrad Aiken (poet), Alex Haley (author), Alfred
Hitchcock (film director), Stanley Kubrick (film director and writer),
John Logie Baird (inventor of television), Matthew Perry (actor), The
Queen Mother, Karlheinz Stockhausen (composer), Terry Wogan
(television personality). S UN L EO —57—
M OON S AGITTARIUS Be prepared to accept such good fortunes as the Gods offer.
SIR ALEXANDER FLEMING Two antagonistic influences … one to mount direct to heaven, the other
to drive yawingly to some horizontal goal.
HERMAN MELVILLE Themes
FIRE/FIRE Hero-worship; honourable; adventurous; passionate;
outspoken; intuitive; independent; loyal; proud; generous; warm
sincerity; romantic visionary; restless; sociable; imperious;
impractical; impatient.
Are you the self-confident leader attached to home and empire, who
sometimes feels like shirking all responsibilities, throwing caution to
the wind and hitting the road for some new adventure? You are a
combination of fixed, self-centred creativity and the restless striving
for novelty and knowledge. You may be the kingly nomadic, the
travelling entertainer, the daredevil extrovert, the lucky artist, the regal
philosopher, the captain of the team. You are self-assured, proud and
resilient, and you have so much enthusiasm and imagination you
sometimes may not know what to do with it.
A nobility of spirit coupled with the savvy of a gambling gypsy
combines to make you a creative adventurer wherever you turn up, and
usually you play the hero. Essentially a restless explorer, either
geographically or in the mental realms, you react rebelliously against
being trapped in any one place, job, philosophy or relationship. Your
instinct is to go, go, go, and to exploit personal potential in the most
immediate and exciting way.
You are autocratic in style but egalitarian in spirit. Friendly, ready
to get involved with others, full of innovative ideas and original ways
of viewing things, you easily see the ‘big picture’, and find it
challenging to see how many ways there are for fitting the various
pieces of the whole together. Your inner ideals constitute the ‘real’
world for you and always serve as a guide to action and behaviour.
Because you are intensely honourable, you can seem somewhat
high-minded at times, even though you are one of the most kindhearted souls in the zodiac. Enthusiasm and eagerness for adventure makes it hard for you to say no, but the result of your intense, speedy
and risk-taking ways can be instability. You may have enormous
financial swings, as well as a lot of domestic disarray. This is because
‘doing your own thing’ – which means being allowed to dream up and
pursue possibilities with the minimum of accountability – will almost
always take precedence over completing yesterday’s tasks.
This is not to say that you are anything other than utterly honest
and moral. Integrity is your middle name; you detest human hypocrisy
and will feel personally called upon to expose it where you find it.
Indeed you can be very contemptuous of those whose moral standards
fall too low to qualify, in your view, as human. But life for you is
essentially about exploring, creating and giving free rein to your
imagination, and creating in the here and now. Relationships
Emotionally you are pretty challenging, too. Naturally generous with
your affections as well as with any material goods you have, you may
need more than one person on whom you can bestow your fun-loving
beneficence. You can, in fact, be quite exhausting. One famous owner
of this combination once said, ‘I find myself interesting – but tiring.’
Restless, passionate and somewhat nervous, you do not like things
getting too heavy, and you avoid like the plague being given a verbal
list of your childish faults. You need intellectual rapport with your
partner, and to share your romantic vision of life – to live out your
myth of the adventurous hero – with someone who will not interfere
with your independent escapades of body, mind, and spirit. Just make
sure, however, that you learn how to share taking out the rubbish and
doing the washing-up, as well.
A kind of manic ‘upness’ and constant pursuit of excitement may
mask a hidden fear of being ordinary and bound by mortal limits, and
you may be prone to unexplainable bouts of depression. The more you
can pause for self-reflection, appreciate what your senses are reporting
and tune into the more tender moments of intimacy, the less will you
experience imbalance in your life. This will also enable you to bring to fruition more of your creative ideas – and to enjoy the rewards of your
labours with less impatience. Your Greatest Strengths
High personal standards; broad and far-ranging intuitive mind;
enthusiasm for learning and for personal development; and your open,
resilient and positive friendliness towards others. Your Greatest Weaknesses
Restlessness and inability to tie yourself down for long to relationships
or projects; tendency to jump before thinking things through; and to
dismiss ideas or others arrogantly with brusque, sarcastic
pronouncements that wound far more than you intend. Images for Integration
Merlin the Magician teaches young Arthur the mysteries of algebra,
alchemy and archery … The knight in shining armour wins a game of
poker and the drinks are on the house. Famous Personalities
Sri Aurobindo (guru), Ray Bradbury (writer), Sir Alexander Fleming
(scientist), Lisa Kudrow (actress), Lawrence of Arabia (soldier and
writer), Herman Melville (author), Sally Struthers (actress), Ellen
Yoakum (healer). S UN L EO —58—
M OON C APRICORN We must laugh at man to avoid crying for him.
Religion is excellent stuff for keeping common people quiet. NAPOLEON BONAPARTE
The world is charged with the grandeur of God.
GERARD MANLEY HOPKINS Themes
FIRE/EARTH Ambitious; proud of achievements; workaholic;
practical visionary; the self-centred child and the wise old man;
laughter and sadness; sprightly and sombre; self-demanding;
domineering; organized and purposeful; stubborn and temperamental;
the authoritative leader; the ardent chief; the sombre star.
Do you imagine yourself in a position of power and acclaim, but then
quietly quake when you realize how much depends on you? Do you
naturally put your best foot forward and easily impress the world, but
hide an inner world of loneliness and hunger for love? Are you
supremely self-assured or deeply self-doubting?
You have immense vitality and purposeful ambition. Quite simply,
you want to get on with the job and achieve your aims. So determined
are you that your gaze rarely deviates from the road most likely to
succeed. But you may not realize how much your ego is depending on
those glorious achievements. Worldly recognition, in the form of
rewards, university degrees, badges of honour, positions of authority,
applause from those who matter most and fat cheques to put in the
bank, is what you want. You have the disposition of the megastar who
will not rest until she is convinced that she has arrived and can call the
shots.
Although you wish to shine and be well thought of, you often
gravitate towards solitude, preferring your own company. Despite a
spontaneous, childlike creativity, you need to be in charge and to
formalize all that you do. In your path upwards, however, you tend to
take yourself too seriously and forget to take other people’s lives – and
feelings – into consideration. Arrogance is your downfall, and
passionate perseverence your strength. If you can develop compassion as well, you will gain the affection as well as the respect of your
comrades.
There is about you a great vitality, sense of adventure and joie de
vivre, and yet also a guarded, serious, self-protective side which has
experienced, and almost expects, setbacks. Your punch and vigour
contrast with your matter-of-fact formality and desire to get things
finished and under control. In this guarded side there is considerable
tension, a kind of defensive anxiety which keeps you ready for life’s
attack.
Early in life your shyness may hold you back, but later you mould
your vulnerability into self-controlled polish so you can deal with the
outer world effectively. Authority figures may have crushed your
confidence at one point, and as a result you want to become strong,
even impervious to criticism. You are the type who can pull yourself
up by your bootstraps, determined to make good in the world and
rarely letting anything prevent you from reaching your aim.
You have a need to shine, to be seen and appreciated for your
unique individuality, and your Capricorn Moon will help you stick to
the work at hand so that your success as a professional will be assured.
You will be made aware of the power of the media and, if you are in a
profession that puts you in front of the public, you will rapidly learn
how to use publicity to put forward your best profile. Your biggest
challenge may be learning how to relax and let go of your defences
when you are not in front of the camera, which, of course, is a lot of
the time! Relationships
You are not sure whether you are a hermit or a socialite. You can be
either, and will probably go through phases of putting work first and
then, when you feel acceptably secure, jumping into romance with
lusty enthusiasm. You are romantic, devoted and love being
extravagant towards your loved ones.
You have a deep respect for traditional values and you are as loyal
as the day is long. At times, however, you can be demanding, stubborn
and vain, letting your touchy ego rear with wounded dignity if you are not ‘handled’ in just the right way. You are paradoxical because you
would like someone who could devote themselves to your needs, but
you also want your partner to be someone you can show off, someone
of whom you are proud.
Your independence, toughness and self-preoccupation will soften
with experience, when you have learned to laugh at yourself more
easily, and when personal successes let you feel more secure. Your Greatest Strengths
Ambition; diligence; ability to carry plans through; practical intellect,
which can assess facts accurately and organize accordingly; courage
and powers of leadership; and the enthusiasm and personal commitment you bring to all your responsibilites and pleasures; courage and
steadfastness. Your Greatest Weaknesses
A need to dominate and be in control; impatience with imperfection;
the way in which you hide insecurities behind an impermeable
arrogance and a false intellectual stance; an insensitive sweeping aside
of other people’s needs, views and feelings; arrogant ruthlessness. Images for Integration
An orphan rummages in the attic and finds an old geneaology book
which maps out the family tree of her long-lost, forgotten royal
ancestors … A prince organizes his father the King’s weekly schedule. Famous Personalities
Lucille Ball (actress), Napoleon Bonaparte (French soldier and
emperor), Ernst Cassirer (philosopher), Joe Chambers (rock musician),
Teng Hsiao-Ping (Chinese politician), Gerard Manley Hopkins (poet),
Yves Saint Laurent (fashion designer), Arnold Schwarzenegger (actor),
Norman Schwarzkopf (army general), Joe Weber (satirical comedian). S UN L EO —59—
M OON A QUARIUS Idealism increases in direct proportion to one’s distance from the
problem.
JOHN GALSWORTHY
‘Who in the world is this?’ inquired Johnny Townmouse. But after the
first exclamation of surprise he instantly recovered his manners.
BEATRIX POTTER, FROM THE The Tale of Johnny Townmouse
If I should die think only this of me That there’s some corner of a
foreign field That is for ever England …
RUPERT BROOKE Themes
FIRE/AIR Aristocratic; vivid imagination; idealistic; truthful; friendly;
proud; theatrical; broad-minded; loyal; strong social force; love of
friendship; standing out within the group; extreme individualist; deep
convictions; spiritual strength; noble bearing.
Do you want passion and stardom or freedom and friendship? Do you
want to woo the audience or to help and befriend them? Sometimes
you want both, but always you are the individual who stands out in a
crowd.
Fiery, proud, romantic and inspirational, you feel great concern for
other people’s troubles and will want to do something about them – but
only after you have sown your wild oats and discovered who you are.
Your need to be special can find its outlet in large enterprises that
further the welfare of the many. You also need, however, to be a leader
in some way, to be recognized for your integrity, intellect, individuality
and laudable ideals.
You love a challenge and will flamboyantly cross accepted social
boundaries to make your point. You are the soul of honesty, a bit
rebellious, elegantly outspoken and completely unable to be anything but yourself in all situations. That self is enthusiastic about social
ideals but also chivalrous, wanting to see only the best in your fellow
man. Broad-minded with a noble bearing, you are kind-hearted and
have a touching naivety when it comes to human relations, for you
expect to find people as pure and good as the inner figures of your
imagination. One of your deepest needs is to cultivate mutually
beneficial relationships and to promote a lenient and altruistic
understanding of human needs. But you also possess innate selfdramatizing abilities which may be put to good use on the stage,
directing or portraying the greatest human stories. Alternatively you
may choose other creative forms such as writing, music, teaching and
‘storytelling’.
Your need for love and adulation, and for egalitarian friendship
may sometimes create a conflict within you. Highly individualistic,
you need to feel special, but also to belong to a group of like-minded
souls where you can sometimes sublimate your ego in philanthropic
service. You are often brimming over with generous affection,
outrageous plans, noble intentions and a preponderance to lecture
others on how to run their lives. What you may need to develop is
more practicality, for your head is often in the clouds. You need to look
at things more objectively, and come to more comprehensive solutions.
Reason and imagination work creatively within you, but you can
be so autocratically certain of your perceptions as ‘right’ that you
become inflexible, almost intolerant of others – something you would
hate to admit. But, in general, so well meaning are you that any hint of
arrogance or condescension towards others is usually dismissed as one
of your endearing, idiosyncratic ways. Relationships
You have strong beliefs and principles, and you readily share your
dreams, visions and values with your friends, colleagues and lovers. In
emotional relationships you are romantic, loyal and magnanimous, and
you also have a real need to be friends. One of the creative dilemmas
you will need to face is how to combine passionate romance and
platonic friendship. You will learn that true loyalty in love inspires the spirit of largess
and compassion, so that you want for your loved one exactly what he
or she requires to thrive. Your faithfulness, your sense of justice and
your uniquely imaginative flair can work together to influence your
world in an uplifting and personally satisfying way. Your Greatest Strengths
Warm, sympathetic nature; excellent powers of observation and fine
mind; commitment to personal ideals; inventiveness; courageous and
independent spirit of leadership. Your Greatest Weaknesses
A tendency to be a bit of an impractical dreamer; proneness to fixed
views and arrogance; tendency to be restless and rebellious and a selfappointed law unto yourself – which causes you to squander your
creative resources. Images for Integration
The chairman of the board raises his glass to his able colleagues …
The king of a large, prosperous empire invites everyone to his
wedding. Famous Personalities
Menachim Begin (Israeli politician), Louise Bogan (poet), Rupert
Brooke (poet), Sandra Bullock (actress), Kate Bush (singer), Rory
Calhoun (actor), Henry Ford (industrialist), John Galsworthy (novelist
and dramatist), Melanie Griffith (actress), Keir Hardie (socialist
politician), Linda Martel (child healer), André Maurois (novelist and
essayist), Beatrix Potter (writer and artist), Jacqueline Susann (writer),
Ambroise Thomas (composer). —60—
S UN L EO M OON Plutão ISCES Poetry is the record of the best and happiest moments of the happiest
and best minds.
PERCY BYSSHE SHELLEY
Then I thought of the whole world. Who cares for its travail and seeks
to encompass it in like lovingkindness and peace ?
HUGH MACDIARMID Themes
FIRE/WATER Modest yet proud; great integrity; compassionate and
concerned; poetic imagination; one who can feel poetry and
understand philosophy; eccentric; warm friendliness; highly emotional;
strongly devotional and idealistic; enthusiastic; extravagant; creative
inner world.
Do you love the warmth of the social and artistic limelight, and yet
often shun it because you sense it is fickle and will ultimately hurt
you? Are you a stunning show-off or a modest help-mate? A lion or a
lamb? A plutocrat or pleb?
You have star quality but privately prefer to be a wallflower. You
have a strong need for excellence and social approval, yet you honour
your own private, individual values more – and perhaps even come to
expect there to be a conflict between your moral integrity and the
demands of your audience.
Very impressionable and easily moved by suffering, you are a
mixture of self-assured certainty and oversensitive, confused
uncertainty. Sometimes self-denying and withdrawn, other times
autocratic and wilful, you have a great longing to belong as well as a
strong need to be actively useful. When you can combine these two
sides, you are one of the most poetic and creative of all combinations
with a spontaneous and childlike delight in the world, an immense sense of fun and a capacity to translate experience into words and
colourful images.
You can sometimes feel torn between your desire for plenty of
peace and privacy, and your need for worldly success and the affection
and approval of people you love and respect. You have an essentially
artistic temperament and need to learn how to be your own best friend
– how to look after your own best interests – as you are so easily
drawn towards looking after others.
Whether or not you are overtly religious, there is a strongly
reflective and devotional side to your nature. You may even feel that it
is nothing less than every human being’s duty to realize his or her
immense spiritual potential. At the same time, you never lose your
compassion for people and their problems and failures. You know
yourself how you go through phases of striving and then retreat,
successful self-expression and then, perhaps, a refusal to play the game
if the cost to your integrity is too high. You can be severely shaken by
the ways of the world, and yet it would be unhealthy for you to
relinquish your active role altogether.
Full of ardour and deep feeling for life, you are the lion-hearted
mystic, the gentle king, the gullible sweetheart who would not harm a
fly, the flamboyant, fiercely loyal friend who will share others’
sorrows and successes with equal intensity. You are courageous in the
face of difficulties, ever true to your word through thick and thin, and
dignified and hopeful even when pain absorbs you utterly as it is wont
to do quite often.
Changes of mood are your way of life, and if you can make them
fodder for your creative imagination, they will serve you well. As a
writer, a poet, an actor or any kind of artist, you can indulge in your
feelings dramatically, and readily transpose your inner life out into the
world. Relationships
Compassionate love is central to your way of being. Intensely
charismatic and emotionally available, you literally pour yourself heart and soul into your personal interests, your career and your
relationships.
At heart you are a total romantic and also a dreamer, and you may
give your all for someone who turns out to be not what you think. Your
desire both to dominate and be dominated can make for some tension.
You may also find the more humdrum aspects of human relationships a
bit of a treadmill, and if you do, you can withdraw into your own
world or wander off to greener pastures.
You can never feign what you really feel, and that can cause you
some anguish as you hate the idea of hurting anyone. As well as
needing lots of affection, you also need to be understood, but this is
unlikely to happen. Once you accept this, your emotional life will
become more satisfying. Your Greatest Strengths
Rich, artistic imagination; theatrical sense of both the beauty and
tragedy of life; emotional sensitivity and generous, caring qualities;
commitment to your individual ideals and morals; openness to life,
whatever it may bring. Your Greatest Weaknesses
Subjectivity; moodiness; proneness to dejection; tendency to overdramatize your life with you playing the victim; a kind of divine
discontent in romantic affairs which keeps you emotionally unsettled,
wondering if you will ever be really happy. Image for Integration
The Wizard of Oz gives the Lion a heart and he becomes King of Oz. Famous Personalities
Gillian Anderson (actress), Coco Chanel (designer), Robert De Niro
(actor), Dorothy Hamill (champion ice skater), Mata Hari (spy), Carrie Jacobs Bond (songwriter), Plutão .D. James (thriller writer), Hugh
MacDiamid (poet), Petrarch (poet, humanist), Susan St James
(actress), Jill St John (actress), Norma Shearer (actress), Percy Bysshe
Shelley (poet). Chapter Nine
SUN IN VIRGO S UN V IRGO —61—
M OON A RIES Heed well the precepts of the saints, who have all warned those who
would become holy to speak little of themselves and their own affairs.
ST . FRANÇOIS DE SALES
A thought is often original, though you have uttered it a hundred times.
OLIVER WENDELL HOLMES Themes
EARTH/FIRE Intellectual precision; enthusiasm for excellence; selfmotivated; skilful and pragmatic; diligent; caustic wit; practical joker;
scholarly; detached; dedicated to ideals; self-centred; committed;
workaholic; bossy.
Are you the willing servant who gets rebellious when given your
orders? You feel yourself to be a leader but really only want to be in
charge of yourself. You have a diligent but crusading temperament,
and whether you are an artist, a trade-union representative or a welldisciplined athlete, you know that victory comes to those who do their
homework.
Your personality has a decidedly impersonal cast to it. This is
because you have a practical, no-nonsense approach to life which overrides the finer, more sensitive human feelings that may want to get out.
You are a born professional, and you work best under your own steam because you combine both a meticulous eye for detail with an
exuberant, wholehearted approach to all your projects. But work you
must, for whatever you do your work is your raison d’être, and to be
happy, your work must employ your quick mentality and forcefulness.
You have a clever mind, a sharp tongue, and do not, as a rule,
suffer fools gladly. Full of good advice and well-intentioned criticism,
your manner of delivery is often cutting and blunt, revealing that the
more refined shades of feeling and communication do not always
compute with you. Ideas and facts are more important to you than
feelings, especially when they are your ideas and facts. You respond
rapidly to situations, and verbal repartee is one of your strong points.
You are a great debater.
But whilst you can be forthright, honest and downright impatient
with people who do not speak their mind, you are not quite as
courageous and confident as you sometimes seem. Although you are
capable of making a lot of noise and mustering up a lot of bravado
when the occasion calls for it, you are also aware of your own doubts
and niggling imperfections. One side of you is the humble servant –
simple, innocent, dutiful, trying to be a devoted, useful, healthy
member of society. But then your restless hair-trigger reactions take
over, revealing the intensity of your self-absorption and personal
ambition. You cogitate, analyse and synthesize your environment, and
then you hold forth with great impetuosity.
Whatever your age, there is in you both a young, brash extrovert
and a staid, conscientious introvert. Sometimes you are prone to quick
flashes of anger, whilst another side of you tends to be overly
apologetic and self-effacing. You are a person of great pizzazz yet you
can also be extremely practical and content with routine. You may not
always feel very comfortable with yourself as these two sides alternate. Relationships
All the factors mentioned above can make you edgy in emotional
relationships. You are sociable but very much your own person, and
very self-driven and self-contained. You are not particularly flexible,
and naturally assume that you will get on and run things more efficiently your own way. A marriage of minds is more important to
you than true love, and you have to really work on relationships
because the more subtle shades of feeling usually pass you by.
Emotionally you can blow hot and cold. You may sometimes act
the virgin but there is a lot of you that wants to play the bawdy ram.
Your main problem with emotions is your hastiness and, quite simply,
your lack of interest in your partner’s needs. You may hurt others
without meaning to because your orientation is so self-centred. You
just cannot help the fact that all your main interests are always at the
forefront of your mind. This trait, however, serves you well in hobbies
and professional pursuits. And when you are happy in the latter, you
are, in general, easier to please in relationships.
In many ways, you are a real character. Your purposefulness, your
intellectual curiosity and your zany sense of humour more than make
up for your lack of romantic empathy. Your Greatest Strengths
Ability to get on and do things with skill and energy; quick, analytical
mind that gets to the point with utmost precision; capacity to bring
original flair and enthusiasm into the commonplace and mundane
realms of life. Your Greatest Weaknesses
A tendency to be scathingly critical, over-cerebral in emotional
relationships, a bit too self-sufficient for your own good, and
excessively verbose and know-it-all towards those dependent on you. Image for Integration
A jolly, rotund monk enjoying his food and wine while excelling in
well-worn Latin sayings, witty responses and kindly good humour. Famous Personalities Leonard Bernstein (composer and conductor), Ingrid Bergman
(actress), Henry Ford Gêmeos (industrialist), Donald A. Glaser (physicist),
Salma Hayek (actress), Ellic Howe (historian and writer), Pink (rock
star), Max Reinhardt (theatrical producer), Lily Tomlin (actress and
comedienne), Oliver Wendell Holmes (poet and essayist). S UN V IRGO —62—
M OON T AURUS There are some satisfactions you can only find in work.
PETER SELLERS
I want to be alone.
GRETA GARBO Themes
EARTH/EARTH Dependable; kind-hearted; self-restrained; earthy and
practical; common sense; love of routine; affinity with nature; artistic;
craftsperson; diligent worker; financial savvy; instinctive wisdom.
Are you a practical perfectionist, discriminating and systematic in
almost all you do, or are you content to smell the roses and plod along
making the best of things? Invariably the latter comes easy to you
because you are resourceful and take life as it comes, even if another
part of you gets flustered when you see things being done in an
unintelligent and wasteful manner.
You are at home with the earthy reality of life, and take part in the
daily, weekly, yearly round with ease and enjoyment. In other words,
you possess the farmer’s instinct to cultivate and nurture. All things
concerned with physical wellbeing may interest you, either at the
‘Earth Mother’ end of the spectrum (gardening, food preparation and
home-making) to practical craftsmanship (carpentry, sculpture,
decorating, designing), to the shrewd management of financial
resources (banking, insurance, accountancy). All you really want is to live a full, useful life in which your talents are productively engaged,
helping you carve out a solid, secure and well-ordered niche for you
and yours. In whatever sphere you work, your vocation is to serve and
provide.
You are not just a ‘farmer’, however, as it is very likely that you
have exquisite taste and a deep appreciation for beauty in many forms
– the fine arts, music, drama, opera, literature and people. Tangible
beauty and the cornucopia of artistic life delights you and you want to
be near it, participate in it, patronize it, and perhaps possess some of it,
too. Indeed, you can be quite possessive about your valued belongings,
including people and children, but you know how to look after them,
how to honour and respect their integrity, and how to enjoy and take
responsibility for treasured assets. As a result, others sense your
trustworthiness, feel safe and comfortable in your presence, and
respect you implicitly.
Your penchant for duty, order and security can sometimes blind
you to the more subtle realms of fantasy, feeling and imagination, and
to the more individualistic and eccentric outlook on life which is
typical of a fiery individual. You are simply not interested in what you
cannot see and understand logically. You study the facts; you get to
know your world; you use your experience and acquired knowledge to
function efficiently and successfully in the ‘real’ world, and often
wonder why everyone else cannot do the same thing.
You make a wonderful parent and provider, instinctively knowing
how to live on a budget, to help others cope with busy schedules and
get their homework done, to plan for house redecoration and the
annual holiday, and still be able to end your day unruffled, enjoying
that glass of wine or cup of tea by the fire. However, you have a
relative inability to nurture anything which is not practical and
valuable to your life in a tangible way. It is not that you do not have
the patience to nurture creativity; it is just that you would rather
nurture that which you can touch, taste and measure and which will
yield a good harvest in time. Relationships When it comes to love you have an attractive modesty and inner
contentment as well as an affectionate and thoughtful nature. You do
not express yourself with lots of fireworks, but you are very sensual,
loyal, reliable and willing to go the extra mile to bring home the goods.
You are caring, and enjoy helping and being useful to your loved
ones. You know that actions speak louder than words, and you express
your love in quiet, tangible ways. But you may lack romantic idealism,
and habitually dismiss the more elusive and non-material values of a
mate or friend. However sensible you may be, you may have a hidden
fascination with the intangible, which has a way of attracting you to
emotional, enigmatic people. You are earthy, dependable, always there
to clean up the mess, but you might find it is fun once in a while to
actually make the mess instead of cleaning it up! Your Greatest Strengths
Excellent reasoning ability; dependability; common sense; capacity for
organization and hard work; quiet reserve and resourcefulness which
makes everyone feel that everything is under control; commitment to
serving others and making them happy. Your Greatest Weaknesses
Tendency to be too rational, materialistic and black-and-white in your
thinking; stubbornness which comes out when hierarchical
relationships are ignored; addiction to routine. Images for Integration
A nun finishes washing up in the refectory, and then takes the keys to
her Bentley and drives off to see the new art exhibition … A sculpture
of still life. Famous Personalities Yasser Arafat (leader of the Palestine Liberation Organization),
Cameron Diaz (actor), Greta Garbo (actress), John Houseman (actor
and director), Raymond Massey (actor and director), Mother Teresa,
Captain Mark Phillips (ex-husband of Princess Anne), Peter Sellers
(actor and comedian), John Smith (former leader of the Labour Party). S UN V IRGO —63—
M OON G EMINI Our motto: Life is too short to stuff a mushroom.
SHIRLEY CONRAN
An atheist is a man who has no invisible means of support.
JOHN BUCHAN
Take what you can use and let the rest go by.
KEN KESEY Themes
EARTH/AIR Mental ingenuity; love of words; refined tastes; perennial
student; chop logician; pragmatic and playful; youthful; moody;
analyser of minutiae; a worrier and a worker; reasonable; detached
observer; quick-witted; cool and debonair; the gourmet jack-of-alltrades.
Are you the quick, chatty salesman or the thoughtful, conscientious
craftsman? Do you diligently get stuck into something and then notice
your attention wanders … and suddenly you are seduced by an
alternative agenda? Do you have bits of expert knowledge and fancy
yourself as a specialist, but get despondent over your own lack of
patience and ability to stick-to-it? In this combination there is a
mixture of the light-hearted and the seriously dedicated which can
leave you strung out half-way between. You are seriously interested in a variety of things but your eager
interest can fool you into thinking you are an authority by just
imagining yourself to be one. You always mean well and love to talk
about the things you are learning, and for your quick, active mind a
little education goes a long way. You are a thinker and a doer, an
intellectual and a general dogsbody, a kind-hearted Peter Pan prankster
who always pulls through when family or friends need your help.
You are a logical person with a cool, reasonable approach to life.
Your analytical and critical mind grasps the details and slots everything
into place, and you try to organize your life with streamlined
efficiency, making sure everything makes sense. But you also delight
in the spontaneous visit, the unknown quantity, the exception to the
rule which makes life more interesting, more fun.
Although you are a conscientious worker, you are not really a
workaholic, for you take play just as seriously as you do work. If it is
sport you take up for relaxation – which is a good antidote to your
nervous, busy mind – you will approach it like a pro with a dedicated,
critical eye. Music, art and cooking are soothing, too.
You tend to have sophisticated tastes and a refined aesthetic
appreciation. Variety, interesting connections and links, opportunities
for shrewd advancement – these things your Gemini side relishes. Your
Virgoan side, however, which tends to get into a rut, does not like its
finely tuned system to be disturbed. This clash in your nature can be
upsetting, and can even cause debilitating worry.
If you collect more information and experience than you can
usefully digest, you become plagued by ‘indigestion’, discontent and a
sense of futility. A bit like the experimental rodent going round and
round its wheel and getting nowhere in particular. But when you find a
direction and sufficient enthusiasm for a goal, the strengths of your
combination make you an excellent communicator, analyst, journalist,
linguist, teacher, guide or writer. Having a settled domestic life and
pursuing artistic hobbies which engage your nimble hands will help
you to be less self-critical and enjoy life more. Relationships Being so strong on the mental side, your deficit turns up in the area of
emotions. You like people and are congenial, hospitable and friendly,
although you tend always to sit in judgement of others – no malice
intended, it is just your observant, classifying nature registering the
types and differences in people. You do not mean to be a snob, but you
can easily appear superior and aloof. You may fancy yourself as a
romantic, and indeed you are in an idealistic sense; but you may not be
aware that you do not get as emotionally involved as you think you do.
Emotionally you are fitful, restless and superficial; insecurity and
discomfort with passion and emotional demands make you fickle and
somewhat erratic in relationships. A warm fiery type or a dreamy
watery type could help you relax and explore the mystery of your
emotional needs. Although you would feel overwhelmed by too much
emotion, your curiosity is always up for a challenge – and if the
challenge is the fathomless depths of yourself, then all the better! Your Greatest Strengths
Mental dexterity and rational, analytical abilities; practical common
sense and quick adaptability; shrewd, resourceful eye for organization
and progress; flair for communication and presentation; clever
approach to work and pragmatic approach to fun. Your Greatest Weaknesses
Over-intellectual and critical approach to life and relationships;
proneness to get side-tracked and then swamped with too much
disparate information; tendency to get stuck in unproductive work
patterns which give rise to dry, pessimistic, worrisome moods. Images for Integration
A precision engineer develops new methods of communication … A
raconteur potters in his garden. Famous Personalities
John Buchan (Lord Tweedsmuir – writer and diplomat), John Cage
(composer), Shirley Conran (writer), Buddy Holly (musician), Ken
Kesey (writer), James Marsden (actor), Frederic Mistral (poet),
Grandma Moses (painter), Cliff Robertson (actor), Oscar Sanchez
(Costa Rican president; winner of Nobel prize for peace). S UN V IRGO —64—
M OON C ANCER New opinions are always suspected, and usually opposed, without any
other reason but because they are not already common.
The discipline of desire is the background of character.
JOHN LOCKE
Is it altogether a Utopian dream, that once in history a ruling class
might be willing to make the great surrender, and permit social change
to come about without hatred, turmoil, and waste of human life ?
UPTON SINCLAIR
Owls Do Cry
BOOK BY JANET FRAME Themes
EARTH/WATER Mind v. emotions; sensitivity and practicality; shy
yet sociable; self-repressed but observant; kind-hearted and supportive;
intuitive and quick-thinking; nervous and defensive; conscientious;
fastidious about nourishment; devoted; sentimental; principled but
flexible.
Do you feel more comfortable being the devoted servant of your
family, but crave time by yourself to get on with your own ideas and
inspirations? Do you want to live a quiet, orderly life, but find you are happy to be drawn into lively company which brings down your
barriers and takes you out of chronic introspection? Do you think of
yourself as a sensible, logical fellow but admit in your heart of hearts
that essentially you are as emotional as they come?
You have a fine, quick mind, but your heart has a way of running
the show when you least expect it. This makes you human, warm,
approachable and embarrassingly muddled at times. You can at first
seem the sensitive, shy, retiring type, even something of a wallflower –
overly cautious and discreet, an anxious sort of person who has a lot
going on inside but has trouble getting it all out.
Yet there is also a caring, charismatic and sociable side to you, and
a strong need to be involved in bettering the lot of your fellows. Your
family may benefit first from this impulse, for your doting domestic
streak needs a practical outlet and you are only too happy to pour out
the vitamins for everyone after a gourmet breakfast. But it is likely that
you will also need a professional sphere in which to express your
qualities of mental discrimination, emotional sensitivity and concern
for the wider environment.
You may fuss and worry about details, and can get worked up
about a variety of problems. Being so sensitive and self-reflective, you
tend to analyse and brood over your feelings. You can be pedantic and
finicky, but when this gets translated into a profession it can become a
discriminating and fine-tuned sensitivity to human problems.
Essentially you are both extremely tender-hearted and conscientious, in
the realm of human relations as well as in professional endeavours.
You will give freely and ungrudgingly of your time and energy, but
you may often find that the spirit is willing but the flesh is weak. This
is because nervousness and anxiety can deplete your physical
resources, leaving you exhausted and withdrawn. You need to respect
your bodily rhythms and dietary needs; your mind may be logical but
your body is not.
Yours is a marriage of logic and imagination, a powerful one for
understanding the human condition. Your interests and talents may be
in medicine, mental health and counselling, education and writing. You
may enjoy following the rich tapestry of history and social
development, and this could take you into academia. Whatever it is, you will have exacting professional standards but you will not want
anyone else to hold you to them – you figure you are your own best
taskmaster. From others you want encouragement, love, and support –
as long as it is not too cloying and you have room to stir the creative
brew. Relationships
In close relationships, you are a considerate, loyal and affectionate
person, strongly inclined to serve and fuss over your loved ones in a
very caring, supportive way. You also expect to get the same kind of
attention yourself, and can feel horribly wounded and suddenly
insecure if you are somehow overlooked. Your reticence makes you
appear self-sufficient when you are really dying to be petted and
adored.
Misunderstandings and your oversensitivity can put you in a huffy
mood; you are prone to nag and moan and then go silent. Your moods
become familiar and your partner must apologize in a very particular
way and then just leave you alone. You have your own inner logic and
organic processes that eventually bring you back.
It is quite likely that you are a very domestic being and will
therefore enjoy building a nest with someone and then bringing it to
life. And when you have a partner with whom you can communicate
intelligently, trust emotionally and share your vulnerability, your
constancy combines with romance to make you one of the most
desirable of mates. Your Greatest Strengths
Deep concern for the welfare and needs of others; empirical turn of
mind which is enriched by intuition and imagination; adaptability and
pragmatic helpfulness; quiet generosity, warmth and loyalty to family
and friends. Your Greatest Weaknesses Proneness to criticism and complaining; to rationalize away your own
idiosyncracies; to cut off from others when you feel misunderstood; to
get stuck in old habits, suspicious attitudes and energy-depleting selfpity. Images for Integration
Two old Chinese women gossip about family problems as they work
rhythmically in the rice paddies … The working mother … A
nutritionist serves his family organically grown chicken soup. Famous Personalities
Jackie Cooper (actor), Janet Frame (writer), Antonia Fraser (writer),
Julio Iglesias (singer), Jesse James (outlaw), John Locke (philosopher),
Alison Lurie (novelist), Adam Sandler (actor), Keanu Reeves (actor),
Walther Reuther (trade-union leader), Upton Sinclair (author), Queen
Wilhelmina of Holland. —65—
S UN V IRGO
M OON L EO
Man must choose whether to be rich in things or in the freedom to use
them.
IVAN ILLICH
I think the whole glory of writing lies in the fact that it forces us out of
ourselves and into the lives of others.
SHERWOOD ANDERSON
I’m always cast as someone in authority … I enjoy it because … it’s an
expiation of that part of myself which wants to be grand.
STEPHEN FRY Themes EARTH/FIRE Elitist; noble-minded; devoted; hard-working; artistic
flair; elegant; refined intellect; superiority complex; gentle and
aesthetic; kind-hearted; dutiful; naive; nobility; humility; discreet but
radiant; deeply honourable.
Are you a servant or a monarch? The ruler or ruled? Although you
may have a mundane job, in your heart of hearts you are the
indispensable star of the show and you bring this ‘star’ quality to
everything you do. You are dutiful and devoted to your vocation, and
you have a genuinely caring and conscientious attitude about all your
professional activities and leisure hobbies. This attitude is fuelled by
your high standards and is refined by your mindfulness and by the
sense of privilege you feel in using your skills to create beauty or to
repair the mess you observe around you. Although you have this deep
inner sense of worth and noblesse oblige, you have a difficult time
convincing the world that you deserve more respect – because you do
not have as much confidence as it often appears.
You have a discerning eye for people and beauty; you give your
best and prefer to possess the best but with your cleverness you are
probably adept at turning sow’s ears into silk purses. Standing for the
best is not snobbery, you tell yourself; it is merely dedication to
excellence, something you no doubt feel is sorely lacking in the world.
There is a very reticent, self-effacing side to you, and timidity
sometimes holds you back. But your inner nature is fiery, courageous
and proud, and so may resent the earthy part of you which is content to
remain incognito, busily seeing to the details. Mentally alert and
careful with the words you use, you make a fine teacher. Within you is
the conviction that people are meant to be creative, intelligent and
beautiful, if they could only shrug off the laziness that holds them
back. In your universe hard work is rewarded by a job well done and,
of course, by just a little prestige and respect. A stylish home and all
the accoutrements of a highly civilized life are also on your list.
On your bad days you can become a pedantic know-it-all; a finicky
fix-it man with entrenched, lordly views; a kind of good-advice
machine which over-estimates itself. But although you may sometimes
appear to be a snob, you actually have a heart of gold. On good days your radiant, generous spirit and competent mind work very effectively
and with instinctive creativeness, and it is then that you can be an
excellent role model for individual excellence.
A hard task-master, you work best when you have to answer only
to yourself but still know that your efforts are influencing others
practically and beneficially. When the two sides of your personality
work in tandem, your imagination and robust individuality can be
harnessed and directed by your rigorous intellect, and turned into
something real by your need to be of service. Relationships
With people you can be diffident but charming, and in close
relationships you are both passionate and modest, adoring but needing
to be adoringly petted. When you feel insecure you become haughty
and untouchable, although you melt again like butter if your lover says
the right thing. This is because, in the struggle between the playful
child and the sensible adult within you, the playful child has the
greater resilience and the greater need for love.
You want to be treated elegantly and to be appreciated for what you
are, but it is as though you sometimes live in an innocent fantasy world
where good people always win the reward. And if you do not get the
reward you can be pretty insufferable by sulking and making your
loved one feel guilty. When you begin to feel more comfortable with
your inner dilemma between humility and grandiosity, between being
self-effacing and self-promoting, between serving and being served,
your emotional life will have fewer hiccups and indigestion! Your Greatest Strengths
Moral integrity and high standards; intellectual strength and
articulateness; ability to think in the large and work hard as well; kindhearted devotion to others which you express in utterly intelligent and
useful ways. Your Greatest Weaknesses
Naivety and lack of confidence; over-elitist attitude which can make
opportunities slip by; a kind of self-pitying vanity which is selfdefeating. Images for Integration
Cinderella works diligently to produce her wedding gown … A
medieval monk crowns his cathedral with a 300-foot spire … A senior
doctor cheerfully changes an old lady’s bedpan. Famous Personalities
Sherwood Anderson (writer), Jacqueline Bisset (actress), Karl Bohm
(conductor), Eric Coates (composer), Stephen Fry (actor, comedian
and writer), William Golding (writer), Ivan Illich (educational/social
theorist), Jean Claude Killy (Olympic skier), Louis XIV (French
monarch), Aldo Moro (Italian statesman), Twiggy (model and actress). S UN V IRGO —66—
M OON V IRGO The happiness of man consists in life. And life is in labour … The
vocation of every man and woman is to serve other people.
COUNT TOLSTOY
I strive for the best and do the possible.
LYNDON B. JOHNSON Themes
EARTH/EARTH Identifies with work; perfectionist; utilitarian;
analytical; precise; desire to synthesize knowledge and use it; selfcritical; shy; helpful; kind-hearted; industrious; efficient; worried;
sculpted personality; concerned and conscientious; thoughtful; attention to details.
You are the soul of honesty and kindness, of systems and schedules,
and of precision-like adherence to party line. But you worry too much
about getting it right, and you are constantly looking within, criticizing
yourself and eventually learning that real criticism is observation
without judgement.
There is no one better than you at scrutinizing and analysing data.
When you are at your best you sift everything through your excellent
brain and then slot it all into place so as to make the best practical use
of available resources. You worship the intellect, but your brain-tohand connection is equally strong, which means that you are probably
a natural craftsperson or artist of some sort.
You are a thinker and a doer, industriously applying your
understanding to help and improve things. Whatever your milieu, you
approach creativity with a scientific mind, for you want to master your
art by knowing the principles by heart. This trait allows you to know
when something is wrong, and no one – especially yourself – can relax
until you have fixed it.
Your identification with your work can be so strong that your
identity wobbles on weekends off. So you develop a useful hobby –
something useful to your domestic environment and useful to you
because it allows you to perfect another skill. Well, ‘perfect’ is a strong
word; perfection is what you aim for but feel you never reach. And
when you are absorbed in a job you are both the master-craftsman and
the boss who does not like being interfered with.
Your critical super-ego is the toughest of all task-masters, so you
do not need to answer to anyone else but yourself. Doing this
constantly makes you a bit serious, nervous and burdened by your
sense of imperfection. You are not ideally suited to act as superior in
large enterprises because your tendency to analyse and doubt yourself
impairs your conviction to go forward in a definite direction. You do
not always make life easy for yourself because if you are not seeing
the practical results of your efforts you feel insufficient. How can you
relax and play when there is so much that needs doing? Relationships
You are sentimental, kind-hearted and devoted to those close to you,
and you hate to think you have offended anyone in the least. Tending
to be conventional and discreet in the expression of love, your motto is
‘actions speak louder than words’, and you show your devotion
through service and unfailing loyalty. You may be an exceptional cook
and a home improver with exquiste taste. Good health habits are also
important to you, and you can wax lyrical on the virtues of trace
elements as though you had discovered a new elixir of life.
Your affectionate nature is as pure as the driven snow, but that
means you get cold and overfastidious if you feel unappreciated or
hurt. And you are unlikely to be attracted to someone you do not
respect intellectually. You may find yourself involved in an
unsatisfactory relationship for a long time. This is due to your love of
moral beauty, and the fact that, as long as you are helping someone,
you are vindicating yourself as the superior party and not having to
address your inner feelings of inferiority; and it is also partly due to the
difficulty you find in breaking an established routine. Your Greatest Strengths
Modest and conscientious nature; dedication to service; quiet, studious
attention to detail and technique; observant, analytical mind and
powers of discrimination; ability to be truly impartial and to be a
practical idealist. Your Greatest Weaknesses
A tendency to let high standards turn you into a finicky fault-finder;
self-conscious worrying which depletes your confidence and your
capacity for enjoyment; allowing your criticisms to become too sharp
and destructive – a sign that you have let your feelings go underground
and become too ‘old-maidish’, and that you definitely need to do
something frivolous once in a while! Images for Integration
A ballerina practises alone in a room of mirrors and, sensing her
potential perfection, focuses on her flaws and begins again … A welloiled printing machine hums away, producing perfectly bound copies
of The Layman’s Guide to Essential Nutrients. Famous Personalities
Lance Armstrong (Tour de France champion), Nadia Boulanger
(composer), Lola Falana (singer and dancer), Lyndon B. Johnson
(former American President), David McCallum (actor), Derek Nimmo
(actor), S. Radhakrishnan (guru), Jimmy Rogers (country and western
singer), Clancy Sigal (writer), Count Tolstoy (author). —67—
S UN V IRGO
M OON L IBRA
The universe ought to be presumed too vast to have any character.
CHARLES PEIRCE
If one sticks too rigidly to one’s principles one would hardly see
anybody.
AGATHA CHRISTIE Themes
EARTH/AIR Practical idealist; the well-organized critic; the courteous
intellectual; pragmatic; love of order; the beauty of the mind; the
impartial analyst; moral integrity; appreciation of the simple and
natural; strong sense of community; gift for words; simplicity; charity.
Are you a humble but self-satisfied intellectual, living in a world of
your own, who then finds your pursuits are disturbed by the annoying
demands of others? Do you consider yourself a nice, reasonable person who minds his or her own business, and then discovers that people you
love want their business to be yours, too?
You are an essentially humane, considerate, rational individual
whose quiet charm, humour and powers of observation enable you to
move in and out of society with grace and effectiveness. You like to do
your own thing and are a bit of a loner, very self-composed and
controlled, analytical and reflective, and endowed with a gift for social
observation. But whilst you enjoy thinking and talking about social
ethics and moral structures, you find the whole sphere of relating with
warm-blooded human beings a bit messy, although you will admit that
you do need some sort of social life to be happy.
You clean things up quickly and effectively with reasoned
arguments, with the emphasis on reasoned. This is because you would
not hurt a fly, and are a master at finding tactful, reasonable ways of
saying your piece, even though you are a natural critic of current
affairs. And even if you sometimes appear aloof and above the hoi
poloi, you have a deep awareness of your own fallibility so that you
are as ready to forgive as you are to criticize.
With your eye for detail, clear insight into what any situation calls
for, and your desire to refine and improve what already exists, you
would make a good organizer, social worker or quality-control
specialist. You think carefully about what you do, and this care and
consideration makes you highly valued as a friend, colleague and
counsellor. If you are needed, you will share your ideas and energy
willingly.
You listen thoughtfully to other points of view, but after sifting and
analysing arguments you love to push through with your own ideas.
You delight in paradox, and you get a charge from controversy which
challenges your mental powers, but you do not approve of injustice in
any form. In your own quiet way, you stand for everything that is
decent and good (which you may find actually leaves a lot of things
out). You have a profound sense of values and the importance of the
rule of law. And you yearn for the day when others will see the light so
that everyone can live in a more civilized way.
You live according to a personal moral code and, although you are
charitable and kind-hearted, you will not go out of your way for people you deem to be inferior – or simply boring and aesthetically and
intellectually offensive. It would surprise you to hear someone
accusing you of being a snob, but so influenced are you by your high
ideals and moral propriety that you can forget how to be simply human.
Once reminded, however, you quickly come back to earth, for you
have a critical interior monitor which filters through the bits of
feedback that do make sense. And above all, you are honest with
yourself – scathingly so – and that helps you to laugh at yourself and in
the end makes you far more approachable, and loveable, to others. Relationships
Matters of the heart may be your Achilles heel, even though in some
ways you are one of the easiest of the zodiac types to be around.
Whilst you are essentially independent, you will discover that you
need to love and to be loved, and relationships will show you just how
much you have to give.
Courteous, engaging, gentle and respectful of your loved one, you
extend to others what matters most to you – respect for individual
dignity. You are dependable and trustworthy and deliver what you
promise. But you are so damned (whoops!) reasonable and tactful that
your partner may find it almost impossible to get you involved in a
passionate argument. If you feel that messy rows are beneath you, then
you risk the danger of thinking you are in a relationship when in fact
you are not. You need to tip the scales sometimes, get caught off-guard
and angry, relinquish your grip on harmony, bring your passions into
the centre of your life rather than keeping them under a neat lock and
key. Intellectual rapport and mutual respect is essential for you in any
relationship, but your emotional life will offer you more if you ease the
control over your emotions. Your Greatest Strengths
Excellent reasoning powers; civilized concern for the wellbeing of all;
enlightened and diplomatic approach to helping others; aesthetic appreciation of both art and science; basic tolerance, kindness, and
good will; ability to cooperate with others for a common cause. Your Greatest Weaknesses
Being maddeningly rational in close relationships; fussy insistence on
things being ‘just right’ before you have anything to do with them;
feigning independence when you know you need the input and support
of others; assuming intellectual superiority which separates you from
potential friends and the enrichment of different views. Images for Integration
A monastic husband … A community of researchers work together in
the cause of truth … One’s daily mantra: the unexamined life is not
worth living. Famous Personalities
Otto Oscar Binder (writer of science fiction), Agatha Christie (writer
of detective fiction), Charles Bishop Kuralt (broadcaster and
journalist), Maurice Maeterlink (poet and dramatist), Bob Newhart
(deft comedian), Seigi Osawa (conductor), Charles Peirce (philosopher
and logician), Alan Villiers (sailor and author), Chen Ning Yang
(winner of Nobel prize for physics). S UN V IRGO —68—
M OON S CORPIO The greatest happiness you can have is knowing that you do not
necessarily require happiness.
WILLIAM SAROYAN
Aren’t women prudes if they don’t and prostitutes if they do ?
KATE MILLETT Themes
EARTH/WATER Probing mind; critical and analytical; discriminating;
dedicated; meticulous worker; resourceful; self-sufficient; emotionally
controlled; loyal; health fanatic; opinionated; pious; subjective;
conscientious; loyal; long-suffering.
Do you just want to get on with a useful, well-defined job but find you
react perversely when ordered around? Do you have a servant’s loyalty
but a tycoon’s lust for power? Sometimes you function logically and
purposefully, going about life with a sense of modest dedication and
clear understanding of what you are about. But then a very proud voice
speaks up inside you and will not be satisfied until it has its say – and
its way.
Essentially you are a rational, analytical type, very focused on
duty, improving methods, and increasing the order and security in your
life. You think you are logical and indeed you are; nothing gives you
greater pleasure than solving problems and knowing how to get from
A to B (and then back to A again – you do not like to stay away from
home too long!), whether it involves reading a map, playing cards or
fixing your car. You are a clear-thinking, self-sufficient, immensely
capable person who can be just a little fanatical about ‘getting it right’.
Underneath all your cleverness and practical concerns you are,
however, far more emotionally motivated than you are aware. You feel
intensely about things but may find all those powerful feelings a little
disconcerting, so it all comes out as your fighting spirit in the name of
truth. Thus you are often subjective when you think you are being
objective, and passionate when you think you are being reasonable –
which can make you a very difficult opponent in an argument.
You are capable of astute, careful thinking, and excel at detailed
mental work where you have to scrutinize and arrange data. But you
tend to be somewhat limited in your outlook, and frequently unaware
of how much your emotional forcefulness colours your thinking
processes. You are industrious and practical, and perhaps famous for
your critical acumen, whether for proficiency in playing a winning
hand at bridge, for artistic or literary skill, for making scientific breakthroughs in the lab or kitchen, or for analysing people’s minds.
But your Achilles heel will always be the prejudices you express and
to which you hold on with an utter conviction, prejudices that
ultimately limit your experiences and potential in life.
You need to work in a concentrated manner, at your own pace and
according to your own understanding, rather than according to
someone else’s command. Neither are you particularly good at giving
orders, and when you do you may assume a forced air of authority
which works contrary to your desired goal. But you are the soul of
dedication when you are left to get on with the work in hand, for you
have a strong sense of duty and place much value on a job well done.
You are a humble soul with hidden depths, which you may not ever
fathom entirely yourself. It is as though you know that there is a part of
you that simply will not yield to analysis. When you get your two sides
working creatively together, however, you are the dedicated healer, the
intuitive critic, the passionate servant or the observant artisan, whose
quiet concentration and industry is respected and emulated by many. Relationships
You keep a tight rein on your own feelings which are often bottled up
until, eventually, they have to come out. And when they do it is usually
with quite a bite. You care deeply about people, especially members of
your family, and take your responsibilities seriously. When you have
made a commitment, you are the most constant and supportive of
mates, although you are likely to be more passionate about your work
than your loves.
Your stringent self-sufficiency and resistance to depending on
others can make relationships a real challenge for you. Despising
weakness in yourself and in others, you sometimes seem mean with
your affections, and you can also be vindictive if you are pushed into
an uncomfortable corner. Your Greatest Strengths Shrewd, discriminating intellect; capacity for enormous amounts of
hard work; perceptiveness about people; dependability and practical
support for loved ones; commitment to high standards and the
completion of tasks. Your Greatest Weaknesses
The way in which emotionally charged opinions limit your thinking;
your defensive and over-critical bent; self-demanding independence
which makes relaxation and play difficult – ‘work before play’ is your
motto, but you can always find something that needs doing. Images for Integration
A zealous insect lover stands quietly in the bushes observing the
mating habits of the praying mantis … An impassioned doctor
contributes statistics and personal views at a forum for discussing antiabortion laws. Famous Personalities
Bruno Bettelheim (psychologist), John Curtis (entomologist), Charles
Gates Dawes (financier and former American Vice-President),
Beyonce Knowles (singer), Kate Millet (feminist author), Maria
Montessori (psychologist and educationalist), Donald O’Connor
(actor), William Saroyan (author and playwright), Jack Valenti (film
executive), Raquel Welch (actress). S UN V IRGO —69—
M OON S AGITTARIUS The principal mark of genius is not perfection but originality, the
opening of new frontiers.
ARTHUR KOESTLER Many a man has fallen in love with a girl in a light so dim he would
not have chosen a suit by it.
MAURICE CHEVALIER Themes
EARTH/FIRE Intellectual enthusiasm; restless but controlled; great
integrity; genuinely helpful; intelligent; quick wit; moralistic; critical;
dedicated student and teacher; urbane; a thinker and a communicator.
Do you want fact or fiction? Do you want a useful, upright, dedicated
life or freedom to roam the universe? Your independent and inquiring
mind may sometimes be at odds with your desire for neat, definite
answers. Your spirit yearns for a concrete system which addresses all
the moral, philosophical and religious dilemmas that concern
humankind. But you embrace ideas so passionately that reality could
never live up to your expectations.
One side of you is truly expansive, restless, philosophical and
eager for adventure and learning, whilst the other is utilitarian,
analytical, sensible and hard-working. Inspired by large concepts and
great achievements, open spaces and new people, you easily imagine
yourself in all kinds of exciting places and situations. This side of you
is courageous, optimistic and usually ready to have a go.
Your Virgoan side, however, brings you down to earth. Sometimes
it can make you despair at the seeming futility of attempts to ‘get it
right’, whether this is to do with your job, marriage or holiday, or with
the government, the Church or other broad, humanist concerns. At
such times, philosophical inspiration becomes philosophical
resignation, and you soldier on, determined to figure out and then
master the possible in order to improve your life. For understanding
and improving life is what you are all about.
To marry these two sides of yourself you need to become more
aware of how your preconceived ideas influence the way you
experience people and events, and how they can set you up for
disappointment. You have high standards, for yourself as well as for
others, and can be quite critical of people who stoop to conquer, so to speak. If your beliefs are offended you can get high-minded and aloof,
even though inwardly you are more often quaking than congratulating
yourself.
Although you have a strong sense of propriety and duty, you love
to throw out the rules and play truant more than once in a while. You
love critical discussion, travel and study. Your idea of fun is an
impromptu picnic or visit to the theatre, and you really come alive as
the suave raconteur and the prim-and-proper eccentric in a gathering of
amusing people.
Essentially you are a kind person, and sometimes very reticent
about advancing your own deeply felt views. Your generous concern
for others, coupled with your impeccable discretion, means that you
could be adept at gestures such as quietly placing the perfect book in a
friend’s path, one that you guessed might assist in some important
quest.
You need to nurture your vivid imagination and then anchor it with
your capable, pragmatic side. Your visionary qualities and
industriousness can take you far in many fields: you make an excellent
teacher, counsellor, lawyer, clergyman and travel guide. Your Virgoan
critical bent helps you to bring your Sagittarian dreams down to
manageable proportions, and makes you realize that Earth is not such a
bad place to take a journey. Relationships
In close relationships you need mental affinity and plenty of space, and
the only thumb you want to be under is your own. Sentimental and
idealistic rather than romantic, you are genuinely humanitarian and
seek to show your feelings in practical ways. You tend to look for
paragons of perfection, and disillusionment occurs when you meet,
repeatedly, the huge gap between the ideal you fall in love with and the
actual flesh-and-blood, imperfect person.
You are a curious mixture of egalitarian and elitist sentiment, and
tend to believe in an absolute hierarchical order of things. It makes
rational sense to you, and it frustrates you when people cannot see the
sense of things the way you can – it is so obvious! Your Greatest Strengths
Fine intellect; ingenuity and perception of essentials; combined realism
and optimism which makes you an excellent teacher; the way your
pragmatism brings your vision down to earth; friendliness and
readiness to serve, help and guide. Your Greatest Weaknesses
Moral certitude; desire for ‘reasonable’ answers in the face of human
suffering; lack of empathy and tendency to judge those who appear to
live without guiding ideals – Socrates said ‘the unreflected life is not
worth living’, and he may have shared this Sun – Moon combination! Images for Integration
A bespectacled librarian locks the door at closing time and transforms
into Superwoman … An anthropology class goes on a field trip. Famous Personalities
Maurice Chevalier (actor), Wernher Erhardt (positive-thinking guru),
Gloria Estefan (singer), Richard Gere (actor), Karen Horney
(psychoanalyst), Michael Keaton (actor), Arthur Koestler (author),
Michael Scott (mystic and scholar), Charlie Sheen (actor), Mary
Shelley (writer), Hank Williams (country singer). S UN V IRGO —70—
M OON C APRICORN Puritanism – the haunting fear that someone, somewhere, may be
happy.
H.L. MENCKEN
Never compose anything unless the not composing of it becomes a
positive nuisance to you. GUSTAV HOLST
You can’t teach an old dogma new tricks.
DOROTHY PARKER Themes
EARTH/EARTH A rational pragmatist; streamlined efficiency; selfdoubt and ambition; modest; sceptical; clear-headed; purposeful; quiet
dignity; elegant simplicity; a polished professional; methodical;
organizing ability; kind and helpful; diligent; a private perfectionist;
frugal.
Are you a self-restrained critic or a diligent creator? Are you a selfdemanding workaholic who justifies personal sacrifices through the
long-lasting contributions you hope to make? Do you analyse the data,
get at the truth, but then wonder despondently about the meaning of
life? Do you prefer living a quiet hermit’s existence, far from the
madding crowd, but find that some sort of public acclaim is necessary
for you to feel okay about yourself?
You are an extremely capable, kind-hearted, but serious and singleminded person who can focus exceptionally well on your vocation –
and it must be a vocation, not just a job, because you have to believe in
what you are doing. There is a self-contained and purposeful quality
about you which enables you to pursue your chosen path with quiet
determination and long-term stamina. You also hope that your efforts
will help to make the world a better, more efficient and more beautiful
place. Towards this end you direct your intellectual powers to question,
analyse and fine-tune your medium.
You are naturally ambitious, a quick learner, discriminating and
industrious, and want to give of your very best in whatever you do.
Nonetheless, as one of life’s natural critics, you are the first object of
your own criticism. So you sometimes sink into despondency; you
struggle with self-doubt, self-reproach, and feelings of inadequacy. But
you are not a quitter; you learn to let go of old convictions so you can
become the superlative professional you want to be. As you are extremely good at managing resources, you could
easily fall into an organizational role. You are mentally quick and
practical, and if you cannot get to a teacher, you will teach yourself
whatever you need to know. Very much a hands-on person, you are
usually able to do-it-yourself very much more effectively and
economically than almost anyone else, quite possibly to the chagrin of
those around you. In your eagerness to help, take care that you do not
outdo everyone else with your efficiency and superb capabilities.
You want the plain facts and the unvarnished truth; therefore you
make an ideal literary critic or editor. You also require tangible proof
of your achievements; you want concrete products that bear the mark
of your self-expression, your blood, sweat and tears. You may enjoy
working with your hands to produce exquisitely chiselled fine art or
precisely executed pieces of music. It is as though you were born with
an assumption that life is about work and dedication. When you win
the prize, you do not gloat – you just look for more work. You may
need to learn that the quality of your life can be enhanced by periods of
frivolous self-indulgence. Relationships
You are slow to enter into relationships, but when you do it is with a
deep sense of commitment and duty. A certain self-restraint follows
you all the days of your life, although you warm up and relax more in
the second half of life. Your modesty is charming, even disarming,
when people get to know you, because its source is your purity of
intention in all your endeavours.
You are dependable and expect to work for your keep, and to get
back what you give out to others. But until people do get to know you,
you can appear cold and aloof, and if you get hurt you will retreat into
a very tight, secure place inside yourself. A proneness to separate
yourself from your loved one with sullen moods makes you not always
easy to live with. But most of the time you make a delightful
companion because you are thoughtful, kind, a good listener and
seriously interested in making your life work. Your emotional
insecurities can make you seem a little self-centred, but when you feel appreciated, understood and loved, all your caring qualities blossom.
You are a bit enigmatic as well, and your depths slowly open and
develop in a secure, loving relationship. Your Greatest Strengths
Remarkable ability to organize and discipline yourself to be efficient
and productive; fine critical mind and refined aesthetic taste and sense
of proportion; dedication to excellence; quiet, constant devotion to
friends and family – your giving is full of substance, not rhetoric. Your Greatest Weaknesses
Nervous timidity and a proneness to hide your light under a bushel; to
be over-critical of yourself and of others which leads to a sense of
futility; a defensive preoccupation with rational justifications for
everything you feel and do. Images for Integration
A headline: ‘Small-town boy makes good’… A student passes
entrance examination to a prestigious technical college … Fine bone
china. Famous Personalities
Augustus (first Roman emperor), Anton Bruckner (composer), Anne
Diamond (television presenter), Theodor Dreiser (writer), James
Franck (Nobel prize-winning phycisist), Gustav Holst (composer),
H.L. Mencken (author), Dorothy Parker (writer), J. Pierpoint Morgan
Jr (business man), Jaroslav Seifert (Nobel prize-winning poet). S UN V IRGO —71—
M OON A QUARIUS No woman can call herself free who does not own and control her
body.
MARGARET SANGER
The real lost souls don’t wear their hair long and play guitars. They
have crew cuts, trained minds, sign on for research in biological
warfare, and don’t give their parents a moment’s worry.
J.B. PRIESTLEY
If the world does not please you, you can change it.
H.G. WELLS Themes
EARTH/AIR Reliable yet rebellious; a progressive thinker;
intellectual; principled; imaginatively scientific; dispassionately
critical; forward-looking; a reformer; a purist in love and work; naive
eccentric; philanthropic dedication; worthy ideals; kind-hearted;
wholeheartedly and pragmatically helpful.
Are you impeccably precise in your thinking but emotionally erratic
and unpredictable? Do you think of yourself as a sane, law-abiding
citizen but find you can suddenly go off on what others consider to be
odd tangents which feel perfectly normal to you? Do you want the
global vision but find you get stuck in the minutiae of logic?
You bring a conscientious dedication to both the large social
concerns and the small domestic hobbies that claim your attention, and
you have great capacity for hard work. There is something endearingly
odd about you. Although you can be very exact and self-contained,
which gives the impression that your horizons are strictly limited by
personal duties, you can surprise everyone with your grasp of large
ideas and your nonchalant attitude towards the whole spectrum of
society, its problems and idiosyncracies.
You have the potential for vast understanding, but when it comes to
emotional savvy you can be naive and a bit wooden. You are a social creature, but on your own terms – although helpful and supportive, you
need freedom, sanity and space to get on with your own life.
You have a rather scientific, detached, objective approach to life,
and an urge to understand and explain, rather than go with the flow.
You value order and rules that organize society into one wellfunctioning, environmentally friendly family. But without even
thinking you will make up your own rules and go your own way, for
you listen first and foremost to your own conscience which tells you
where your best path lies.
You have a quirky sense of humour, which alternates with a very
dry, matter-of-fact presentation and quiet humility. Your unintentional
mastery of ‘understatement’ gives you charm. And an interesting
mixture of traditional and progressive thinking makes you a true
egalitarian, critical in taste and judgement but essentially devoid of
prejudice. Your rational powers are excellent; you are single-minded
and industrious and this helps you to succeed in any career that you
deem worthy of your time and energy. If you are not careful, however,
your personality can become too hygienic – remember, you are a
human being not a human machine.
You may be a people watcher, given to analysing motivations,
dilemmas and the passional conflicts which you yourself wish to
avoid, always from a once-removed position and perhaps with a view
to finding practical answers to age-old human problems. Your
empirical turn of mind and detached stance makes you a good
psychologist or theoretician. In politics you are inclined to favour
pragmatic socialism with its concern for the working man, and the
practical, smooth regulation of things for the betterment of all. Be it in
medicine or social work, teaching, politics or international planning,
you are attracted to work which allows you to be of original and
practical worth and service to the larger community. Relationships
You are the most devoted and possibly naive of people, a friendly,
kindly, yet aloof soul who can be out of touch with, or at least
untouched by, your own passions. Emotions are a bit thorny for you, for they can erupt from nowhere, disconnected from your normally
reasonable grip on life.
You enjoy friendship when it is based on common intellectual
interests. You are thoughtful, kind and philosophically disposed to
social intercourse. In intimate relationships, however, where
dependency and emotional vulnerability feature strongly, you can get
nervous, as though something will be demanded of you that you either
do not feel you can deliver, or will cramp your style.
You never mean to hurt your loved ones, but you need to remember
not to treat them as patients or as interesting but demanding objects for
study. Your monk-like self-sufficiency makes you assume others
should be the same way – independent and self-controlled. With a bit
of practice in communicating how you feel, and a bit less reliance on
logic, you make an admirable domestic companion, full of both
supportiveness and surprises! Your Greatest Strengths
Great powers of detached observation and impartial analysis; shrewd
intelligence; idealistic social concerns and conscientious dedication to
work; quiet dignity and respect for the dignity of all. Your Greatest Weaknesses
Overfastidious eye and tendency to focus on black and white facts;
proneness to distance yourself from others and from your own
feelings; to over-invest in perfection and thus to remain pessimistic,
unsatisfied, and lonely. Images for Integration
Staring into a microscope, a scientist sees the past and future writ large
… Aliens land and embark on building a new and improved world
order. Famous Personalities
Lord George-Brown (politician), Denis Healey (politician), Ruby
Keeler (dancer and actress), Ted Key (cartoonist), Sophia Loren (film
actress), Jesse Owens (Olympic runner and jumper), J.B. Priestly
(writer), Jimmie Rodgers (hillbilly-country music star), Margaret
Sanger (pioneer of planned parenthood), Fay Weldon (writer), H.G.
Wells (writer and social philosopher). —72—
S UN V IRGO M OON Plutão ISCES One ought, every day at least, to hear a little song, read a good poem,
see a fine picture, and, if it were possible, to speak a few reasonable
words.
GOETHE
The love of life is necessary to the vigorous prosecution of any
undertaking.
SAMUEL JOHNSON Themes
EARTH/WATER Insightful; compassionate; modest; poetic; kindhearted; refined taste; sense of humour; inspirational; helpful;
dedicated servant; natural counsellor; intuitively wise; discreetly
generous.
Are you a scientist or an artist? Potentially you are both, for you
possess the scientist’s mind and the artist’s heart. Your personality
combines a fine intellect, lots of common sense and a deep feeling for
the woes of humanity. You have an active inner world in which you
absorb, analyse and digest knowledge, whilst at the same time your
sixth sense is busy slotting everything into place according to your
feelings. Logic, compassion and practicality blend within you to make you a
steadfast and devoted friend and one of the most useful members of
society. At your best you are the wise sage who derives profound
meaning out of the exercise of carrot-peeling or any mundane task.
And through serving the needs of others you can shine as a model of
humanity. But you are naturally shy, and prone to anxiety and nervous
introspection. Your critical, self-effacing tendencies can eat away at
your creative energies – which are considerable when you are centred
and at peace with yourself. It is when you manage to shake off your
timidity that you can make the most of your talents.
You possess the capacity to see things intuitively as a whole.
Additionally, you are able to work systematically, one step at a time
towards the completion of your goal – be it an artistic design,
mastering a violin concerto, writing a book, learning to sail a boat or
producing the perfect soufflé. It is as though your mind works so
closely with your heart that the result of your efforts is infused with
your whole being. You hold within your mind the purpose, the method
and the desired end-product, so you become completely absorbed in
your activities. Work is an art and an act of devotion for you. Your
strivings towards excellence are aided by your rich imagination and
penetrating insight into people and situations.
Emotionally, there is no one more giving and practical in the
expression of affection than you. You are one of life’s servers and
healers. Whether in social work, medicine, teaching or art, you have a
way of detecting the hidden need, and finding the best way to respond
to others with the right word and deed. You can, however, be so giving
and oversensitive that you easily get hurt, and wonder why people are
not as considerate and conscientious as yourself. Your touchiness can
make you clam up and fret, at which time your own troubles – real or
imagined – assume tragic proportions in your mind. At such times you
are prone to depression. Criticism is hard for you to bear, even though
you tend to be a stringent self-critic with regard to your own work. Relationships In emotional relationships you need the tender and complete
acceptance of your loved one – which is what you give in return. You
have a dreamy, romantic side to you that may find life too harsh, and
which may seek various avenues of escape, such as day-dreaming.
Your Piscean empathy and tendency to merge emotionally with
another makes it easy for you to become a martyr. This may often be at
variance with your conscious striving for self-definition and your
dislike of being in anyone’s debt, but it also increases your
understanding of the human condition. As you can put yourself easily
in the other person’s shoes you have no problem in forgiving the
fragilities and foibles of others.
You are not particularly self-assertive, but you possess a strong
moral sense which makes itself felt in both your personal and
professional life. That, plus your compassionate understanding and
deep humility, make many people admire you and want your company.
Your only problem may be learning how to say no! Your Greatest Strengths
Sound mind and intuitive insight; devotional nature and reverent
attitude to work and life in general; charming sense of humour;
humanitarian desire to serve others and the larger good. Your Greatest Weaknesses
Tendency to get swamped by details in your attempt to reach
perfection; shyness and diffidence about expressing your views;
inclination to worry too much about everything, from your own
problems to the famine in Ethiopia. Images for Integration
The scientist has a dream and then, in his sacred laboratory, puts the
finishing touches on his magnum opus … A peasant rests in the wheat
field, and shares his bread, cheese, wine and wisdom with the hungry
labourers. Famous Personalities
Claudette Colbert (actress), Anselm Feuerbach (painter), Goethe (poet
and dramatist), Lenny Henry (actor, comedian), Christopher Isherwood
(novelist and playwright), Michael Jackson (pop singer), Maurice Jarre
(composer), Samuel Johnson (lexicographer and writer), Jules
Romains (writer and philosopher), Pierre de Ronsard (poet). Chapter Ten
SUN IN LIBRA
—73—
S UN L IBRA M OON A RIES
Hell hath no fury like a liberal scorned.
DICK GREGORY
A politician is an arse upon which everyone has sat except a man.
E.E. CUMMINGS Themes
AIR/FIRE Sociable; lively; restless; wilful; entertaining; independent
but needs others; self-development through relationships; diplomatic;
enthusiastic sense of justice; influential; convivial and convincing;
controversial; cheeky; fun-loving; romantic.
You are the peace-making crusader, the champion of your team, the
feisty but cool-headed idealist who has spunk and courage. With your
high energy levels and great ideas, you are good at initiating projects –
and parties! – yet you rely on others to help you bring your plans into
being. You need to be actively engaged in life and to be working
towards something – often with an unusual or eccentric twist to it.
Although you inwardly feel yourself to be strongly independent, you
are easily jolted by emotional conflict and criticism from others. The
latter can truly throw you off beam.
You can be a lively and sensitive companion, capable of bringing
optimism, an exciting sense of challenge and great expectations to joint enterprises. Your gentle, diplomatic manner can, however,
suddenly break down in the face of opposition as, contrary to
appearances, you do not budge on issues when you have really made
up your mind.
How do you balance your aspirations for social harmony with your
strong, me-first, impulsive personality? You need others, but you want
to be left alone. Other people’s experiences and opinions stimulate and
feed you intellectually, but you feel you have to do things your own
way in the end anyway. You want love, respect and friendship, but you
can be hard to live with at times because you chafe at the mundane
constraints of everyday life. When you feel hemmed in you may get
restless, argumentative and fault-finding. It is a combination of your
Arien rashness and your Libran search for the ideal: you want the best
but resent what you have to sacrifice to get it. You feel independent
and have a strong need to define yourself, but you discover that other
people help you to do just that. Love them or hate them, people must
be in your life, and personal relationships will provide an important
path to your growth and self-development.
There are usually gender issues with this combination. If you are a
woman, you may not be satisfied with traditional female roles. You are
outspoken and ambitious and will seek some creative form of
expression for your fine intellect and potential artistic skills. For a
man, this combination confers refinement and elegant persuasion to all
your arguments, so that with strategic manoeuvres you learn to manage
people beautifully and get exactly what you want.
Regardless of sex, you can be amazingly companionable,
enthusiastic, influential and deeply romantic – so much so that, when
your passions are spent, your romantic ideal keeps you gallivanting
from one partner to the next. A stable emotional life is what you
require in order to grow. You must try for a workable alliance within
you between your need for dominance and your need for intimacy and
partnership. Sacrificing some of your freedom for the sake of the
greater good (such as your relationship) is one of the main themes that
will crop up in your life. Relationships
Relationships are central to your life, and there are probably many
times when you depend on your partner more than you care to admit.
You love the ritual of love – the romance, the excitement, the
courtship, the suspense – and then the fight! If the spark goes out of
your relationship, you will look elsewhere for a thrill. You tend to get
impatient with the idea that you might have to do a bit of growing up
and create some of your own excitement yourself, but your emotional
life will improve – in depth and consistency – if you do.
Too much insistence on having your own way will tend to cut you
off from your ability to make sound judgements, and from your deeper
needs as an individual. You require companionship, and to discover
that you can still be true to yourself in a relationship of equals. Your Greatest Strengths
Your combined personal strength and diplomacy which wins people
over; desire for justice and commitment to defending the underdog;
quick mind and persuasive use of argument; strong aesthetic sense;
daring spirit and courage in trying new things; ability to bring warmth
and adventure to all your relationships. Your Greatest Weaknesses
Difficulty in reconciling your need for independence as well as
dependence on others; awkward stubbornness when you have reached
your limit; tendency to sabotage your chances for harmony (which you
badly need due to your strong competitiveness); inclination to make
rash judgements when you think you are being astute. Image for Integration
A little girl and a little boy barter whilst playing on a see-saw. She
wants his toy gun; he wants her cream cake. They decide to share. Famous Personalities
Shaun Cassidy (singer and actor), John Coltrane (jazz musician), e.e.
cummings (poet), Enrico Fermi (physicist), Dick Gregory (comedian),
Luciano Pavarotti (opera singer), Cliff Richard (singer and actor),
Giuseppe Verdi (composer), Simon Ward (actor), the Duchess of York. S UN L IBRA —74—
M OON T AURUS I produce music as an apple-tree produces apples.
CAMILLE SAINT -SAËNS
The teacher’s job is to evoke love. This he can only do by loving.
A.S. NEILL Themes
AIR/EARTH Sensitive taste; love of music and art; cooperative; good
business sense; a campaigner for social welfare; sentimental;
affectionate; understanding; generous; nurturing; romantic; selfindulgent; ability to infect others with gaiety and laughter; vanity;
stylish; upper class.
Are you interested in abstract theories, impartial judgements, balanced
and open-minded discussions, but at the same time find that you dig in
your heels at the thought of change? Your personality is paradoxical –
and at the same time enormously attractive. This is because you put
across your ideas with a kind of impartial passion – some would call it
innocence – that surprises and convinces others.
You want to understand your world from the outside in, so you live
and enjoy life with both intellectual clarity and deep, earthy
conviction. You are an ethical person and want things to make moral
sense, yet at the same time you simply want to ‘be’ – to experience and
enjoy the exquisite, meaningful beauty all around you. You require harmonious, pleasant surroundings and certain basic inalienable rights
– you believe that everyone has a right to health, wealth and adequate
education – and without these you may feel that life is not worth
living. Your conviction for these values may take you into politics or
social work where you can be a persuasive and charismatic reformer.
You are either an artist or an art connoisseur, a musician or a lover
of music, and a much-liked and probably sought-after member of your
social circle. There is something about you that makes you very easy
to have around, as indeed you often are, as people are important to
you. You often feel you know what is best for them and can argue, in
the nicest possible way, until the cows come home about the ideas and
causes that are important to you.
You are cooperative rather than competitive, and believe that
everyone’s view should be heard, yet you have an instinct to control,
which can sometimes make you seem intractable. You can infect others
with a sense of gaiety and laughter, and although you are devoted to
your partner you are still a notorious flirt – not in order to stir up
excitement but because you possess such tangible allure and sociability
that you just cannot help it. A natural carer and counsellor, you know
how to put people at ease, and to make them feel special and cared for,
and people may fall in love with you temporarily (or permanently!) if
you are not careful.
You are idealistic and hedonistic at the same time, capable of
turning any mundane chore into an art form. You love the lush beauty
of nature and have a keen eye and nose for all things pleasing to the
senses. In a unique way you combine strong reasoning powers with
good earthy instincts. Extremely friendly, helpful and optimistic, you
are so attractively persuasive about the things you believe in that
others will find you irresistible most of the time. You exude a sense of
effortless charm which makes you seem pliable and easy-going, and
then suddenly you surprise people with your purposefulness and
stubbornness. Relationships Home and family life are central to your happiness, and just as
important as vocational interests. The way to get to you is through
your need for affection, harmony, understanding and love. At times
your sentimental idealism sweeps you along and propels you into
romantic escapades, but when you have found your mate you are a
devoted and steadfast lover, both friendly and amorous, dignified and
warm, conservative and sensuous.
Your capacity for being both mentally and emotionally engaged in
your artistic or business interests, in your friendships and your intimate
relationships, is the magic ingredient that makes those on whom your
gaze falls feel so flattered. Your Greatest Strengths
Graciousness; practical and emotional generosity; sensitivity to the
needs of others; balanced and patient commitment to justice; refined
aesthetic sense and perception; abiding faith in the power of love. Your Greatest Weaknesses
Tendency to be oversentimental and gullible; to over-indulge yourself
both emotionally and materially; a proneness to get stuck in black-andwhite moral positions; your sometimes superficial salesmanship style. Images for Integration
Newlyweds go on a gourmet’s tour of Italy for their honeymoon … A
lecture on ancient Greek architecture and town planning. Famous Personalities
Angie Dickinson (actress), Carrie Fisher (actress), F. Scott Fitzgerald
(writer), George Peppard (actor), Harold Pinter (playwright), A.S.
Neill (educationalist, founder of Summerhill), Camille Saint-Saëns
(composer). S UN L IBRA —75—
M OON G EMINI Time is a dress maker specialising in alterations.
FAITH BALDWIN
There are no really ugly women. Every woman is a Venus in her own
way.
BRIGITTE BARDOT
The immature poet imitates; the mature poet plagiarizes.
T.S. ELIOT Themes
AIR/AIR Lively intelligence; entertaining; communicative; youthful;
questioning; conciliatory; diplomatic; a love of words and ideas;
clever; artistic; graceful and charming; witty; neighbourly; a natural
teacher; seeks justice, understanding and novelty.
You have a youthful, engaging personality and, as is characteristic of
youth, you have lots of questions. Direct questions about people and
the world are never far from your quick, persuasive lips, but will you
ever be satisfied with the answers you get? And do you seriously
question yourself and your own motives, or is that a taboo area which
brings out all your most cunning diversionary tactics? Indeed, is life a
serious business or is it something of a cosmic joke?
Of the many questions life poses you, some of the key ones centre
around your relationships with others. You like attention and to be
accepted and well-thought-of by others, but you also get bored easily
and like to play devil’s advocate, to have your say and let others think
what they will. Like Groucho Marx, you can aspire to social elegance
and propriety, yet find that you instinctively take a much more ad-lib,
happy-go-lucky approach to things. Although deep friendships and one-to-one relationships are central
to your life, you can be remarkably carefree, flippant and outrageously
flirtatious. You like to see yourself as a thinker who lives a reflective
life, and indeed you possess real intellectual potential. In order to make
the most of it, however, you need to cultivate some perseverance. You
glibly agree with the maxim that the unexamined life is not worth
living, yet you easily get by without examining too deeply.
You have definite ideas about most things, which you can put over
with great charm and persuasion. What you think, and what other
people think, is all important to you, and you enjoy exchanging gossip,
games and good times. Ideally, however, you would like to have a
mind so clear that it sees beyond opinions. Sociability and lively
discussion with friends is your lifeblood. You want to live your life as
smoothly and intelligently as you can, and this may lead you to
espouse some particular ‘ism’ or collection of dependable mottos
which, in general, work most of the time.
Although you prefer harmonious intercourse, you have a gift for
seeking and arguing both sides of any question. In other words, you
cannot help stirring up a bit of healthy controversy. This characteristic
is welcome if you work in academics, politics or the theatre, but it is
not as appreciated in close relationships where you use that cunning
wit of yours to wriggle out of tight corners and irksome
responsibilities. This you may do when your own feelings or the
emotional demands of others seem threatening, for although you are
romantic enough, you do not suffer emotional inquisitions gladly.
Naturally articulate, versatile, socially skilled and humane, you can
readily slip into other ways of looking at things. This is because you
are truly interested in ideas, and you will do almost anything for a
laugh. You use your logical approach to explore and reconcile the
irreconcilable; that is, the enigmatic behaviour of people and society in
general. You work well with others, and your easy-going, adaptable
nature, and your relaxed, jokey, yet courteous approach to human
relations, make you a natural diplomat who can be guaranteed to make
any collaborative effort run smoothly. Relationships
The other person in your life is of very great importance to you, though
your casual and sometimes off-hand ways can seem to deny this. Close
friends and loved ones fill your life with fascination and colour – you
learn from them and are genuinely interested in what makes them tick.
And they reflect back to you what makes you tick.
You have an intelligent approach to relationships and may well
take the view that any two people can get along, so you will do your
best to make your partnership work. The other side of your somewhat
naive and sweetly reasonable, breezy approach to relationships is the
turbulent depths of emotions which you crave and yet find frightening
and a bit distasteful at the same time. Your mysterious emotional
depths can take you by surprise and cause an imbalance which you
really dislike. You can be a fickle chatterbox and a bit exhausting to
your partner if you do not slow down long enough to delve deeper than
surface facts. Your Greatest Strengths
Clarity of your mind; impartiality; willingness to consider opposite
viewpoints; lively and articulate self-expression; charm and genuine
friendliness that puts people at ease. Your Greatest Weaknesses
Your tendency to skim the surface and therefore never fully develop
your talents; to try to cover too much ground and spread yourself too
thin; to remain emotionally immature; and to be lazy and just rely on
your luck. Images for Integration
Birds circle in perfect formation on the breeze of a bright autumn day
… Having delivered a fair judgement, the chairman of a conciliation and arbitration board chats amiably with the previously opposing
factions. Famous Personalities
Faith Baldwin (writer), Brigitte Bardot (film actress), James Chadwick
(brilliant experimental physicist), Edwina Currie (politician), Helene
Deutsch (pioneer psychoanalyst), T.S. Eliot (poet, dramatist and critic),
Bryan Ferry (singer), Madeline Kahn (comedienne and actress), Ursula
LeGuin (author of Earthsea books), Arthur Lovejoy (philosopher and
historian of ideas), Groucho Marx (comedian), Jean F. Millet (romantic
painter), Barbara Walters (TV interviewer and news presenter). S UN L IBRA —76—
M OON C ANCER Sentimentality – that’s what we call the sentiment we don’t share.
GRAHAM GREENE
Losing love is like a window in your heart, everybody sees you’re
blown apart, everybody sees the wind blow.
PAUL SIMON Themes
AIR/WATER Sensitive; emotional; moody; entertaining; adaptable;
sociable; love of intimacy; caring and considerate; domestic; artistic;
musical; intuitive; prudent mind; talkative; nervous; devoted friend.
You are the socialite of the family, a romantic individualist, ambitious
for both career success in the outer world and for the intimate kinship
that keeps you going. Sensitive to the feelings and needs of others, you
use your ‘feminine’ intuition and amazing adaptability to help others
as well as to protect yourself from disharmony. You know what you feel, but is it really true? You are frequently
torn between your inner emotional, often sentimental, response and
your need for reasonable understanding, and for objective, clearheaded relationships. You like to think of yourself as impartial, fair and
socially concerned, but when your personal feelings are touched or
your safety threatened you suddenly become a sentimentalist, subject
to envy and every heart tug in the book. This makes you moody,
apprehensive and a little timid, as you are aware, at some level at least,
of how powerfully other people can effect you.
Sometimes you are convivial and eager for friendly discourse. On
such occasions your genuine interest in people, ideas and creative
possibilities comes to the fore, as does your natural diplomacy and
charisma. You can easily adapt and go with the flow in social
situations, and if you are shrewd (which you usually are) you can use
your adaptability in a personally advantageous way.
Intimate friendships in which true affection and trust are shared are
vital for your happiness. When you feel appreciated and truly ‘seen’
you purr like a kitten and your creative adrenaline works overtime.
There is nothing you would not do for those friends. At other times
you sink into a brooding, withdrawn shell, wanting to be left alone to
get on with your private life, your thoughts, impressions, problems and
your creative inspirations. You get hurt easily, deplore any kind of
unkindness, and can carry a strong resentment around until you feel
justice has been restored. Your inner equilibrium is disturbed by
injustice – you do not like it intellectually and it does not feel good
emotionally, either. Your innate sensitivity can work both for you and
against you, and this you know only too well.
Essentially you are a family person with a real need for a
harmonious home life and a steady emotional environment. But
differences in outlook and values and the introduction of new cultural
influences into the family will be part of your life theme. This will
stretch you and ultimately bring out the best in you.
You have a good mind for art, history, mythology, music and
teaching. You want to venture out into the wider world and then bring
that world back into your own private one, enlivening it with romance,
vitality and personal meaning. You probably learn how to put your best foot forward and to get the best out of people with the minimum
disruption to yourself. You may, therefore, become a good manager of
people, understanding their needs and problems as well as inspiring
them with your personal convictions, honesty and integrity. Relationships
You have a tremendous need for love. Close relationships are a big part
of your life and will bring out the best in you – eventually.
Psychologically speaking, childhood behaviour scripts are deeply
imbedded and can turn your mate into mum or dad before you know
what is happening. But you are the most sensitive of mates, wanting to
comfort, amuse and encourage your loved one, and you are very
receptive to the same from him or her. Your pitfall is being too
accommodating and also overly possessive and manipulative. You
need to honour your vulnerable feelings, to bring them out into the
open and not to be ashamed of them. Your Greatest Strengths
Sensitivity, warmth and concern for others; emotional energy;
intellectual curiosity and altertness; quiet individualism and respect for
others’ rights; artistic imagination and powers of communication;
adaptability in the face of obstacles. Your Greatest Weaknesses
A tendency to over-romanticize people and places; sentimentality;
need to please others; emotional instability and vulnerability;
proneness to self-pity and carping when people do not look after you in
the ‘right’ way. Image for Integration
A patriot rouses the masses to seek education, and then goes home to
cook dinner for his friends. Famous Personalities
Rona Barrett (Hollywood gossip columnist), Annie Besant
(theosophist), John Kenneth Galbraith (economist), Graham Greene
(writer), Clive James (critic, writer and television presenter), Olivia
Newton-John (singer and actress), Paul Simon (songwriter and
musician), Eleanour Roosevelt (Amercian first lady). —77—
S UN L IBRA M OON L EO
It is absurd to divide people into good and bad. People are either
charming or tedious.
OSCAR WILDE
Hate the sin and love the sinner.
MAHATMA GANDHI
Twinkle, twinkle, little star, How I wonder what you are! Up above the
world so high, Like a diamond in the sky!
JANE TAYLOR Themes
AIR/FIRE Vivacious; theatrical; vain; aesthetic; love of literature;
idealistic; graceful; honourable; poetic; romantic; trusting; visionary;
religious; ardent; high-minded; witty; flamboyant; has ‘an
unconquerable gaiety of soul’.
A passionate idealist and lover of noble and beautiful ideas, you are
true to your inner vision of yourself as an artist of life and love, even to
the point of sometimes appearing rather high-minded and imperious.
Magnetic, warm, and charming, you are a social being committed to
nurturing the highest potential in people and society. Something of a
visionary, you have ardently romantic goals and are unlikely to
compromise yourself on any issue of importance – and nearly all your issues are important. In fact, it is your burning conviction to your
ideals that gives your personality a radiance that attracts people to you.
You are often a real character – fun-loving and playful, satirical,
elegant and refined. Although you are a good practical joker, you do
not relish jokes being played at your own expense. You can be
temperamental and huffy if your pride is wounded, although when you
get argumentative and overbearing it is usually because you are feeling
wobbly and insecure. Your resilience is great, however, and even in the
worst of times you possess an unconquerable gaiety of soul which
sustains your optimism and creative inspiration.
You idealize partnership and seek stimulating, intelligent
companions, and you are likely to be found in lively, artistic or literary
social circles where you will often be the life and soul of the party. A
very strong need to be loved and admired makes you vulnerable and
somewhat dependent, although you prefer to think of yourself as the
one on whom others lean. You need to guard against your intense
idealism setting you up for continued disillusionment when you find
that people have fallen off the pedestals on which you have put them.
No one is as pure and perfect as you would like them to be.
Although you have great faith in yourself, you need romance and
beauty to keep your inspiration flowing. You have a tendency to cover
up any feelings of insecurity by behaving in a snobbish, outlandishly
self-important way – substituting social position for true
accomplishment. Although you express yourself with great personal
flair, even when lacking confidence, your over-the-top behaviour can,
ironically, make your deepest insecurities more apparent.
You like to be flattered but you cannot stomach empty adulation.
Your theatrical skill is matched by your natural diplomatic bent. Thus,
you make a charismatic political or social leader, an adored teacher,
and a respected and loved friend and lover. Relationships
Romance is the staple of your life – you need it, in some form, to
survive. When you are in love you taste the ecstasy of completion, the
purity of passion, the meaning of life, but you soon find that this is all a bit heavy for your partner. Love brings out your nobility and your
highest ideals, but you will have more fun if you realize you are
relating to a flesh-and-blood mortal who just wants to be loved for
him- or herself.
You fall in love with love and with the self that you become when
you are in love. You need to come down to earth a bit, take the stars
out of your eyes for a while and detach from the courtly side of the
love game. As you become more honest about your own doubts and
inadequacies, you will be less affronted by those you find in your
partner; and instead of a role player in an exciting drama, he or she
will be allowed to become an individual, a human being in a human
relationship. Taking out the rubbish and balancing the cheque book
then become part of the joint effort to live joyfully and fully in the real
world. Your Greatest Strengths
Great kindness, playfulness and gentility; quick wit and capacity for
seeing the dramatic and comic in everyday situations; nobility and
ethical conscience; the artistic flair you bring to public service;
generosity of spirit. Your Greatest Weaknesses
Vanity; reliance on others’ admiration and good opinion; luxury-loving
self-indulgence and laziness; a stubborn refusal to recognize your own
limitations; a tendency to make poor judgements when flattery will get
you everywhere. Images for Integration
A performance of The Importance of Being Earnest … The managing
director throws a birthday party … A political idealist is crowned
leader by adoring followers. Famous Personalities
Catherine Deneuve (actress), Eleonora Duse (actress), Mahatma
Gandhi (Indian national leader), Evel Knievel (stunt motorcyclist),
Angela Rippon (television presenter), George C. Scott (actor), Jane
Taylor (poet), Margaret Thatcher (former British prime minister), Rev.
Desmond Tutu (archbishop of Capetown), Oscar Wilde (playwright). —78—
S UN L IBRA M OON V IRGO
I would say that music is the easiest means in which to express … but
since words are my talent, I must try to express clumsily in words what
pure music would have done better.
WILLIAM FAULKNER
The ‘what should be’ never did exist but people keep trying to live up
to it. There is no ‘what should be’, there is only what is.
LENNY BRUCE Themes
AIR/EARTH Eminently civilized; fine intellect; social critic; correct
behaviour; refined simplicity; considered actions; particular aesthetics;
kind-hearted and helpful; philosophical and judicial mind; exquisite
composure; devoted artist.
Are you the stylish peacemaker who dialogues with the whole
spectrum of humanity – tramps, vamps, artists and aristocracy – to get
their views? Or do you find security in fastidiously adhering to a
black-and-white approach that weeds out the unsanitary elements of
life?
You are the socially concerned artist, the diligent craftsman or the
social theoretician with a flair for people. Essentially, you are the
epitome of the civilized person – rational, articulate, peace-loving,
modest, graceful, socially concerned and purposeful. People interest you and you interest others because of your understated charm and wit.
Nevertheless, you are very picky about the people you take into your
confidence, and quite matter-of-fact about where you stand on most
things.
Even though you have a diplomatic way of delivering your
criticisms and opinions, it is easy for you to appear aloof and rather
cool. This is because your preferred mode of operation is to bring
everything, even irrational emotions, to the bar of reason. Sometimes
your desire to be fair and courteous conflicts with your conviction that
you are right and your annoyance with others who do not share your
opinion. You never actually want to upset anyone, however, and
harmony and cooperation are ultimately more important to you than
standing alone on principle. You can be scathingly honest when you
relate with others, but your purpose is to find the bare bones of truth
and to polish and refine them so as to reveal the most intelligent way to
live.
You like to observe people because you learn from them, but you
analyse, compare and weigh things up because of your intense dislike
of hypocrisy. Your instinct for finding the practical principle
underneath all the superfluous fuss is what makes you a good teacher.
You probably enjoy helping to open other people’s minds to the
detailed beauty of the world through cultural jaunts and visits to
museums, theatres, libraries and concerts. You enjoy the best
achievements of civilization and prefer to leave the ugly bits out.
Possessing an independent mind that naturally observes and analyses,
you enjoy actively putting your knowledge and skills to practical use.
This means that an independent career of some kind where you can
hone your specialized talents as close to perfection as possible is where
you are most likely to flourish. Relationships
In relationships you have a kindly, devoted, affectionate nature, and
you love to be of practical help to your loved one. At the same time,
you enjoy attention and being pampered, and may have a kind of repressed vanity which sulks cheerlessly if your lover does not get the
message that you are feeling sensitive.
Anything coarse or ludicrous turns you off, and you may find the
irrational world of emotions a bit overwhelming and bewildering at
times. Wildly emotional people seem messy and unattractive to you,
but also extremely fascinating. You can feel intensely, but as you
dislike losing control, you find more elegant and modest ways of
showing your feelings.
Love for you must contain a strong mental rapport and a sharing of
hobbies, artistic interests and humour. You may also be quite domestic
and love gardening and cooking, although your purist, finicky tastes
may be too rarified for most of your family. Although you tend to think
of yourself as pretty self-sufficient, you will blossom and develop
more confidence in a secure relationship where you can relax enough
to learn how to be silly and play. Your Greatest Strengths
Self-sufficiency; reasoning abilities; social concern; practical
helpfulness; intelligence; aesthetic sensibilities; fine sense of
discrimination; kindness; tactfulness; devotion to your values and
loved ones. Your Greatest Weaknesses
Finicky attitudes and dislike of messiness; inclination to over-analyse,
critize and intellectualize feelings; a sometimes ‘holier-than-thou’
attitude based on your cleverness and quick summing up of the facts. Image for Integration
With minute precision, a sculptor chisels the finishing touches to his
work of art for the 99th time, and then sweeps up before leaving for his
art-therapy group. Famous Personalities
Lenny Bruce (comedian), John Evans (politician), William Faulkner
(writer), Lucien Gaudin (Olympic fencer), Dante Gherst (opera
singer), Frank Herbert (writer), Alberto Giacometti (sculptor), Deborah
Kerr (actress), Horatio Nelson (admiral), Max Schmeling (world
heavyweight boxer). —79—
S UN L IBRA M OON L IBRA
Charming people live up to the very edge of their charm and behave as
outrageously as the world will let them. People say life is the thing, but
I prefer reading.
LOGAN PEARSALL SMITH
The opposite of a correct statement is a false statement. But the
opposite of a profound truth may well be another profound truth.
NIELS BOHR Themes
AIR/AIR Intensely idealistic; diplomatic; fine intellect; powers of
comparison; zeal for justice; courteous; deplores harshness; gracious
and friendly; vacillating; seeks relationships and romance; flirtatious;
vivacious; chivalrous; refined way of treating others; ‘gentle parfit
knight’.
Do you like people, love people, need people, feel inspired by people,
but find that you inevitably become utterly disillusioned with them?
Diplomatic, graceful, sociable, you are something of a ‘gentle parfit
knight’ (Chaucer), set on a happy, even course by the love of a good
woman, man or ideal. But life throws you plenty of curve balls when
that good man or woman turns out to be less than ideal.
Intellectually you tend to be a perfectionist, but, ironically, you are
often a master at laissez-faire, realizing that everyone has their own idea about what is important and that every person’s truth has value.
You are an idealist, but when it comes to working with people you
strive for the best, most balanced option. This entails plenty of
discussion in order to arrive at a truly ethical, fair, consensus decision
or plan of action.
You truly hate unfairness of any kind and will complain strongly if
you or those you love and respect are wronged. In fact, you can really
wage war in the name of re-establishing justice. Courtesy and refined
manners are important to you – you cannot imagine anyone behaving
crudely or with malice and so you are often rudely awakened by the
harsher realities of human nature. Discord throws you off balance.
If you lived in ancient Greece, you would be an ideal philosopher,
a follower of Plato, a soul for whom the True, the Good and the
Beautiful are as real as the constancy of the seasons. In the modern
world you could be a diplomat, an artist, a judge, a musician, a writer
or a teacher – for in all these professions there is the common aim to
express eloquently the most just and beautiful ideal or form.
Chaos and crudeness are anathema to your very being. In your
efforts to restore harmony and live an ideal life, you will, however,
find that you have to make many adjustments and compensations,
which you are well equipped to do because of your gift for strategy
and negotiation. Just be careful that you do not bend too much to fit
into what you think others want. Even though you say you want peace
and harmony, you actually come alive when you have to fight for what
you believe in, when you are forced to jump off the fence and take
command.
But just what do you believe in? It takes a while and contact with
many people to find out. You may seem to jump onto one side of the
fence, and then to the other, but it is only in order to see the truth in all
views and to try to balance things out. In fact, you can use opposition
to your own advantage, and will find controversy a catalyst for your
own powers of understanding and decision-making. Relationships Whether professional, platonic or passionate, relationships play a
central role in your life. In order to feel complete and right you need
someone to meet you half-way; and you need feedback from others on
all your ideas. You may espouse independence, but you need above all
to be loved and balanced by a partner.
Romantic relationships are almost a ‘wisdom path’ for you. That is,
you need them in order to find out who you really are, as though
another will supply the missing ingredient in your own personality.
You are romantic and loving, but your idealistic, airy designs help you
to manoeuvre around those irksome, raw emotions which do not fit
into your perfect paradigm. When things get too ‘heavy’ you may fly
off to another potentially ‘ideal’ relationship.
Your breakthrough comes when you discover that your real
Achilles’ heel is dependency – depending on others to convince you
that you are loveable. Then you will feel more secure and able to get
on with the real challenge of making your relationship human as well
as beautiful. Your Greatest Strengths
Devotion to truth and justice; ready kindness and companionability;
capacity to see your opponent’s view; artistic inspiration; a desire to
uplift and encourage others with understanding and optimism. Your Greatest Weaknesses
A tendency to be indecisive; insistence on civilized, rational discussion
to avoid real emotional involvement; dependency on others for your
sense of wellbeing and confidence; addiction to relationships. Image for Integration
A prince and princess of warring tribes fall in love and marry, and
1,000 years of peace ensue. Famous Personalities
Niels Bohr (physicist), Michael Douglas (actor), Heidegger
(philosopher), Derek Jacobi (actor), Felicity Kendall (actress), Angela
Lansbury (actress), Christopher Lloyd (actor), Logan Pearsall Smith
(essayist), Arthur Rimbaud (poet), Arthur Schlesinger (historian),
Romy Schneider (actress), Bruce Springsteen (singer and songwriter),
Sting (rock star), Lech Walesa (trade unionist and politician), Kate
Winslet (actress). S UN L IBRA —80—
M OON S CORPIO The century on which we are entering – the century which will come
out of this war-can be and must be the century of the common man.
HENRY A. WALLACE
Venice is like eating an entire box of chocolate liquers in one go.
TRUMAN CAPOTE Themes
AIR/WATER Self-possessed; restrained cordiality; good instincts;
astute, analytical and judicial mind; strategic; perceptive; love of the
good life; ambitious, aloof and intense; magnetic and powerful; urge
for social regeneration; love of debate; desire for truth; intellectuality
v. sensuality.
A diplomatic, enticing, quiet demeanour plus great fortitude and
penetrating insight combine to make you a charmingly formidable
person. You are the blonde bombshell whose self-possession and
sanguine smile says ‘don’t mess with me’; the cordial, debonair
businessman who surprises colleagues with his rod-of-iron willpower
and astute decisions. Underneath that conciliatory veneer, your powerful instincts work
overtime sizing up people and situations – and you do not miss a trick.
A strong social sense takes you into the mainstream of life where your
love of learning, your need for mental challenge and critical debate
over social issues, and your hefty desire for respect will find you a
vital, active role in the world.
You are a charismatic mixture of social idealism, emotional
intensity and judicial detachment, and your exacting but diplomatic
mind offers its criticism in a way that makes others sit up and take
notice rather than wince. You are interested in people, politics and
power, and how these three mega-ideas can be balanced to regenerate
society. You can face the mess around you with unruffled poise and get
on with making your analysis and judgement about what needs to be
done. This, plus your innate friendliness, makes you enormously
effective and popular, though some may be disturbed by your double
messages.
The theme of fairness versus personal gain is one you will meet
often in your life. You are a good detective and enjoy rooting out
hypocrisy, calling a spade a spade, and standing up for the underdog.
Equally, however, you have an appetite for security, comfort and
luxury, and you are unlikely to neglect yourself or your material needs
whilst busily performing your duties and upholding the law (as you see
it).
You are something of a maverick, enjoying controversy and
intellectual challenge where your social ideals and survival instinct
come together to create a champion debator of great integrity. You are
one of the few Sun Librans for whom decisions are not such a
terrifying prospect, and because of your incisive mental abilities and
your capacity to face facts, you would be a natural in politics or socialreform movements. Whatever you do, your sincerity, enthusiasm and
positive approach win admirers and fans with ease. Relationships
You can be very emotionally controlled but this does not alter the fact
that you are very needful of love and emotional fulfilment. High standards keep you playing the field, but suddenly you fall head over
heals for someone, and raw emotion takes over. True love has to have
some passionate intrigue and angst to keep you interested – and you
will create it if it is not forthcoming. One part of you may think you
can handle a light-hearted affair, but unless you experience emotional
depth you will not feel that any relationship is worth the bother.
Your emotions are powerful and your desires profound, hence you
may fear the dependency on others that you sense could develop. That
might feel too much like giving up your cherished autonomy and
control, yet you need intensity and you need people. As you learn to
trust yourself and the depth of your feelings, you will be able to risk
the thrill and pain of intimate relationships without hedging your bets
so much. You have a lot of pride; love will bring you the pleasures of
humility. Your Greatest Strengths
An exacting sense of justice; courage and tenacity in the face of
difficulties; subtle, clever way of delivering clear-headed judgements;
devotion to ideals and to loved ones; ability to weigh evidence
impartially and to make decisions. Your Greatest Weaknesses
Moodiness; temptation to manipulate others; self-interest which can
masquerade as a crusader for social justice and harmony; a tendency to
be overly suspicious and paranoid of other’s motives, which can
damage the ideal harmony between you and a loved one you want so
much. Images for Integration
An army general becomes patron of a new museum of art. A wolf and
an elegant Burmese cat become inseparable friends. Famous Personalities
Julie Andrews (actress), Christopher Booker (journalist and author),
Truman Capote (writer), Eminem (rock star rapper), Richard Gordon
(writer), Trevor Howard (actor), François Mauriac (writer), Linda
McCartney (photographer and musician), Roger Moore (actor),
Gwyneth Paltrow (actor), Will Smith (actor). S UN L IBRA —81—
M OON S AGITTARIUS I explained to him that I had simple tastes and didn’t want anything
ostentatious, no matter what it cost me.
ART BUCHWALD
I see people out there enjoying themselves and I want to join them. I
like the camaraderie of the House.
BETTY BOOTHROYD , SPEAKER OF THE HOUSE OF COMMONS Themes
AIR/FIRE Calm yet restless; idealism; foresight; spontaneously
helpful; ardent but flighty; generous spirit; adventurous; witty;
intelligent; enthusiastic; missionary zeal; philosophical and
philanthropic interests; persuasive powers.
Are you purposefully ambitious or easy-going? Are you happiest
socializing with friends or when chasing the next project and a new
horizon? Do you run everywhere or stroll at your leisure? Do you
listen, all-ears to others or do you tend to hold forth about your latest
obsession to the nearest audience you can find?
If you are doing what you want to do and what you believe in, life
for you is a constant love affair, as you delight in doing your own
thing, especially if it involves helping others. You are the soul of
diplomacy, capable of seeing all sides of any question and genuinely wanting to be truthful and fair, but this does not prevent you from
being fabulously enthusiastic about your own convictions and
viewpoints. Your obvious integrity gives emphasis to your compelling
charm and may help to hide from you your very real, if almost
invisible, ambition and determination to make your mark.
The person who said ‘If you want something done, ask a busy
person’ probably had you in mind. With your immense enthusiasm,
energy, charm and humour, you manage to juggle several things at
once. You not only show interest in, but also actually facilitate, other
people’s pet projects. An excellent organizer and communicator, you
enjoy cooperative ventures. You also have the qualities of a natural
diplomat, with an added touch of flair, elegance and extravagance.
Naturally considerate and concerned for the welfare of others, you
can harness your high moral sense and forthright approach to further
their needs and do what you believe to be the right thing. Although you
are not always terribly practical, you can usually get down to the
essentials and cut through protocol. You are helpful and obliging, but
can also see how to get your own way in most things without
necessarily bending the rules, and certainly without offending anyone
– the only time this might happen is when your sense of moral
correctness gets carried away and you become a bit holier-than-thou
and unable to adapt to imperfect circumstances.
Your lively, original mind is constantly tuned in to the Zeitgeist, so
you know spontaneously where things are going and what needs to be
done. This gives you an immense flair as a populist and as a formulator
and mouthpiece for grand visions that take society by storm, or for
establishing businesses that speak to the needs of the masses. You want
others to hear what you have to say; you love spreading the message
and make an inspiring teacher, lecturer and educationalist. You may
also excel in advertising where your charm, wit and ability to see
patterns and recognize trends can take you far. Whether drawn to
science or art, you love to look ahead and explore new paths. You may
have a deep appreciation for philosophy, art and literature and may be
especially drawn to music, though you enjoy expressing yourself and
your ideas through most media, given half a chance. Relationships
Although you have an independent nature, you are really quite
romantic. Relationships are vital to your wellbeing, yet they can also
be your Achilles’ heel. As a born idealist, you are a natural team player
and are prepared to give your all to those you believe in and to any
worthy cause that has caught your imagination. But you do expect your
enthusiasm to be reciprocated. In this you can be disappointed, for few
can match your dedicated zest and commitment. Thus you are likely to
suffer ‘downers’, periods of disillusionment when you wonder why
you give so much of yourself to so many, for so little return. But you
are resilient and forgiving and ever an optimist.
You need love and affection and you are devoted in your own
fashion. But you are fairly independent-minded and do not really like
to be interfered with by a disgruntled lover when you are engaged in
one of your single-minded pursuits. Your loved one will need to keep
up with a fast pace, as you like to travel and go places – both
physically and intellectually. Your Greatest Strengths
Your lively spirit of cooperative enthusiasm; grace; wit; eternal
optimism; good humour; ability to see the larger vision and new ways
of doing things; flair for persuasion and publicity. Your Greatest Weaknesses
Tendency to overstretch yourself and over-estimate your capacities; to
hide personal problems with workaholism; appearing too proud and
aloof from others; emotional naivety; a lack of introspection and
blindness to your own deeper motives. Images for Integration
Bob Geldof spins Band Aid out of the air to help famine-stricken
Africa … An educationalist creates a Palace of Discovery to feed and stimulate young minds. Famous Personalities
Elle Abel (radio journalist), Salvatore Accardo (violinist), Pierre
Bonnard (painter), Betty Boothroyd (Speaker of the House of
Commons), Art Buchwald (writer, journalist and humorist), Bruce
Catton (historian, editor and journalist), Sir Joseph Chamberlain
(English statesman and winner of 1925 Nobel prize for peace), Bob
Geldof (musician and philanthropist), Sean Taro Lennon (singer son of
John Lennon), Jean Perrin (Nobel prize-winning physicist), Dory
Previn (songwriter), Christopher Reeve (actor). S UN L IBRA —82—
M OON C APRICORN The Supreme Court has handed down the Eleventh Commandment:
‘Thou shalt not, in thy classrooms, read the first ten.’
FLETCHER KNEBEL
We must start coming forth with our energies … our intellects, and our
abilities to see what is right and what must be done, so the suffering
will stop, and the phrase ‘life, liberty, and the pursuit of happiness’
begins to make some human sense.
BOBBY SEALE Themes
AIR/EARTH Purposeful; pragmatic; courteous; tasteful; orderly;
sophisticated; strategic; the just politician; tactful; good manners;
opportunistic; skilful at managing people; diplomatic; powerful;
controlling; persuasive; responsible; sensitive to the moods of others.
You are the artful manager par excellence – the sociable patriarch, the
serious socialite, the professional artist, the steadfast friend. Your great sense of diplomacy and your instinct for power work together to make
you a shrewd, formidable but likeable person. You believe passionately
in fairness, law and order, propriety and ethical systems, but you also
believe strongly in yourself and in living a life of which you (or mum
and dad) would be proud.
Fairly ambitious and determined to succeed, you can translate your
idealism into prudent and decisive action and land yourself exactly
where you want to be. But your sensitivity to others’ opinions and
needs is as strong as your personal ambition, and this makes you
popular, impressive, trusted and well-liked. You give personal
ambition a good name; you carry others along on your own tide of
success; and you make others realize that power and wealth are okay
when used in the right way. At the same time you need recognition for
your successes and contributions, and in this sense you rely on others
and are not as independent as you think.
You have a love of both material and moral order, and this can
manifest in a number of ways – in a love of art and a desire to keep
your home well stocked and aesthetically harmonized; in impecable
manners and a respect for hierarchical relationships as well as rules
and regulations; or possibly in a lively public spirit and in the need to
fulfil an important role in the world. You take your responsibilities
seriously and your word is as good as gold. You tend to have a cool,
controlled exterior but underneath you are sympathetic, congenial, and
paternal towards your close friends.
There is a side of you that likes solitude, but in general you want to
be part of a team – preferably the team-leader. The truest way you
express your love is to unfailingly provide what you have promised –
letting someone down would be the worst thing you could ever do. But
your ambitious, professional approach to life could be a little irksome
to a partner or to close family members who do not want to be
organized down to the last detail of relaxation periods. You are so good
at organizing people that you may not know when to stop, and taken to
the extreme, your innate managerial talents can turn into compulsive
behaviour.
Your standards are very high, and you may need to cultivate more
tolerance – you are something of a perfectionist and can be a snob if you are not careful. Comfort, beauty and designer labels are important
to you – there really isn’t an ounce of gypsy blood in you. Relationships
A close relationship is very important for your wellbeing, and when
you have found the right person you can be extremely devoted. You
need to be adored – and respected – and when you know you have this
you can relax and enjoy yourself.
One side of you wants to do everything with your partner, whilst
another knows how to enjoy being alone and answering only to
yourself. Perhaps somewhere deep inside you know that the final
human condition is a lonely one, so you adjust and adapt and survive.
You have to be careful that this part of you does not turn cynical and
wish loneliness. You like to control things and you have to learn that
being in a relationship is not the same as running a business. Your Greatest Strengths
Executive skills and organizing abilities; your fair, rational and tactful
approach to problems and your logical, sharp mind; social conscience
and sense of responsibility; sense of duty; determination to win;
sensitivity to the mood of your environment and the needs of others. Your Greatest Weaknesses
Subtle talent for manipulation; an inner conflict between the
cooperative spirit and blatant self-interest; an over-rational approach to
relationships and emotional matters; a desire to keep all areas of your
life completely tidy; an over-sensitive ego which takes offence too
easily. Images for Integration
At the annual company Christmas party, the chairman dresses up as
Father Christmas and hands out new gold-engraved stationery for everybody … The Statue of Liberty. Famous Personalities
Neve Campbell (actress), Johnny Carson (television talk-show host),
Dr David Clark (politician), Matt Damon (actor), Joan Fontaine
(actress), Fletcher Knebel (novelist), Pope John Paul I, Mary
McFaddon (fashion designer), Anne Robinson (television and radio
presenter), Bobby Seale (Black Panthers activist), Dimitri
Shostakovich (composer). S UN L IBRA —83—
M OON A QUARIUS If there’s anything that you want, If there’s anything I can do, Just call
on me, And I’ll send it along with love from me to you.
JOHN LENNON
Whenever I prepare for a journey I prepare as though for death.
Should I never return, all is in order. This is what life has taught me.
KATHERINE MANSFIELD
Turn Off, Tune In, Drop Out.
TIMOTHY LEARY Themes
AIR/AIR Spirit of cooperation; independent but romantic; rational;
outgoing; communicative; love of truth and beauty; gracefully
anarchistic; detached but humanitarian; objective; friendly; receptive;
idealistic; vivid imagination; refined artistic taste; lively sociability.
Do you want to be one of the team but stand out as the awkward
individualist who does not fit in? Do you have so much faith in the
essential goodness, truth and beauty of life that you occasionally put a spanner in the works just, well, to make things more interesting? Are
you well-meaning and receptive to others but also maddeningly
resistant to being pinned down or put into a convenient pigeon hole?
You are a reasonable and idealistic person. For you, problems and
dilemmas are things that can be resolved by reason, discussion and, at
the last resort, by law. Although society, elevated principles, and social
institutions matter to you, perhaps even more than the individual
people who go to make them up and run them, for you it is vital that
you live the principles that you hold in such high esteem. This makes
you something of a visionary and prone to set yourself up for
disappointment, for nobody – including yourself – could be as ideal as
you would like.
Equality, liberty, fraternity is probably your credo, and no matter
how impractical you might be, your friends will always glean the good
intentions that inform your actions and behaviour. Although you can
be charming, magnetic and witty, you willingly bring up contentious
subjects and speak your mind with a kind of serene frankness. You
look at all sides of any issue, and you bring a lively interest and
enviable clarity to all social interchange. Even when you have strong
views, you do not really want to rock the boat too much, and this
makes you an ideal diplomat.
Friendships are enormously important to you, yet because you hate
upsetting anyone, you find it difficult to be friends with anyone with
whom you cannot be totally frank and open. The challenge you face
again and again is how to keep the harmony and connectedness,
without sacrificing your autonomy. Because you are such an equable,
rational person, you easily feel threatened by powerful emotions such
as hate and jealousy. They feel like enemies of the intelligent world
order you seek, and yet paradoxically you are often attracted to
emotional types.
Emotions tend to play hide-and-seek with you, pulling you into a
merry chase that feels both exhilarating and frustrating. Emotional
intrigue actually fascinates you, and you allow it to feed your instinct
for self-dramatization. Whilst all the while pretending to figure out
why someone could behave so irrationally, you are really getting a
buzz and, if inclined towards the literary arts, planning your next plot. Relationships
You come alive in social settings and know how people like to be
treated. You can be flirtatious and sincere at the same time, both
provocative and philosophical, demure and straightforward. All kinds
of relationships are important to you, but True Love takes priority. In
the midst of closeness and intimacy you can, however, somehow feel
detached and remote, and yet strangely yearning for more.
Despite your strongly intellectual approach to life, you tend to
romanticize people and to spin imaginative ideas around them and
your relationship with them. You can be passionate and devoted
enough, but you may retain a sort of childlike arrogance about what
should and should not happen in relationships. You may be a brilliant
psychologist with a profound understanding of human emotion and
motivation and what makes people tick, but in practice you may find
you feel overwhelmed by any measure of emotional tension or
conflict. But you do not give up easily! Your Greatest Strengths
Your natural sense of justice; social conscience and sense of belonging
to the human family; kindness and desire to be of help; openness to
new ideas; relaxed, forgiving approach to other people’s foibles;
aspiration to impartiality and to a universal viewpoint. Your Greatest Weaknesses
A proneness to laziness and lack of ambition; naive insistence on
rationality at all costs; an over-emphasis on the laissez faire approach
which prevents definite answers and choices being made; a tendency to
be too idealistic and impractical, which makes you ineffectual;
blindness to your own dependence on others; inclination to dream your
life away, building castles of romance and a Utopia in your mind. Images for Integration A group of literary radicals stage a ‘love-in’ to protest against
government military policy … In an elegant opera house, a trendy jazz
musician performs rag time with a symphony orchestra. Famous Personalities
George Gershwin (composer), Charles Ives (composer), Aaron Judah
(novelist and children’s writer), R.D. Laing (psychoanalyst), Katherine
Mansfield (writer), John Le Carré (writer of spy novels), Timothy
Leary (psychologist, psychedelics’ guru), John Lennon (musician and
songwriter), Susan Lucas (novelist). —84—
S UN L IBRA M OON Plutão ISCES There is nothing in the world I so reverence as beauty, whether of the
world, of character or in a soul.
MARIE STOPES
None of us can help the things life has done to us … at last everything
comes between you and what you ‘d like to be, and you have lost your
true self forever.
EUGENE O’NEILL Themes
AIR/WATER Sensitive; artistic; adaptable; wistfulness; inconstant;
sociable; talkative; an idealist of the heart; a dreamy romantic; loving;
insightful; dependent; vacillating moods; perceptive intellect;
generous; helpful; rich imagination; lazy.
Your ethereal charm and your genteel diplomacy make you one of the
easiest and nicest people to have around. Your essentially diplomatic
spirit and helpfulness mean that, in a very real sense, your bliss is
making others happy. Idealistic and romantic, and often gullible and impressionable, you are a Utopian dreamer who will work, in either
your personal or public life, for social equality.
You observe and analyse others; you seek others’ views and, with
your keen intuition, you reformulate your own. Your gifts of openness
and imagination ennable you truly to ‘get inside the dragon’s skin’, to
see the other viewpoint, to feel what it is like to be someone else, and
to effortlessly follow the mind of your nearest companion – whether he
or she is a crook or a saint.
You have the mind of a detective, a psychologist or an actor. And
because you intuitively know that motives are usually inextricably
mixed, your impulse is always to see and to understand rather than to
judge. This uncanny ability to peer into the private feelings behind the
public face lends an air of mystery to your personality. You can be
sociable and outgoing, but all the while your secret heart is testing the
true climate, the real message in the emotional environment.
A natural worker on behalf of others, you are capable of both
initiative as well as fitting in with larger plans. You can handle
controversial matters smoothly and diplomatically, because the cause
of unity is always close to your heart. You work gracefully and
charmingly, hearing the feelings and thoughts behind another’s words,
and this makes you a superb counsellor and group facilitator. Your
largeness of mind and humility in the face of the variety and vagaries
of human nature give the impression of massive fairness and
compassion, which endears you to others. Relationships
Close relationships are the pivotal experience in your life, for through
identification with others and their best interests, you find yourself and
your own. The slippery slope for you, however, is losing your balance
when romance takes over. Because you are so giving and sympathetic
and yearn for harmonious union with another, your emotional nature is
often easy prey to the delusions of romance. You desperately want to
believe in your lover, and there is a part of you that secretly yearns to
capitulate, to give your partner sole ownership, so you can bask in a dreamlike abandon. This can lead to that ever-present tendency to
martyr yourself and unconsciously to assume the role of doormat.
Through being unable to stand others’ suffering and giving too
much in relationships you will discover the deep well of emotional
strength you possess. And when you pull yourself out of hopeless
emotional symbiosis and despair, as you will do periodically
throughout your life, you will realize how strong you in fact are.
Intense emotional involvements leave you either drowning in delicious
puddles of self-pity or feeling newly self-defined, enriched,
empowered and more committed to allowing your own self-taught
wisdom to guide your actions. Your Greatest Strengths
An intuitive mind; non-judgemental empathy; romantic devotion to the
‘great ideals’ (love, brotherhood, freedom); ability to listen and
understand; capacity to retain the innocence of childhood even when
portraying the silky elegance of stardom. Your Greatest Weaknesses
Lack of conviction; vacillation at crucial crossroads; tendency to drift
into new intimacies when the delights of romance fade; identifying
with numerous viewpoints and positions – this creates confusion and
leaves you out of touch with who you really are, and you may have to
withdraw into yourself to regain your confidence. Image for Integration
The curtains come down, the actor takes off his mask and, in privacy,
looks into his mirror to find himself as a child of six with his
imaginary friend. Famous Personalities James Clavell (writer and director), Aleister Crowley (occultist), Lillie
Langtry (actress), Carole Lombard (actress), Yves Montand (actor),
Anthony Newley (singer), Eugene O’Neill (playwright), Jerry Seinfeld
(comedian/actor), Alicia Silverstone (actress), Marie Stopes (feminist,
family planner and poet), Pierre Trudeau (former Canadian prime
minister), Catherine Zeta Jones (actress). Chapter Eleven
SUN IN SCORPIO
—85—
S UN S CORPIO
M OON A RIES
Lord give me chastity – but not yet.
None save great men have been the authors of heresies.
ST . AUGUSTINE OF HIPPO
Nothing great will ever be achieved without great men, and men are
great only if they are determined to be so.
CHARLES DE GAULLE Themes
WATER/FIRE Large appetite for life; a fighter and strategist; volatile;
impatient yet circumspect; dedicated; missionary zeal; ambitious;
courageous; determined; egocentric; passionate views; wilful; proud
and persuasive; ruthless; a tenacious individualist.
Fight! Fight! Fight! You rally to the call of battle of any kind with
unstoppable courage and determination. Yet you can also find conflicts
where others see none. This can arise from an inner duel between your
instinct to assert yourself and your immense desire for self-control.
With your natural pride, ambition, vigour and self-esteem, you
want to be great in some way and to make your mark upon the world.
But should you go about it head first, rushing in where angels fear to
tread? Or do you approach the world, deeply suspicious of its perils and pitfalls, determined to conquer it by strategy and stealth? Either
way, you are one of life’s warriors, and when you can bring together
the fighter and the strategist within you, you are well-nigh invincible.
As someone with great personal and public ambition you ‘aim high
and stand upright’. You may, however, find yourself caught between a
smouldering, silent intensity, which you find difficult to express, and a
need to get out there, guns blazing, and tell the world what you are
going to do – shooting straight from the hip. Despite your volatile
swings in mood you can be highly committed and deeply persuasive in
your approach to life, and will flourish best when you have some kind
of overriding, personal mission with which you can identify.
When you do get your two very different sides together and start
firing on all cylinders, you have at your command a passionate zeal
and an intense drive for action. This goes beyond your own personal
needs to the desire to champion larger causes. When that happens you
can become positively inspiring and able to kindle in others the fires of
your own convictions.
With your incisive mind, sharp wit, penetrating vision, foresight
and tenacity of purpose you are a natural problem-solver who relishes
nothing better than getting your teeth into an issue that others consider
unresolvable. Whether in education or science, medicine or social
work, art or commerce, you flourish on challenging situations which
can harness your naturally tough and determined approach to life. You
can be hard on yourself, driving yourself to fulfil self-imposed goals,
and equally demanding on those in your orbit. Yet those to whom you
can communicate your vision will find themselves profoundly
motivated and empowered. Because of your self-punishing tendency,
however, you sometimes push yourself on to the point of exhaustion.
You therefore need to make conscious efforts to relax, rather than only
stopping when you have finally run down your formidable reserves of
energy.
Deeply aware of the harsh realities of human aggression, you may
find that fast, pugnacious and highly competitive sports, such as icehockey and squash, serve as an excellent outlet for your own
forcefulness, stamina and will to win. You are never frightened to mix
it with those who cross your path. Indeed both friends and enemies are probably inclined to think of you as impatient and antagonistic, yet
also as someone who can be relied upon in a corner to rally to the
barricades and enthuse everyone with your sheer vigour and your wild,
often riotous and ribald sense of humour. Relationships
The best of friends or the worst of enemies, you are suspicious by
nature. Although you can be an excellent leader, you are not naturally
co-operative and tend to suspect anyone who is too friendly. Once you
have committed yourself, however, you give nothing less than 100 per
cent, and require the same in return. You are most at home in
partnerships where there is a large degree of common interests, shared
sympathies and a common cause for which you can jointly do battle.
Emotionally intense, indeed passionate, you know whom you want
to be with and you will set your sights upon winning them with an
unremitting zeal. Unless you have learned to listen to others, however,
you may lack sensitivity to your partner’s real needs and sensibilities,
and can tend to ride roughshod over his or her feelings, assuming that
your point of view is the only one that really counts. Then you may be
surprised to find that you seem to live in a state of disruptive ferment,
constantly engaged in an antagonistic falling out with those you most
love. Your Greatest Strengths
Ability to motivate and inspire others; astute, penetrating mind;
indefatigable courage; intensity of purpose; magnetism; charisma;
powers of persuasion; willingness to give your all to any cause you
embrace. Your Greatest Weaknesses
Volatility; moodiness; impatience; intolerance of those who do not
agree with you; attraction towards subterfuge; reluctance to see another point of view or to compromise readily; insensitivity to the
feelings of others; workaholism. Images for Integration
A crusader fights for her vision of truth … A dedicated scientist
pioneers new frontiers of knowledge. Famous Personalities
Jessica Campbell (actress), Benvenuto Cellini (artist and adventurer),
John Cleese (actor and comedian), Alain Delon (actor), Charles H.
Dow (economist), Bill Gates (CEO of Microsoft), Charles de Gaulle
(statesman), Sally Field (actress), Martin Luther (religious reformer),
Lise Meitner (pioneering nuclear physicist), Meg Ryan (actress), Dame
Sybil Thorndike (actress). S UN S CORPIO —86—
M OON T AURUS British management doesn’t seem to understand the importance of the
human factor.
PRINCE CHARLES
Our country needs not heroics but healing; not nostrums but
normalcy; not revolution but restoration.
WARREN HARDING Themes
WATER/EARTH A quiet strength; determination; concern for others;
order and control cover a seething inner world; sensuality and self
control; the mystery of the material world. You are a person who loves the colours, scents, tastes, sounds and light
of spring, yet who is equally drawn to the dark decay and mystery of
autumn. More vividly than most, you see the world as a dance between
the sensual delights and pleasures of life, and the dark, inevitable
threat of death and corruption of innocence. In consequence you can be
torn between bright optimism and brooding pessimism, between a
desire to enjoy life and a need to protect life from its darker elements.
When these two sides of you are working together you will be drawn
by an intense idealism to uphold and promote all that is solid, lasting
and dependable in society. Equally, you are likely to develop a
passionate interest in work that encourages the healing and
regeneration of society and individuals.
Though you can at times appear rigid, inward-looking and
withdrawn, you are by nature intensely practical and factual, and are
likely to be a touchstone and a dependable rock for all your friends.
Although you rarely show it to the outside world, you have a rich inner
life and imagination which draws you to look beyond the bald facts to
the mysterious and the challenge of the unknown. This gives you a gift
and fascination for any kind of research, be it in science, the arts or the
world of business and society. Whether your career is in psychology,
sociology, medicine, archaeology or the marketplace, you have a real
sense of the basic impulses that motivate people – love, devotion, hate,
fear and greed. Whatever you do, you need to feel a sense of
commitment and dedication, and once your attention is engaged it is
seldom distracted. You have a good sense of values and are likely to
have shrewd business acumen, with a gift for handling money and
resources well, though in practice you may have a love-hate
relationship with money.
You are an essentially quiet and gentle, if passionate, individual,
who thrives on harmony. At times, however, you can appear quite
surprisingly dogmatic, stubborn and even pig-headed, especially when
your pride and self-esteem seem threatened. You would see this
resistance to others’ viewpoints as a determination not to be deflected
from upholding those values you know to be important. This inner
strength and your mixture of compassionate sensitivity and plain
common sense may draw you towards work in the area of counselling and the helping and caring professions. Whatever your vocation, you
have a strong need to live a useful, dedicated life, to be of solid,
practical service to the world, and to make your mark.
You can work hard and play hard, and swing between selfindulgence and self-denial, between feast and famine. Good food (you
are probably an excellent cook), good company and good music can be
central to you, yet equally you have an opposite desire to control such
delights lest they run away with you. What is important for you is to be
involved in a life to which you can give yourself in wholehearted
dedication and commitment. Relationships
You care deeply about those near and dear to you, and can readily
sense what is going on in any situation. You can also, however, seem
somewhat removed and remote, and may find it difficult to put your
inner insights into words.
Emotionally you are intense and possessive, an all-or-nothing
individual, and can develop rigid ideas about relationships. You will
either be very emotional, abandoning yourself to sensual pleasures
wherever you find them, or strongly contained, focusing all your
passions within one special partnership to the exclusion of all others.
In return you need and expect the same degree of devotion from your
partner. Your Greatest Strengths
Ability to dedicate yourself totally to what you are doing; your natural
understanding of basic human needs and financial and economic
realities. Your Greatest Weaknesses
Wilful inflexibility; stubbornness; possessiveness; tendency to cling to
what you know; self-doubt on emotional issues; occasional blindness
to the motives of others. Images for Integration
A celebrated surgeon amasses a fortune … A successful businessman
probes the mysteries of life … Pluto takes Persephone into the
Underworld. Famous Personalities
Prince Charles (Prince of Wales), Michael Crichton (director and
writer), Michael Dukakis (politician), Nanette Fabray (musical
actress), Clifford Irving (author), Demi Moore (actress), Robin Moore
(author), Daniel Nathans (Nobel prize-winning micro-biologist), Erwin
Rommel (German field marshal), Roy Scheider (actor). S UN S CORPIO —87—
M OON G EMINI It is a good morning exercise for a research scientist to discard a pet
hypothesis every day before breakfast. It keeps him young.
KONRAD LORENZ
For lust of knowing what should not be known
We take the Golden Road to Samarkand.
JAMES ELROY FLECKER
If the devil doesn’t exist, but man has created him,
he has created him in his own image and likeness:
I plunge into the depths, and, while analyzing every atom,
I search out the whole.
FYODOR DOSTOYEVSKY Themes WATER/AIR Quick-witted yet intense; passionate yet detached;
ambitious yet easy-going; penetrating insights; the gift of
psychological understanding; communication; poetry; satire.
Butterflies, sunbathers and carefree good cheer flourish in the sunlight;
deeply searching astronomers, thinkers, lovers and anxieties thrive at
night. You cannot decide which is your time of day. Are you a bright,
cheerful, witty, sociable and, let’s face it, rather superficial soul? Or
are you a dark, concerned, passionate, mysterious seeker of the inner
secrets of the universe? You have a tantalizing duality which can be
flippantly superficial about the seven deadly sins, yet deadly serious
about trivia.
When you are able to combine and work with both sides of
yourself equally, you become the natural, quick-witted, clever
communicator of the wisdom of life and the emotions of the soul. This
can be an especially powerful gift if you train as a writer, artist or
musician, as it enables you to give your audience immediate access to
hidden depths of feeling. Likewise, at a personal level, you are able to
help others connect with and articulate their own inner issues that they
may not want to face or simply cannot see. This makes you a natural
psychologist, counsellor and therapist, and also a writer and teacher
who can translate the hidden and the mysterious into vivid images.
When it comes to communication, one side of you is the village
gossip; the other will take your secrets to the grave, though not without
extracting their inner essence first.
You can combine intensity and fun and are likely to have a glorious
sense of the ridiculous. One moment you are seriously marching into
passionate battle; the next breaking into pointed laughter. This gives
you the ability to defuse awkward situations and move from the tragic
to the light-hearted in one step, making light of disaster and death, yet
willing to look problems in the eye and acknowledge their place in our
journey into the unknown. You can use the same technique and your
sense of the absurd to alleviate and defuse your own tendency to
develop irrational worries, fears and anxieties, which can otherwise so
undermine you. You are endlessly curious about human emotions (your own as
much as other people’s), and have a writer’s gift for articulating and
evoking the gamut of human experience. The dark, destructive and
sexual dimension particularly fascinates you, and you can be both
profoundly serious and devastatingly witty on such matters.
That said, however, you can find in practice that it is difficult to let
yourself go emotionally and become really involved with others. There
can be something of the voyeur about you. You constantly find
yourself one-step removed, detached and needing to remain in control
so that reason takes the place of the living passion of life. This in turn
can cut you off from the spontaneity of your own emotions and leave
you feeling very insecure and vulnerable. Relationships
You yearn for passionate, emotional security, yet you want to keep
your options open, flitting across the surface of life, plunging into the
depths and up again for fresh air. You can blow hot and cold, being
deeply involved and flirtatiously faithless. This can introduce a love –
hate element as you are torn between the desires of attraction and the
need to be free.
Your emotional life is both the hub of your life and an incidental
appendage. In relationships you can be fiercely loyal, and yet naively
unfaithful and experimental, as you love to explore the vivid world of
changing emotional colours. You simply enjoy the widest variety of
people and working out what makes them tick – preferably over a
cordon-bleu meal. Your Greatest Strengths
Restless energy and curiosity; quest for understanding; ability to
translate feelings into ideas and to interpret the heights and depths of
human passions into words; wit and insight. Your Greatest Weaknesses Emotional restlessness; volatility; self-doubt and anxieties; sense of
splitness and division; your on-again, off-again involvements. Images for Integration
Trivial Pursuits goes macabre … A virtuoso violinist touches the
hearts of her audience … The mystery of life in a strip cartoon …
Dostoyevsky’s The Brothers Karamazov … Rodin’s The Kiss …
Rodin’s preoccupation with hands and sensual touch. Famous Personalities
Sir Thomas Browne (doctor and author), Stephen Crane (writer),
Nicholas Culpeper (herbalist), Fyodor Dostoyevsky (novelist), Keith
Emerson (rock musician), James Elroy Flecker (poet), Goldie Hawn
(actress), Tina Lenert (mime artist), Konrad Lorenz (specialist in
animal behaviour), Auguste Rodin (sculptor), Jonathan Ross
(television personality), John Sousa (the ‘March King’), Sir
Christopher Wren (architect and astronomer). S UN S CORPIO —88—
M OON C ANCER I love everything old: old friends, old times, old manners, old books,
old wine …
OLIVER GOLDSMITH
There is a homely adage which runs ‘Speak softly and carry a big
stick, you will go far.’
THEODORE ROOSEVELT
So live that you would not be ashamed to sell the family parrot to the
town gossip …
WILL ROGERS Themes
WATER/WATER A mailed fist in a velvet glove; deeply perceptive;
imaginative; emotional sensitivity; charismatic; strong sense of duty;
clannish; supportive; sincere; shrewd; passionate commitments;
satirical; intensely guarded; secretive; strong sense of self; deep
reservoirs of emotional strength.
Are you tough or tender? Passionate or sentimental? Self-sacrificing or
self-assertive? You probably have some of all these features in your
personality, which is a magnetic blend of passion and
impressionability, and of nostalgia and powerful desires. You can be all
kindness, sweetness and light until someone tries to take advantage of
you or those you love, and then, suddenly and mysteriously, you are in
exterminator mode and a quiet (or not so quiet) fury breaks out.
You are a person of very strong feelings, and you need to make
sure your feelings are for the right beliefs because feelings are what
guide you to your destiny. Although you feel the needs of others
intensely and want to care for them, your own survival needs come
first. You are also an instinctual being, capable of acting on irrational
notions and gut reactions to people and events. And you are often
right, although you do not go in for explaining yourself logically –
your mind works a bit like a detective’s, down nooks and crannies and
the byways of human weaknesses. You tend to be suspicious and
protective, taking your insights and storing them in a safe place.
Feelings literally flow through you, enabling you to see and sense
much about people and the world. A certain self-sufficiency and
serenity makes you a person others feel they can lean on. You do not
have to lord it over people in a flashy way, but your weight and power
are keenly felt nevertheless. Your profound perceptiveness and deep
empathy for suffering souls could make you an understanding
psychologist or a capable doctor or nurse. Your love of probing could
be used to find out what makes people tick, or in an attraction to
science where you can dissect and analyse the very pulse of life.
Although you have a deep fondness for the ‘good old days’, a
desire to take control of your life and an ambition to make your own mark on the world keeps you very much in the present. Both highly
sensitive and self-assertive, you have a natural flair for tapping the
public pulse and taking appropriate actions to give people what they
want. There may be a quality of quiet concern and compassion within
you which impels you to work for the improvement of the lot of the
underdog. This same quality makes you look after yourself well, and
helps you become a devoted parent or a committed business person.
Indeed, your cunning savvy, probable physical strength, and silent
stamina serve you well if you enter the shark-infested waters of the
business world. Your success comes from being able to combine selfinterest and ruthless decision-making with traditional family values. Relationships
You have a deep need to give and receive emotional support, and
therefore relationships are a central part of your life. Strongly
sentimental, you may find yourself trying to re-create your childhood,
wanting the bliss of total dependency, or the satisfaction of revenge for
early disappointments. This can turn your loved one into an unwilling
parent or a rebellious child, depending on how possessive you are –
and you can be very possessive.
Sensual, affectionate and romantic, your greatest need is for
emotional security. When you have this you are the most devoted and
magnetic of partners. If you are too devoted and oversensitive,
however, your attentiveness becomes claustraphobic, demanding and
manipulative. You need to be aware of your fanatic tendencies;
although they may be too much for your loved one to endure, they can
perform miracles in a career! Your Greatest Strengths
Intuition; resilience and emotional tenacity; courageous capacity to
nurture the downtrodden; ability to ‘feel where things are at’ and then
take appropriate action to do something about helping restore harmony. Your Greatest Weaknesses
Tendency to let subjective hunches replace objective reasoning;
inclination to sink into self-pity and let negative emotions absorb you;
a kind of egocentric sensitivity that insists on making the world come
to you. Images for Integration
A mother eagle defends her babies with immense courage … A
surgeon develops life-saving methods … A mother passionately
defends her delinquent child and pleads for a compassionate verdict. Famous Personalities
Charles Atlas (body builder), Christian Barnard (pioneering hearttransplant surgeon), Admiral Richard Byrd (explorer), Nicol Fontana
(fashion designer), André Gide (novelist), Oliver Goldsmith (poet),
Edith Head (Oscar-winning costume designer), Tatum O’Neill
(actress), Dan Rather (television news reporter and commentator), Will
Rogers (humorist), Theodore Roosevelt (former American President). —89—
S UN S CORPIO
M OON L EO
The Sun does not set in my dominion.
FRIEDRICH VON SCHILLER
Bah, I have sung women in three cities But it is all the same; And I will
sing the sun
EZRA POUND
The difference between a gun and a tree … is a difference of tempo.
The tree explodes every Spring.
EZRA POUND Themes
WATER/FIRE Public and private; extrovert and introvert; bright or
brooding; light yet intense; powerful; ambitious; shrewd; wholehearted; intense; a sense of drama and poetry; the determined pursuit
of excellence.
Is your season bright, high summer or the late, darkening days of
autumn? Light and dark are both strong within you. One half of you
loves the brilliant world of the noonday sun; the other half of you
craves the dark dreams of midnight.
You can be frank, open and upfront, yet equally you can be
reserved, secretive and private. You naturally feel that you deserve a
place in the limelight of society, yet having achieved centre stage you
find a key part of you really prefers to remain private and hidden. This
tension between your public and private sides can cause you
considerable internal angst and is at the heart of your creative
dilemma. Indeed it may well incline you to wear dark glasses even in
winter, and to seek out isolated, unspoilt spots in summer.
When you allow the day and night sides of you to combine, you are
one of the most wholehearted, persuasive, determined and inspiring of
all the Sun – Moon combinations. Someone of high ideals, creative
drive and intense emotional purpose, you can bring light into the
darkest corners. You can be driven by a desire to save yourself and
others from the ignorance, darkness, disease and corruption that at
some level you fear may consume you and the world. This can attract
you towards medicine and into any work where you are able to make a
difference.
At the same time you are no self-effacing saint! You have a strong
satirical sense and will not hesitate to attack forthrightly what you
consider to be wrong, especially the inflated, the self-important and the
socially ambitious. (You should be aware, however, that we often hate
in others what we cannot face in ourselves!)
You are a person of powerful and intense feelings and appetites
who can be driven by the most basic desires for sex, money, power and
social advancement. Whatever you do, you desire to be ‘someone’. You feel you deserve it too, and need to work yourself into a position
of authority to be truly happy. You are an all-or-nothing person who
finds it difficult to compromise. Others can see this as unscrupulous
ambition. You see it as being true to yourself and your essential
nobility, which in you, of course, it is.
You both feel and imagine things intensely, and you want to give
them expression. This is why you have a deeply poetic and dramatic
sense and are likely to be attracted by the theatre in all its forms. For
you there are no half-measures. You are strongly aware of both life and
death. This gives you a strongly creative drive, for you feel that in
creating you can defeat the grim reaper.
You have to believe in whatever you are doing, and when you do
you are fiercely loyal and will do whatever is necessary to encourage
and promote your cause. You are not frightened to get your hands dirty
and will take on jobs that others will not or dare not do. You are
perfectly happy to stand up forcefully for unpopular decisions and see
them through.
Once you set yourself upon a career you will naturally visualize
yourself at the top, and will focus your passionate drive on ensuring
that you get there. Personal and economic success and social esteem
are very important to you. No matter what you direct your attention
towards you will tend to end up at the helm, for you are hard-working,
and can even be a driven workaholic. Although you can outwardly
conform for the sake of your career, you have a strongly anarchistic
streak, a desire to do your own thing which really requires some
measure of self-employment for its larger fulfilment. Relationships
You are an ardent, romantic individual, and relationships are of
immense importance to you. Yet your very intensity and passionate
loyalty makes it difficult for you to be ‘just good friends’. You tend to
plunge in all-or-nothing, but if this is too frightening you can cut
yourself off from getting involved at all.
When you are in a relationship it consumes you and you expect it
equally to consume your other half, and for them to be as dedicated as you. During your life you may go through some dramatic changes in
relationships. When young, you are likely to be very much ruled by
your passions. As you grow older you seek to go beyond sex and
personal gratification, and may become converted to some kind of
cause which offers long-term satisfaction. Your Greatest Strengths
Natural powers of persuasion, magnestism and charisma; loyalty and
passionate, creative commitment to whatever work or cause you
espouse; capacity to see and encourage light in the blackest darkness. Your Greatest Weaknesses
Ruthless pursuit of power; snobbery; intolerance of those with whom
you disagree or who in any way obstruct you; willingness to ride
roughshod in pursuit of your chosen goals. Images for Integration
A Samaritan mirrors sunshine into the depth of a dark pit bringing
hope to those who live there … A sexy superstar creates a new charity. Famous Personalities
Terry Gilliam (cartoonist and film director), Ruth Gordon (actress),
Lauren Hutton (actress), Kim Hunter (actress), Veronica Lake
(actress), Hedy Lamarr (actress), André Malraux (writer and
politician), Ezra Pound (poet), Julia Roberts (actress), Rev. Dr Chad
Varah (founder of the Samaritans), Friedrich Von Schiller (poet and
dramatist). —90—
S UN S CORPIO
M OON V IRGO When great changes occur in history, when great principles are
involved, as a rule the majority is wrong.
Intelligent discontent is the mainspring of civilization.
EUGENE DEBS
Men always fall for frigid women because they put on the best show.
FANNY BRICE Themes
WATER/EARTH Passion and piety; Martha and Mary; constructive
imagination; romantic but practical; hard-working; quiet dedication;
clarity; conscientious; simplicity; biting criticism; relentless
perfectionism; powers of analysis; organizing ability; intensely loyal;
witty and satirical.
Are you a modest, self-effacing soul who harbours passionate
ambitions to make your mark? Or are you a forceful and determined
individual who is surprisingly humble and retiring beneath that
formidable front? You are the kind of person who seems to be very
much in control of your life – and indeed you are. You achieve this by
thinking things through logically and carefully before you act, always
mindful of measuring twice so that you only have to cut once, so to
speak. You are sometimes surprised, however, by powerful emotions
that disrupt your logic, and you find yourself doing or saying things
completely out of character. Although you have a scientist’s
temperament, you have the passion of an artist, and actually thrive on
challenge and emotional involvement.
You are good at routine but only when you love what you are
doing, and when you know that it merits your dedication. You can be
somewhat distant and austere, a unique cross between the purposeful
research worker and the inspired genius. The divide in you is between
your need to be practical and in control of things, and your desire to
experience life to the full, from the heights to the depths. When you are on top form, you can be remarkably hard-working,
thorough and systematic, a veritable dynamo of well-planned and
strategically executed industry. Your dedication and creative energy
can win you success and respect in a wide range of endeavours –
science or art, business or sport, politics or the healing professions –
where your more general concern to improve the world and our
understanding of it can be expressed.
You have a strong sense of duty, though it would be unwise for
anyone to try to play on that fact as you will not be bullied into
anything. You like things direct and up front and do not take kindly to
attempts from anyone to manipulate you. You are very much your own
person, a bit of a maverick who will think and feel exactly what you
decide. When you get stuck into things, you expect to work hard and
you expect others to do likewise.
You have a razor-sharp mind which can spot the weaknesses in
others’ work and arguments, and when you decide to point these out
you can speak with scathing honesty and accuracy. Your strong social
conscience makes you well-suited for politics, and your sharpest
criticism and biting wit is usually reserved for hypocrisy. You feel the
needs and concerns of others deeply and have a natural desire to be of
service. When this side of your nature is uppermost, you can be drawn
to social work and to helping the underprivileged.
You have a quiet, shrewd, deeply insightful approach to life and a
passionate commitment to common sense and the smooth running of
society. Although you want to live a useful, productive life, you do not
often choose to sacrifice your own comforts and pleasures. In fact, you
can be acquisitive of the good things of life and happily hedonistic, so
long as it is all in good taste. Taste and style is important to you, and
you observe every detail of your colleague, enemy, or lover, summing
up their essence with mental acuity and swift intuition.
You may be a progressive or you may be a reactionary, and in any
area of life you can develop a combination of technical skill and
physical stamina which will give you the ability to come back time and
again against the odds. But whatever you do, you will certainly run
your life according to firmly held principles – principles that you
understand clearly and believe in passionately. Relationships
Despite your mental approach to most matters, you are quite a physical
person. You have intense desires, a part of your nature which is made
all the more interesting by your instinctive modesty and self-control.
You have a need for both passion and security, for intrigue and for
simple trust. This can make you a trifle difficult to satisfy! If you
cannot find these things combined in one person you may find yourself
attracted to very different types at various times in your life.
When you are happy in your relationship you are the soul of
devotion and duty. You will go out of your way to provide, not only
adequately but also beautifully, for your dependents. You need to be
careful, however, that you do not over-organize and over-control your
loved ones; your creative fanaticism should be saved for your career. Your Greatest Strengths
Your straight-from-the-shoulder honesty; an excellent mind; strong
sense of duty and commitment; capacity for systematic hard work and
getting things done; sense of humour and eye for the ridiculous. Your Greatest Weaknesses
Narrowness of outlook; conscious aggression which can emerge as
biting and destructive criticism; an arrogance which assumes that, if
you can think them up, you are entitled to rewrite the rules. Images for Integration
A scientist probes into the mysteries of the cosmos … An artist
combines simplicity with intensity in a study of still life … Britten’s
opera Billy Budd. Famous Personalities Patrick Blackett (Nobel prize-winning physicist), Fanny Brice (singer
and comedienne), Benjamin Britten (composer), Richard Burton
(actor), Judy Canova (comedienne), Eugene Debs (socialist and trade
unionist), Edward VII (former King of England), John Morris QC
(politician), Elizabeth Prentiss (author), Henry Winkler (television
actor – ‘the Fonz’), Jonathan Winters (comedian), Viscount Linley
(furniture maker and craftsman). —91—
S UN S CORPIO
M OON L IBRA
When you stop having fun, you don’t win.
BILLIE JEAN KING
Dying
Is an art, like everything else .
I do it exceptionally well.
SYLVIA PLATH, Lady Lazarus Themes
WATER/AIR Intensely interested; magnetic sociability; emotional;
analytical; self-controlled gracefulness; shrewd observations; creative
intellect; innate sense of justice; organizing ability; passionate honesty;
pragmatic idealism; expensive taste; quietly ambitious; perceptive.
Are you charmingly cooperative or emotionally demanding? Do you
seek compromise or readily take revenge when your fairness is
abused? Are you tough or tender, naughty or nice? You very much
want to be kind, supportive and adaptable and to work for a better and
more beautiful world, yet you will learn that difficult decisions and
firm tactics are needed to defend the decency you desire. However
diplomatic you can be, you will never compromise your dignity.
Although you optimistically hope for the best, you can be shrewdly
understanding of the mad, the bad and the ugly. Your challenge will somehow involve engaging whole-heartedly with life as you find it,
whilst not allowing disappointments to tarnish your idealism
significantly. Injustices shock you but, oddly enough, tend to bring out
the best in you, as you need to have access to the dark and terrible to
be able to put the boot in, so to speak. The admiration and respect of
your colleagues means a great deal to you, and you can do wonders in
getting any group to work together. But let us not kid ourselves; you
are also a pretty tough cookie, and if you cannot charm your way
through to the prize, you can certainly turn on the pressure!
Because you like, even need, to be liked, you may find it all too
easy to say ‘yes’ when you mean to say ‘no’, until you swing to the
other extreme and say ‘no’ when you mean ‘yes’. You exude charisma
and capability and people readily depend on you. In fact, you can
charmingly agree to do almost anything, but somehow what you do not
want to do does not get done.
If you allow your instinct for compromise and your desire for
affection and harmony to cover up your more forceful, dictatorial side,
you can end up hating yourself. Admitting you really cannot stand
some people (and that perhaps some may feel the same about you) is
probably as good a way as any of getting in touch with your real
power.
You have a vivid imagination, a keen sense of drama and probably
rhythm, too, and if you take off in an artistic direction you can develop
a very subtle yet eloquent manner of self-expression. But your best
skills tend to involve people and ideas, and you will feel at home
teaching, preaching or organizing. You can be a charismatic showman
with a dramatic, eloquent delivery.
Although you may begin life on the gullible side, your savvy soon
develops and you can become a natural psychologist, able to see into
other people’s motives and how best to get them to cooperate. You
have passionate views but will defend them with clear, rational
principles. You are a thinker and an idealist, defending justice and
standing for excellence. But your animal instincts do not miss a trick
so that your estimation of ‘correct behaviour’ always has a kind of
ironic mercy about it. You aspire for the good in life and in people, but
you are never very surprised by the foibles of human nature. Relationships
Close, happy relationships are essential to your wellbeing. You need to
belong to someone, to give and to feel that your presence in his or her
life makes a big difference. Your passion and charm combine to make
for a paradoxically intense but reasonable approach to love.
You are romantic and generous, and your capacity for intense
possessiveness can sometimes be disturbing to your more rational,
idealistic need for harmony and equanimity. But your openness and
tenderness help you to grow through love’s trials and tribulations, and
you tend to be open to negotiation on most things. This, coupled with
your intuitive sense of what your loved one is feeling and needs,
makes you a very engaging, attractive partner and very prone to get the
best out of partnerships of all kinds. What you may have to come to
terms with is just how dependent on others you really are, for you think
you are independent but in reality you get well and truly hooked when
your heart is involved. Your Greatest Strengths
Shrewd intellect; steady warmth; suave adaptability; commitment to
fair play and personal honour; ability to perceive feelings and think on
your feet, and to pursue what you believe in with organization,
commitment and artistic fervour. Your Greatest Weaknesses
Overdependence on others; tendency to resort to manipulation when
you feel insecure, and to assume you are being impartial and fair when
emotional need is really dictating your behaviour. Images for Integration
A passionate poet leads the ‘Poets for Peace’ mass demonstration … A
criminal lawyer auditions for the lead part in a new play about heroes
of the second-world-war resistance movement. Famous Personalities
Billie Jean King (champion tennis player), Vachal Lindsay (poet),
Jayne Marie Mansfield (actress and Playboy model), François
Mitterrand (French president), Estelle Parsons (actress), Sylvia Plath
(poet), Billy Sunday (preacher), Ted Turner (business executive). S UN S CORPIO —92—
M OON S CORPIO Ah, sir, you dwellers in the city cannot enter into the feelings of the
hunter.
DRACULA , BRAM STOKER
Where I was born and where and how I have lived is unimportant. It is
what I have done with where I have been that should be of interest.
GEORGIA O’KEEFE Themes
WATER/WATER Desire v. self-control; intense; self-possessed; wholehearted;
stubborn;
passionate;
astute
perceptions;
wary;
uncompromising with strong convictions; jealous; sarcastic; private;
introspective; imaginative; relentless willpower; zeal for the truth.
Are you intensely passionate and self-assertive, or do you try to keep
your strong feelings under lock and key, self-contained and selfcontrolled? Do you enjoy a deliberate confrontational stance that
makes hypocrites writhe in humiliation, or do you seek more guarded
paths for expressing your views, values and aspirations?
You are a powerfully whole-hearted individual whose personality
is characterized by an internal struggle between stringent selfdiscipline and powerful self-expression. You love and hate with
intensity, and whoever’s side you are on, you fight the fight of sheer
survival. Not surprisingly, you make a formidable foe! An innate mistrust of authority figures marks you out as the quiet
rebel; your instinct is to dislodge any control over your life except your
own. The irony about you is that you are quite authoritative yourself,
with firmly entrenched opinions and ideas. Your loyalty is first and
foremost to yourself, because if you let yourself down, you have no
one else to blame.
You are a very determined and resolute person, passionately
committed to your beliefs and purposes. You may be a powerful
innovator or a deeply reticent conservative, but whatever you do,
privately you are an individual who is difficult to know and
understand. This is a view of yourself that, in your more brooding and
inward-looking moments (and there are an abundance of those), you
may share, as you try to resolve the tension between your desires and
fears. You may often ask yourself why you seem to care about things
much more intensely than most people you know. Sometimes this feels
like a burden, but it is one you carry well.
When you can get your passion and self-control working together,
you have a formidable amount of whole-hearted, driven, emotional
energy to channel into whatever enterprises or ventures capture your
vivid imagination. In touch with yourself at both levels, you become
someone who can excel at anything upon which you set your heart.
The arts, especially music, attract you because they offer a channel of
expression for your strong feelings. The sciences, especially
psychology and medicine, can capture your imagination and satisfy
your need for challenge and your desire to get to the bottom of things.
You are a potential social reformer as well, and your desire to help the
suffering will be based on your intimate knowledge of pain and on
your conviction that the discarded underdogs of this world have
something important to contribute to human life.
In the world of business you have many of the attributes of the
successful entrepreneur: you enjoy the cut and thrust of competition
and ‘making a killing’; you are innovative, forceful and capable of
living with tension and uncertainty. Sport is another area where you
can excel, though you are not likely to be a good loser. You are the
child who, if he cannot win, will not play. Like Bram Stoker, the author of Dracula, you are naturally drawn
to all that is powerful, mysterious and hidden. You may well have a
love of the macabre, a taste for horror stories and a deep fascination
with sex and death. Paradoxically, however, your very interest in death
and darkness can stimulate your appreciation of life. You register
beauty with tremendous force, and you may find the world of nature
and its soothing rhythms very attractive and healing. Whilst pruning
and cutting may bring out your love of promoting growth through
control, you can be especially attracted to flowers and find their scents
and colours both calming and deeply satisfying. Relationships
You have very strong desires, and you are a naturally loyal and
steadfast partner. It could even be said that you tend to become
addicted to your other half once you have pledged yourself. But you
expect equally uncompromising loyalty and devotion from your lover,
and can become extremely possessive, jealous and indeed vindictive if
your relationship is threatened in any way. Your potential for
emotional fulfilment is enormous, but you may have to learn how truly
to trust before your powerful need for intimacy can be met. Your Greatest Strengths
Sheer drive, energy and stamina; astute observations and analysing
abilities; loyalty and dedication to whatever captures your imagination;
emotional courage; creative potential. Your Greatest Weaknesses
A tendency to let suspicions and cynicism limit your capacity for
relaxed enjoyment; reluctance to share your fears; inclination to take
yourself too seriously; desire for revenge; proneness to get stuck in
negative emotions. Images for Integration
A pile of manure slowly permeates the deeper soil as the November
rains soak the still, dark garden … A millionaire businessman
establishes a foundation for medical research. Famous Personalities
Adam Ant (rock star), Howard Baker (lawyer and politician), Leif
Garrett (singer and actor), Whoopi Goldberg (actress), Paul Hindemith
(composer), Louis Malle (film director and writer), Cord Meyer Jr
(reformer), Georgia O’Keefe (painter), Mohammad Pahlavi (former
Shah of Persia), Bram Stoker (author of Dracula). S UN S CORPIO —93—
M OON S AGITTARIUS Millions of angels are at God’s command.
BILLY GRAHAM
Artists who live and work with spiritual values cannot and should not
remain indifferent to a conflict in which the highest values of humanity
and civilization are at stake.
I’d like to live like a poor man with lots of money.
PABLO PICASSO Themes
WATER/FIRE Passionate; committed; stern judge; uncompromising;
philosophical; intuitive; great integrity; zeal for truth; socially
concerned; loyal; forceful; persuasive; self-dramatizing; intellectually
discerning; investigative turn of mind. Are you an over-emotional, paranoid introvert, or a sporting and
spontaneous extrovert? Are you concerned with the big first and last
things in life, or with all the fun things in between? You are the goodhumoured detective, the passionate crusader for the truth, the
moralistic artist who is aware of the unfathomable gulf between human
instincts and social ethics.
Ardent and outspoken about the things you believe in, you are
something of an extremist who will go to great lengths to express
yourself or to uphold your view of the truth. That is, to others it may
seem like you go to great lengths, but to you it is the norm. You are
incapable of being lukewarm about anything; something is either
essential or non-essential to your life. Not that you are a closedminded, black-and-white thinker – not at all. You are both highly
focused, able to fixate on the object of your desire with intense
concentration, and yet you are also wide-ranging, hating to be fettered
or constrained.
You are at your best when you are in a position to give yourself a
broad canvas and then to focus on it. You are fascinated by the
paradoxes of life, and this makes you something of a philosopher who
struggles to make sense of the world. Your instinct is to dig and
explore, as you are naturally restless and questing, searching for
fundamental truths and answers to complex social problems. But you
are most likely to explore thoroughly something about which you are
already passionate. The things you do not examine, and which seem to
belong to a different value system, can truly baffle you, and perhaps
you remain a bit aloof from them.
You would make a superb educator, as you are someone who sees
the large view and the broad principles, and who can communicate
them with deep passion and insight. Whether or not you are into sport,
you have some of the essential ingredients of the sports champion: the
will to win and the stamina and enthusiasm to carry the day. When you
are working with both sides of yourself you can successfully bring this
combination of ambition and vitality to anything you do, be it in
business, politics, theatre or the healing arts. Your instinct for selfpreservation is strong, and combined with your fine intellect and powers of deduction will tend to keep you on the right side of
providence. Relationships
You make a loyal friend, generous with your time and energy, and
when you say you are going to do something, you do it. It does not
matter if you are usually late – that does not detract from your essential
trustworthiness and effectiveness.
Your mate, your friends and your family may sometimes feel
frustrated with you because you do not always reveal all the depths and
imaginative insight they know you have. This is especially true when
you are sizing up new people and situations. Although you are
forthright about your beliefs and your moral standards, you will hold
back a trump or two when it comes to feelings, if you judge it wise.
In close relationships there is some conflict between your need to
possess absolutely and your need for freedom and buoyant social
stimulation. You can be rather demanding, for you seek emotional
intensity as well as intellectual equality. But when you learn to balance
these two sides, you become more trusting, less prone to paranoid
grumpiness, and even more charismatic.
Instinctively aware of people’s feelings as well as your own, you
are good in group dynamics. Your analytical turn of mind, plus your
feeling for the regenerative potential of society makes you a natural
psychologist. Whatever you do, your personal flair has a sting in its tail
that provokes others to think. Your Greatest Strengths
Inner commitment to personal values; probing, questing, analytical
mind which is quick to see the larger implications of facts; unique
blend of idealism and realism; enduring, affirming loyalty to those you
love. Your Greatest Weaknesses Sudden obstinacy and fanatical side, which comes out as a tendency to
moralize and expect the world to conform to your view; tendency to be
a bit holier-than-thou when it comes to socializing – you will not bend
the rules because your integrity is more precious to you than all the
gold in Aladdin’s cave. Image for Integration
A child gazes up at the night sky, captivated by the mystery of dark
space. An alien appears, and reveals a glimpse of the child’s future as a
famous astro-physicist. Picasso’s Guernica. Famous Personalities
Charles Bronson (actor), Louis Daguerre (inventor and artist), Danny
DeVito (actor and director), Michel Gauquelin (psychologist,
astrologer and statistician), Billy Graham (evangelist preacher), Cleo
Laine (singer), Lulu (singer), Pablo Picasso (artist), Carl Sagan
(astronomer), Tom Seaver (top baseball pitcher), Joan Sutherland
(singer). S UN S CORPIO —94—
M OON C APRICORN Puritanism … helps us enjoy our misery while we are
inflicting it on others.
MARCEL OPHULS
Take calculated risks. That is quite different from being rash.
GENERAL GEORGE PATTON
He was like a cock who thought the sun had risen to hear him crow.
GEORGE ELIOT (MARY ANN EVANS ) Themes
WATER/EARTH Purposeful; self-demanding; serious; committed;
tough; tenacious; self-righteous; loyal; hard-working; ambitious;
integrity; courageous; dark intensity; brooding; enigmatic;
judgemental; cynical; dry wit; a natural leader.
Do you thrive on public crusading, or on personal and private
ambitions? Are you an introspective and aloof individual, or do you
throw your whole self into public service? Are you defiant and rash or
painstakingly cautious?
There is in you a need both for social conformity and usefulness,
and also for exacting personal integrity. This will demand that you
think seriously about your life at quite an early age, and that you
decide what you want to achieve. When you get yourself together you
are one of the most intensely purposeful and ambitious combinations
in the zodiac, and you can pursue any goal you set yourself with a
sometimes ruthless determination which makes less single-minded
types wilt.
Your hard-working, focused intensity makes you one of nature’s
natural leaders. Provided that your own strong sense of self did not
attract harsh treatment in your childhood, you are likely to be
supremely self-confident and capable of instilling a sense of deep
purpose and mission to those around you. If you had a difficult or
repressive childhood, however, you may first need to learn that
resentments must be purged, whatever bitterness you may feel about
past events, and that there is an important role for you to play in the
future. If you focus your will on something you really want to attain,
nothing can stop you.
You feel passionately about the ‘rights and wrongs’ of social
interaction, and very often you feel personally called upon to step in
and play first the detective and then the judge. Strong convictions and
stubborn courage make you well suited for a career in social work,
politics or the law. You have a natural gift for regeneration, be it of
people, laws, buildings, companies or indeed countries. But whatever
it is you do with your creative energies, you will not be satisfied until you know you have won the recognition, respect and admiration of
your friends, colleagues and public.
There is about you a toughness and tenacity, an urge to tackle and
conquer difficult issues with your fine, rational intellect, and a love of
discussion and persuasion. Although you will not compromise your
principles, you have an innate sense of strategy which helps you
anticipate and manipulate others’ perceptions of you. If you are a
family person, you devote yourself to their wellbeing with the ferocity
of a mother bear. If you are involved in the arts, you employ your
passion and self-discipline to develop and fine-tune your skills. Once
you have focused on your mission, you will carry it through with true
grit.
You feel acutely the tragedy, irony and drama of life, and you need
to make sure you are prepared for whatever it may bring. Material
security and powerful position, you have observed, go a long way in
protecting one from the sudden twists of fate that are part of life. But
an even deeper wisdom tells you that sound moral fibre is the surest
way to real contentment and independence – for in the end, you have
to live with yourself.
Although many of your qualities are heavy, earnest and sombre,
when relaxed you surprise everyone with your pungent wit and
unlikely indulgence in practical jokes, your satirical flair, and your
willingness to play the giddy goat. Relationships
You readily attract others as you have a silent, sexy charisma and a
certain hard-to-get mysterious magnetism which the opposite sex
loves. You are essentially a true blue sort of lover – very devoted and
dependable, and capable of coping with the pressures of family
responsibilities. You take yourself very seriously, however, and are
inclined to get suspicious, especially if you have to recover from
difficult emotional experiences in youth.
You are likely to be very highly sexed. If your partner does not
share this trait you can become embittered. Try to express your
feelings, not simply hide them away in the dark to ferment. Your Greatest Strengths
Integrity and loyalty to your cause; ability for unremitting hard work;
tenacity of purpose; a penetrating eye for hypocrisy and humbug;
illuminating dry wit; moral and physical courage. Your Greatest Weaknesses
Inflexibility; ruthlessness; impatience with others’ weaknesses; vanity
and sense of self-importance; brooding cynicism; capacity for harsh,
unthinking treatment of others. Images for Integration
A general leads his troops to victory … A film director plans each shot
to maximize its emotional impact. Famous Personalities
Florence Chadwick (long-distance swimmer), Tom Conti (actor),
George Eliot (writer), Marsilio Ficino (philosopher), Robert Kennedy
(politician), Sir Robert Lorimer (Scottish architect), Baaba Maal
(Senegalese musician), Montgomery of Alamein (British general),
Marcel Ophuls (film director), George Patton (American general),
Gary Player (world-champion golfer), Helen Reddy (singer), Elke
Sommer (film actress), Sun Yat-sen (Chinese revolutionary leader). S UN S CORPIO —95—
M OON A QUARIUS Integrity is in no need of rules.
ALBERT CAMUS
O may my heart’s truth still be sung on this high hill in a year’s
turning. DYLAN THOMAS
How much more cruel the pen is than the sword.
ROBERT BURTON Themes
WATER/AIR Passionately dispassionate; astute observations; exacting
sense of integrity; powerful intellect; proud; radically independent
views; law unto oneself; wilful; loyal; love of social ironies; principled
but intolerant; self-reflective; scrutinizing; magnetic effect on others.
Are you an impenetrable enigma of human emotion, or a wide-eyed
and open-armed friend of the people? Do you yield to your gregarious
instinct, finding both meaning and comfort in the company of likeminded souls, or do you cut yourself off from frail humanity because
you cannot tolerate their flaws and corruption?
You are often torn between being the dispassionate observer of life
and the intensely engaged redeemer of human suffering. Sometimes
you cannot help feeling isolated and cynical; other times you find your
identity with being one of the gang, and your conscience sends you out
into some all-consuming cause. You have a real job combining your
immense pride with your lofty idealism, your blunt, piercingly astute
observations with your need for congenial companionship. But when
you successfully manage it, you can become a powerful force in your
own circle and in the world at large if you so deem that a cause merits
your total dedication.
You pursue truth with an intensity that would exhaust more laidback, luke-warm types. When the impartial spectator within you
marries the passionate experiencer of life’s mysteries, you become a
natural scientist, philosopher or artist, who can bring together the
heights and the depths. This can satisfy your need to understand from
your lofty eyrie and make sense of what can at times seem a deeply
threatening world.
Life for you can seem both a tragedy and a comedy in which both
the light and darkness of the human situation are mysteriously and inextricably intermingled. And your fine intellect gets lots of mileage
from this awareness – you can be a master of satire and a sharp social
critic. You are all too aware, however, that the paradoxes and ironies
you observe in society lie within yourself as well, and you may use a
well-developed sense of the absurd as a kind of defence against the
pain of being alive.
You have powerful desires and feelings and a real need to achieve.
Your standards are high; you know that personal achievements reflect
your essence, so you make sure that your achievements are worthy of
you. But your essential seriousness and emotional control often belie
some very tender feelings and a deep need for friendship, for
underneath that solid ego is immense concern, affection and even
compassion for the suffering to which you are so sensitive. Sometimes,
however, you suspect the worst of your fellow human beings, seeing
them as predators and, even worse, monstrously indifferent to the
plight of other living beings.
Like Dylan Thomas, you may feel that life is summed up by the
fact that ‘we are born in others’ pain and perish in our own’. But you
have enormous resilience and tenacity, a capacity for regenerating
social structures, and you can take your perceptive mind and emotional
commitment into the healing professions or politics and accomplish
much.
You see what needs doing and get on and do it, regardless of what
others think. A certain ability to plunge into experience and observe
the consequences makes you an excellent trouble-shooter. Your
personality combines sheer survival instinct with aspirations for
nobility. You can turn despair into hope by clinging tenaciously to your
uniqueness and to your common bond with all humanity. Relationships
Emotionally you blow hot and cold, interested and then indifferent, but
your instinct is to protect yourself from pain by keeping your
dangerous feelings under control. You can be a real enigma to your
loved one. You may share intellectual rapport (this will be important),
as well as political views and acerbic humour, but there will be vast depths that you do not express, as though your silence is the best
testimony to that well of feeling.
You may at times suffer from the ‘freedom – closeness’ dilemma,
for you can be terribly possessive whilst also needing a lot of freedom
yourself. Emotional and physical fidelty may be two different things in
your world. At times, therefore, you can find yourself torn between a
deep natural loyalty based on scrupulously developed principles, and
primitive passions. Your Greatest Strengths
Ability for detached analysis and criticism; insistence on the truth;
unwillingness to accept easy answers; intense determination; clarity of
expression; sharp sense of humour; exacting self-honesty. Your Greatest Weaknesses
Proneness to allow depression and cynicism to undermine your
creative talents; setting yourself impossibly high goals or standards
which only invites frustration; a lack of faith in your fellow beings,
which does not give them a fair chance and can keep you lonely. Images for Integration
A hovering hawk surveys the world, at one with nature … An exotic
moth emerges from its chrysalis, in perfect form, a specimen of the
sublimity of nature’s intelligence. Famous Personalities
Margaret Atwood (novelist and poet), Albert Camus (novelist), Don
deLillo (author), Calista Flockhart (actress), Nigel Havers (actor),
Vivian Leigh (film actress), Naomi Mitchison (sci-fi writer), Jean
Monnet (economist, architect of the European Community), Lester
Piggott (world-champion jockey), Dylan Thomas (poet), Voltaire
(philosopher), Auberon Waugh (satirist). —96—
S UN S CORPIO M OON Plutão ISCES …our lives are part of some greater effort … we are connected to one
another … community means that we have a place where we belong no
matter who we are.
HILARY CLINTON
The saints are the sinners that keep on going.
Fifteen men on the dead man’s chest – Yo-ho-ho, and a bottle of rum!
ROBERT LOUIS STEVENSON Themes
WATER/WATER Aloof yet warm-hearted; vivid imagination;
hardworking dedication; shrewd strategist; emotional intensity;
persuasive; prone to addictions; love of the mysterious; a gift for
caring and healing.
Are you a Lady Macbeth or an angel of mercy? A Dracula or a Good
Samaritan? You can be a real Dr Jekyll and Mr Hyde, torn between
passion and compassion. At one level you are the highly sensitive,
idealistic, dreaming poet; at another the shrewd, ruthless and
determined go-getter who thrives on challenge. When both sides come
together you can be a deeply motivated and persuasive romantic who
sees life as a mission to help those whose cannot help themselves. Be it
in medicine, social welfare or political reform, you have a curative
magnetism that few can ignore, though some may reject.
You have a fertile, often lurid, imagination. This can add an extra
dimension to whatever you do, be it work or play. It can make you a
wonderful spinner of yarns and creator of atmosphere, or it can allow
you to become haunted by your own inner macabre imaginings,
nightmares and psychic insights. You are capable of both great self-indulgence and immense selfdiscipline. Your creative middle way comes through dedication to
some higher ideal, for whatever captures your strongly emotional
imagination captures your life, and you will find yourself swept along
by a passionate dedication and intensity. Whilst your sympathies go
out to the underdog, you will not hesitate to play top dog if necessary
to achieve your ends.
You love a mystery, and whether you are creating or evoking a
mysterious atmosphere, or probing into the secrets of nature, you will
pursue the world of the unseen, unknown and arcane with an immense
thirst and relish to get to the bottom of things. Your immensely rich,
powerfully poetic and creative imagination, especially for the dark side
of life – death, destruction, greed, fear and sexuality – gives you a deep
understanding of human nature. Your capacity for seeing into and
through other people and their foibles and deeper motives makes you a
natural psychologist. At the same time, your insights can be totally
devastating, for despite your compassion, you can be a ruthless critic
and will not hesitate to put the knife in if this is what you feel is
required for the greater good.
Your motto could usefully be ‘Blessed are the pure in spirit’, for
you are at your happiest when your sensitivity to the needs and
motives of others is allowed to move you to great works rather than
into cynicism, bitterness and game-playing. But if you do get hooked
on games you can be a superb strategist, able to sense others’ moves.
Your imaginative and emotional nature makes you more than
usually prone to addiction, be it to love, drugs, alcohol, films or simply
food and sex. You need the fuel of constant emotional stimuli. When
you do decide to quit a particular habit, however, you can make a
dramatic turn-about. During your life you are therefore likely to touch
the heights and the depths, and to go through a series of dramatic
rebirths as you rediscover your deep sense of purpose and commitment
to a larger vision. Relationships An intensely emotional individual, you have a highly sensitive,
telepathic understanding of the unspoken subtleties in relationships.
You can, however, often hide this behind a seemingly cool, aloof
exterior. Close, enduring, passionate personal relationships can be
everything in life to you. You see into other people’s essence and
deeply need to be understood in the same way.
Earth types, especially Taureans, attract you, as you need to be
with someone who can contain you and give you the clear boundries
that your life may otherwise lack. You find clear-headed, bright and
breezy Air types infuriatingly impersonal, yet strangely attractive for
that very reason. If, however, you have been hurt in a relationship,
your yearning for an all-consuming union can give way to a desire to
stand alone, self-contained and self-sufficient. Your Greatest Strengths
Intense, passionate commitment and dedication to whatever you do;
ability to capture the imagination and to come back fighting. Your Greatest Weaknesses
Addiction to your emotions; lurid imagination; lack of objectivity;
penchant for strategy and subterfuge. Images for Integration
Madame Curie works for the Red Cross whilst dedicating herself to
solving the mysteries of radioactivity … Long John Silver, with
ruthless charm, becomes a successful entrepreneur. Famous Personalities
Hillary Clinton (lawyer and American first lady), Marie Curie (chemist
and physicist), Grace Kelly (film actress), Bela Lugosi (horror-movie
star), Rene Magritte (surrealist painter), Winona Ryder (actress), Gene Tierney (film actress), Martin Scorsese (film director), Robert Louis
Stevenson (writer and poet). Chapter Twelve
SUN IN SAGITTARIUS
—97—
S UN S AGITTARIUS
M OON A RIES
There was things which he stretched but mainly he told the truth …
Always do right; this will gratify some people and astonish the rest.
MARK TWAIN
Well, if I called the wrong number why did you answer the phone ?
JAMES THURBER Themes
FIRE/FIRE Frank; forthright; big talker; picaresque adventurer;
intuitive certainty; irreverance for the classic and antique; impatient;
energetic; blunt but sincere; habitually hopeful; emotionally
demanding; courageously idealistic; passionately honourable; the
entrepreneur; the kind-hearted rebel.
Are you a restless, impulsive go-getter out to further your own
interests, or does that missionary inside you call the shots with
theatrical moral fervour? Do you look for patterns of meaning in the
chaotic dance of life, or are you too busy dancing and enjoying the
spotlight to notice?
You are a big-hearted person with a vivid, far-seeing imagination
and a very strong desire to succeed. Your driving instinct is to explore,
to create and to act. Running large enterprises – whether it is a multi- million business or a large and noisy family – is probably your cup of
tea. You relish anything that offers challenge, adventure and scope for
originality.
Basically, you are a plain-speaking, independent-minded, warmhearted extrovert. You can talk up a storm and brew up a lot of
enthusiasm – in yourself and in others – for your exciting ideas. But
you will often give the impression of possessing great knowledge
about something when, in fact, you have not even covered the most
basic details – yet. In other words, you are quite capable of delivering
the goods, but you may have to fall apart a few times before you
realize that what is missing is patience and sticking to a practical plan
of action – and all the boring details therein.
Champion of the underdog but first in line when it comes to
receiving prizes, you may not always be sure whether you are in it for
yourself or for the good of the cause. In fact, you have a healthy and, if
anything, over-sized ego which finds little conflict between morally
sound altruism and blatant self-interest. Whatever your field of
enterprise, however, you put in enormous energy, and you can keep up
quite a pace with your planning and organizing and wheeling and
dealing.
Although you may seem to be competitive, what actually keeps
you going is a kind of intense, childlike faith in yourself and your
ideals. This enables you to express yourself like a firebrand, a bright
star shining amidst the humdrum routine of earthly existence. And if
you do compete with others, you will always respect anyone who beats
you fair and square. In fact, you will thrive on a certain amount of
challenge and creative conflict.
You need a lot of freedom to do your own thing, yet you also have
a deep-rooted commitment to helping make the world a better place.
You are a natural egotist, but you do not like to acknowledge facts that
are unflattering. This will be accentuated if you do not gain a modicum
of personal success in your career as you do need to achieve something
and to feel appreciated as an authority in your particular sphere.
Your weak spots are your temper, irritability, insensitivity to more
vulnerable, emotional individuals, and your tendency to exaggerate.
When things go wrong, you either wail like a misunderstood artist or you fall into real dejection. Your over-riding zeal never wanes for long,
however, and you can continue knocking on closed doors a lot longer
than others when you have decided on the best way forward.
A person of exemplary moral integrity and philanthropic
propensities, you are a believer in principles. No matter how often
your bubble might burst, you will never give up your conviction to
lead a life based on your own inner truth. People therefore trust you,
and have good reason to do so. Your own purposes are never far from
your mind, and your earnestness and honesty make you a person
people respect and admire, no matter how impractical you might be. Relationships
Intimate liaisons are not your strong suit. Although you are certainly
romantic enough, you tend to lack the patience or willingness to listen
that is so important where understanding other people’s needs are
concerned.
You need someone you can respect and who stimulates you, but
you need to be careful that you see the real person instead of the royal
consort of your romantic imagination. You may be attracted to watery
or earthy types who help you to slow down and feel more comfortable
with your ordinariness and emotional needs. Life with you, however,
will always contain some surprises, so your partner will have to
understand your gregarious instinct and need for creative space. Your Greatest Strengths
Infectious enthusiasm; absolute honesty; courage and leadership
abilities; intuitive mental gifts; exceptional moral integrity. Your Greatest Weaknesses
Impatience; disliking of details; insensitivity to the more subtle
nuances of human relationships; neurotic need to be affirmed as the
biggest and best; black moods when things go wrong. Images for Integration
He who would be King postpones the coronation for a trek through the
Himalayas … A mature student discovers her political convictions and
debating talents through confronting the corruption of academia. Famous Personalities
Heinrich Boll (novelist), Ellen Burstyn (actress), Ada Byron (inventor
and mathmatician; daughter of Lord Byron), Robert Goulet (actor),
Margaret Hamilton (actress; the ‘Wicked Witch of the West’ in The
Wizard of Oz ), Nellie Sax (poet), Kiefer Sutherland (actor), James
Thurber (writer and humorist), Mark Twain (writer and humorist). —98—
S UN S AGITTARIUS
M OON T AURUS
A mind not to be changed by place or time. The mind is its own place,
and in itself Can make a Heaven of Hell, a Hell of Heaven.
JOHN MILTON
What Price Glory ?
MAXWELL ANDERSON Themes
FIRE/EARTH Friendly and romantic; steady aspirations; generous
nature; measured optimism; extravagant taste; entrenched beliefs;
devotion to progress; self-confidence; a gentle authoritarian; social
conscience; love of beauty; musical sensitivity; a pragmatic
philosopher.
Are you a natural explorer whose get-up-and-go is undermined by a
love of your own home? Do you want freedom but fear that life will
force you to sacrifice it all for material and emotional security? Are you a thinker who finds your greatest inspiration comes when you are
cooking (or gardening, painting or playing music)?
You are a warm, open person, restrainedly idealistic, confident and
enthusiastic about your activities and interests, and possessing a strong
dramatic sense with a distinct satirical edge. You can be restless and
impatient, robust and argumentative, but underneath it all you have a
deep need for harmony and security, and it takes a lot for you to give
up on anything.
Your instinct is for the slow and traditional, for the constancy of
pleasant surroundings and familiar faces, but you also would like to be
at the cutting edge of the creative arts or perhaps the social/political
scene. Your moral strength and warm, aspirational nature make you a
person that people notice and respect, and your generosity and bon
viveur qualities make you someone who, generally, is easy to love.
You have a good imagination and bright ideas, and fortunately you
can usually see how they can be put to practical use. Philosophical
ideals play an important part in your life, but they are never divorced
from your practical life or those unavoidable economic necessities of
life. Not for you the airy-fairy ideologies of the ‘New Age’, which
neglect the importance of creature comforts.
You want to enjoy yourself, but you must earn your keep – or find
someone who will do it for you. Although you revere justice and want
equal rights for all just as much as the next person, your common sense
reminds you that getting your bills paid and having a bit of savings
makes you feel good.
It is also quite likely that you have a natural understanding of
ecological beliefs, the idea that nature and the perpetual round of life
that sustains us all must be valued. You not only think about these
things, but you also want your life to be actively involved in the
preservation of the species – your species, preferably. You can be
amazingly resourceful, and will know how to value and give validation
to simply enjoying the scents, sights, tastes and textures of living.
You could be something of a practical educationalist, convinced of
the importance of knowing the facts about all kinds of things. You
believe that knowledge will suffice, that it will protect you and enable
you to make better choices in all the roles you play – parent, consumer and friend. Therefore you remain an avid student all your life, and you
will have a passion for your hobbies, even if they never become
lucrative. Music and art may also play a big part in your life, for you
know in your heart and feel in your bones that man does not live by
bread alone. Relationships
In relationships you can express your warmth and big-heartedness
along with your dependability and appreciation of the simple pleasures
of the daily round. You are romantic but reliable; fun-loving but
common sensical. You intend to live a good life, and to do that you
need to feel happy in a close relationship, and to have familiar faces
around you.
You tend to feel at ease with yourself and your tastes and cravings,
and as a result you put others at ease. In emotional liaisons, however,
you are bound to meet the extreme paradox of your nature head on. A
part of you wants variety and excitement, whilst another part wants
security, closeness and absolute promises. You can, without realizing
it, become addicted to the emotional nourishment you get from your
partner and family. You may even become very possessive unwittingly.
Assuming your loved ones will always be there, you may go off
sporadically to quench your thirst for adventure. You need a mate who
shares your excitement for learning and activity, and who, with
perhaps just a touch of water in their make-up, can connect you to the
more mysterious realm of feelings, and help you develop your own
overlooked sensitivity. Your Greatest Strengths
The way you combine brilliant insights with practical know-how; an
expansive outlook made viable by your calm and serious bearing;
commitment to ideals and people; warm approachability; capacity to
enjoy life to the full. Your Greatest Weaknesses
Lack of initiative; proneness to live in your dreams and let others pick
up the bill; becoming a slave to your own exotic tastes; tendency to get
stuck in ideologies that clutter your life and impede your creative
output. Images for Integration
A pirate ship searches for gold … An armchair traveller roughs out a
financial plan for his next adventure. Famous Personalities
Christina Aguilera (rock singer), Maxwell Anderson (journalist and
playwright), Busby Berkeley (Hollywood director and choreographer),
Van Heflin (actor), Armando Iannucci (comedian/actor), Lucy Liu
(actress), Jean Marais (actor), Ricardo Montalban (actor), Jim
Morrison (rock musician of The Doors). —99—
S UN S AGITTARIUS M OON G EMINI Creative minds have always been known to survive any kind of bad
training.
ANNA FREUD
I’ve over-educated myself in all the things I shouldn’t have known at
all.
NOEL COWARD Themes
FIRE/AIR Versatile; intellectual; witty; friendly; casual; literary
genius; restless; adventurous; inventive; ironic; sociable; covers a lot of ground; both profound and fun-loving; a sage and a student; the
eternal youth.
Do you want knowledge or do you want wisdom? Are you a
philosopher or a jokesmith? Essentially, you are a collector of
information, people and experiences, an eternal child asking ‘why’ and
‘what for?’. When you have collected sufficient answers, however,
your intuition gets working and you can become an expert map-reader,
seeing the underlying meaning, the ‘gestalt’ behind the parts.
Getting the moral of the story for you is more satisfying than just
the vocal/aural experience. That is not to say, though, that you do not
enjoy talking – you can play devil’s advocate to the nth degree and
out-talk anyone (you find the sound of your own voice intoxicating!).
For you, life is one adventure after another and one stimulating
conversation after another. The communication of ideas, from the
profound to the anecdotal, is the essence of your life. And whatever
you believe in, you articulate with moralistic fervour.
You have an engaging and wickedly mischievous personality, and
are interested in a huge range of ideas, projects and people. You may
be gifted with language, clarity of thought and communication, and
your talents may be applied in many different areas, from teaching and
writing to advertising and marketing or being an inventive
entrepreneur. You are friendly and hard-working but can easily exhaust
yourself from over-socializing, and become short-tempered and
tactless when things are not going your way. At these times your
impatient and somewhat self-righteous side comes out.
Innocently irreverent and quite capable of making jokes at the
vicar’s expense, you see connections between seemingly unrelated
things, the levity and the profundity all in the same twinkling of an
eye. Thus popularity generally comes easily for you, if you can ever be
pinned down long enough to fill in your diary. You have great insight
and can sum up a person in a few pithy words. But you can also be
quite cutting and blunt, although you never mean to be unkind or
ungenerous, and you will be dismayed when someone gets offended
and huffy. Relationships
You can be amazingly logical, and are able to give practical advice
when needed, but you find people’s emotional problems difficult to
cope with. How could they get themselves in such a mess in the first
place? When it comes to your own emotional life, you may avoid
commitment because you fear boredom and the end of adventure. As
you are often out of touch with your own feelings, you remain naive
about many things – especially emotional depths and interpersonal
intrigues. To your friends and colleagues this may be an endearing
quality, whereas the love of your life may find it exasperating.
You are affectionate enough and generous with whatever you have,
but tend to rationalize and wriggle out of tight corners if things get too
emotionally heavy. You need intellectual rapport with your mate, the
sharing of ideals, travel and philosophies. You are not fond of strong
displays of emotion, as you have neither the patience for nor the
interest in such things. In this area of human experience, brevity is
definitely the soul of wit for you. Without realizing it, however, you
can end up taking the child’s role in emotional relationships, and that
can cheat you of adult rewards.
Essentially you are a natural teacher, spokesperson, communicator,
disc jockey, trendsetter, inspirational catalyst – someone who, by hook
or by crook, opens the way for others to broaden their own views. You
are a sophisticated gypsy, here today and gone tomorrow, but you will
be back and just pick up where you left off. Your Greatest Strengths
Intellectual curiosity and love of learning; gift of repartee;
communication skills; frank, friendly nature; openness to experience
and different cultures; inventiveness and original flair, including the
way you readily share your knowledge; an eternal youthfulness which
makes you charming, approachable and fun-loving, no matter what
age. Your Greatest Weaknesses
Spreading yourself too thin and not finishing projects; overanalysing
things as a way of hiding from your feelings; tendency towards selfabsorption and never quite growing up; never fulfilling your deeper
poential because it is so easy to live by your wits. Image for Integration
Robin Hood as a young boy plays truant from school to go to his
archery lesson, but ends up teaching his card tricks to his master. Famous Personalities
Akbar the Great (ruler of Persia), Jeff Bridges (actor), Noel Coward
(playwright), Billy Connolly (comedian and actor), Benjamine Creme
(‘New-Age’ prophet), Francisco Franco (Spanish dictator), Anna
Freud (psychoanalyst), Christopher Fry (writer), Petra Kelly (founder
of Green Party), C. S. Lewis (writer), Alyssa Milano (actress), Edith
Piaf (singer). —100—
S UN S AGITTARIUS
M OON C ANCER
And did those feet in Ancient days Walk upon England’s pastures green
?
WILLIAM BLAKE , JERUSALEM
I remember my youth and the feeling that …I could last for ever,
outlast the sea, the earth, and all men; the deceitful feeling that lures
us on to perils, to love, to vain effort – to death.
JOSEPH CONRAD , YOUTH Themes FIRE/WATER Mind and heart; enthusiasm and sensitivity; extremes of
extroversion and introversion; emotionally charged; intuitive,
prophetic visionary; over-extended; brilliance; pizzazz; dramatic sense.
Do you want to stay home with mum or sail the seven seas in the
swiftest boat alive? Are you the moody, sensitive, self-absorbed
outsider or the super-optimistic, partying fun-lover? Are you fiercely
assertive or gently caring?
You are a fast-track progressive caught up with the ideas of the
moment and tomorrow, yet at the same time you are moved by
nostalgia and the good old days, and can be happy to drift along in the
realms of memory until the next enthusiasm captures you. By the same
token, you can be a very private person with a need to nurse your
feelings, and yet be someone who thrives on other people, good
fellowship, new contacts and relationships.
Your creative fires are sparked by anything that can combine your
love of action with your vivid imagination and quest for the meaning
of life. Freedom to explore by land, sea, air and the imagination, and a
home fire to come back to is what you want and need. You have a great
zest for life, immense adaptability, and will throw yourself into any
experience at least once. You enjoy people and will want to know what
makes them tick.
You delight in moral paradoxes, which is just as well, for you can
often find yourself torn between pity and scorn for your fellow beings,
and indeed for yourself. Your own self-pity never lasts long, as your
visionary sense of what is around the corner gives you a boundless
faith in Providence, and a conviction that things will turn out right.
They usually do, though with your trusting naivity you can be all too
easily deceived by less scrupulous types, and will do well to learn to
look more carefully and systematically before you leap.
Your combination of caring intimacy, vision and panache gives you
a natural magnetism and talent for motivating, teaching and persuading
people. This can make you a born innovator and true educationalist
who can inspire others, and gives you a gift for public relations and
making a splash in the world. Whether you are in business or fashion,
a travelling salesman (overseas visits your speciality), a rock musician or a teacher, you have charisma and know how to use it. You can work
with great loyalty and energy yet you hate to be tied down, and will
tend to get yourself hopelessly over-extended. You are someone who
can shrewdly squirrel away financial resources for the future; yet your
faith in life’s bounty can equally lead you to throw economic caution
to the wind. In business matters it will therefore pay you to listen to the
most feet-on-the-ground bank manager you can find. Your motto
should be ‘moderation in all things’, but you will no doubt add to that
‘and especially in moderation’. Relationships
You are really emotional, and a romantic with it. Feelings and passions
steam up in you, and the next romantic interest in your life is always
Ms or Mr Right. At one moment you could be feeling a possessive and
protective love that will last for ever, and swearing undying loyalty;
the next moment you are off, burning your boats and waving goodbye.
You do not necessarily have ‘a lover in every port’, but you do like to
wander the world, in fact or imagination, and know that everywhere is
home. When these conflicting sides are not reconciled, you can feel
torn between a deep belief in human fellowship and a sense of inner
loneliness and emotional isolation.
Although you seek constant emotional stimulation, and cannot
tolerate boredom, you are quite capable of being loyal to your
childhood sweetheart – as long as he or she sufficiently captures your
wild imagination and love of variety and changing moods. Likewise,
your very wildness may attract you to solid Earth types who can offer
you a sober stability and common sense which you otherwise tend to
lack. Your Greatest Strengths
Undiluted optimism; intuitive ability to tune into the times and express
your own and other people’s thoughts and feelings with wit and
insight; personal magnetism; your kind helpfulness, generosity, good
fellowship and willingness to go the extra mile. Your Greatest Weaknesses
Restlessly searching for fresh emotional and intellectual stimulation
and excitement which can push you to extremes of behaviour;
constantly over-extending your financial and emotional resources;
leaving projects unfinished; gullibility and misplaced faith in unworthy
people and causes. Images for Integration
A homing pigeon … An international nanny … An evangelist offers a
vision of personal salvation … Jimi Hendrix’s Woodstock rendition of
The Star Spangled Banner … William Blake’s watercolour Teach
These Souls to Fly (Tate Gallery, London). Famous Personalities
William Blake (poet, artist and mystic), Joseph Conrad (novelist),
Georges Feydeau (dramatist and farceur), Sonia Gandhi (wife of
Indian President, Rajiv), Jimi Hendrix (legendary rock musician),
Hans Helmut Kirst (novelist), Lord Frederic Leighton (painter),
Isabelle Pagan (pioneer astrologer and writer), Tom Waits (lyricist,
composer). —101—
S UN S AGITTARIUS
M OON L EO
Remember, happiness doesn’t depend upon who you are or what you
have; it depends solely upon what you think.
HOW TO WIN FRIENDS AND INFLUENCE PEOPLE , DALE CARNEGIE
The nation had the lion’s heart; I had the luck to give the roar.
Personally I’m always ready to learn, although I do not always like
being taught. WINSTON CHURCHILL Themes
FIRE/FIRE Warm-hearted; grandiose; self-dramatizing; intuitive
thinker; visionary; romantic; arrogant; nobility; absent-minded; hottempered; devoted; extravagant; courageous; childlike enthusiasm;
adventurer; gambler; love of winning.
Are you seeking the meaning of life or the glory of self? Are you a
visionary philosopher or a playful child who never knows when to
stop? Your active, larger-than-life imagination hastens you on to the
‘sunny uplands’ of the future, but you are apt to forget that the slow
steps of humanity must travel every inch of the weary road that leads
there.
Intensely fiery, restless and proud, you work and play with total
involvement, never losing your vision of the pot of gold at the end of
the rainbow – for you want nothing less. But that pot of gold – whether
it is a win at the races, a first at Oxford, a bestselling novel, or a trek in
the Himalayas – is part of the future that eternally fuels your ambition
and beckons you on. Your inner vision of your life with you in the star
role is everything.
Your enthusiasm for life and learning is overwhelming, and can be
very contagious. You therefore make a natural leader, as long as others
do not mind your autocratic style and your somewhat abrupt way of
giving orders. Everything you do must be true to your inner vision and
to the principles that underpin all your actions. And if someone objects
to the way you express yourself, well it is just too bad for them. With
both the Sun and the Moon in the element of Fire, your drama and
volatility can literally burn more sensitive souls who will wonder what
hit them.
Your intentions, however, are utterly honourable, and when people
get to know you they will realize that your autocracy has a childlike
quality – innocent, pure-of-heart and omnipotent. Self-expression is as
necessary as breathing for you, and you refuse to be pigeon-holed by
anyone. Whatever engages your talents professionally will have to be something that offers enough room for your originality and flair. Your
high sense of justice would come alive in courtroom drama or on the
stage.
Following your road to ever greater and fuller self-expression can,
however, cause you to collapse with fatigue. So consumed are you
with your inner visions and plans that you easily neglect your physical
wellbeing and treat your body as one more mundane responsibility that
gets in the way of your fun. If you can develop some patience and
realism, and the capacity to really think about other people’s views,
you will have a greater chance of bringing your ideas to fruition – with
longer-lasting results. Relationships
Intensely romantic and in love with love, you are passionate and
committed in a relationship, but perhaps never quite sure that this is
the great romance. Your love of intense experience plus your
considerable vanity mean that you are open-ended when it comes to
relationships, and this can be disconcerting for your mate. You give
your all and expect the same in return, as love is part of the big drama
of your life.
You cannot hide your feelings and, if your passions change, you
will change your life as well. But you are extremely honourable and
true to your moral principles – to go against them would be a gross
insult to yourself. You expect others to be as morally sincere as you,
and are mortified when you discover otherwise. Yet you are immensely
resilient, and bounce back from emotional or professional setbacks
with your integrity untarnished, your wisdom enhanced and your
determination to succeed increased ten-fold.
You love the good things of life: beauty, style, talent, literary
genius, champions of all kinds, and social soirées where your inner
child comes out to relish the sheer delight of human intercourse. Your Greatest Strengths Creative imagination; sense of the drama of life; playfulness and
openness to new adventure; ability to see potential in people and
situations; optimism; courage; leadership abilities; nobility of spirit;
capacity to bring light and warmth into the lives of others. Your Greatest Weaknesses
Impatience; temper tantrums; being bossy and opinionated; propensity
to grab the limelight of others to hide insecurity; difficulty in accepting
normal human limitations; lack of sensitivity to other people’s needs;
taking yourself too seriously; self-centredness. Image for Integration
At an emotionally moving ceremony, the shaman of the gypsies is
given an honorary university degree in herbal lore and ancient
geography. Famous Personalities
Willy Brandt (politician), Dale Carnegie (guru of positive thinking),
Winston Churchill (former British prime minister), Benjamin Disraeli
(politician), Arthur Fiedler (conductor), Gustave Flaubert (writer), Jane
Fonda (actress), Nancy Mitford (writer), Lee Remick (actress), Charles
Ringling (of Ringling Bros. Circus), Christina Rossetti (poet), Jean
Sibelius (composer), Lee Trevino (golfer). —102—
S UN S AGITTARIUS
M OON V IRGO
Nothing is more terrible than activity without insight.
Work is the grand cure of all the maladies and miseries that ever beset
mankind. THOMAS CARLYLE
Happiness is the rational understanding of life and the world.
BARUCH SPINOZA Themes
FIRE/EARTH Cavalier yet careful; socially concerned; intellectually
discriminating; enthusiastically precise; ability to categorize
knowledge; a practical idealist; boldly dogmatic; diffident yet
outspoken; loyal and helpful friend; morally sound; philosophical;
charming; humorously tactful.
As an artist of life, are you a miniaturist or would you say you work in
bold, slapdash images? Are you a confident extrovert who keeps an
anxious inner world under tight mental grip, or an imaginative
introvert who finds pleasureable release through discovering you can
make a big impact on the world? Do you flourish in the privacy of
your own home, or do you want to roam the world, seeking out new
friends and open spaces?
When in insecure, critical mode you can be a modest but nervous,
small-minded puritan who works to the letter of the law. When you are
truly inspired, however, and engaged both intellectually and
emotionally in your life, you become a grand visionary who can marry
broad concepts to practical human need. You are inspired by large
truths but you will not be happy until you get the rules down on paper
– and you want to get it right only because you have such reverence for
the great ideas that bring the most hope to humankind.
You are liable to shift between periods of great certitude and selfconfidence, and moods of deep doubt and self-criticism. The centre
stage attracts your sense of drama and self-esteem, but if placed under
the spotlight for too long you can become something of a nervous
shrinking violet. Your aims really are for the greatest good of the
many, rather than just for yourself.
Even if you are not particularly academic, you have the mind of the
perennial student and are always learning something new that will be grist to your mill. You can talk a great deal and impress others with
your zeal, but then surprise everyone by working just as hard. A good
education is especially helpful in bringing out your great strengths, for
you are someone who knows there is a lot about you that is just
waiting to be born, so to speak, if only you could find the right teacher,
the right course …
Although you need to feel of use, you also sense that your life is a
journey and that, well, you ought to be going somewhere. Your fieryearthy temperament can create a lot of nervous tension for you, and
you may sometimes find it difficult to unwind. When you catch
yourself becoming obsessively active and pompously intolerant, that is
your signal to slow down and smell the roses, to learn to play, to find
out what you feel. Speaking of roses, you will find that gardening and
other healthy and ecologically sound outdoor activities will do
wonders for your optimum mind – body balance.
When your aspirations to a universal outlook are married to your
love of clarity, detail and service, you can be a superb educator. By
presenting the big picture of any subject – which you can do because
you are an intuitive at heart – and at the same time getting down to its
practical application, you are able to enthuse your students and bring
out the best in them. When you want to be, you are a great problem
solver and thrive on finding precise, logical solutions to seemingly
insoluble problems.
You tend to be a person of great faith – a faith based upon reason,
so you probably see no conflict between science and religion.
Although you are a lover of objective truth, you sense the underlying
mystery of life which, quite reasonably, transcends all those
quantifiable facts! Relationships
You can be kind-hearted and utterly devoted in relationships, and you
will be shocked by disloyalty. Yet you can blow hot and cold yourself
– at one moment something of an uptight prude, the next wildly
vivacious and flirtatious. You are fairly gregarious and like the company of many different
kinds of people, preferably stimulating and important types, but you
may find it difficult to really be intimate on a one-to-one basis unless
you share an intellectual rapport with your partner, as well as having
some common vision, enthusiasm and dedication to a cause.
You are warm, sentimental and dependable when people have won
your respect, and very willing to stop and have a good time – as long
as it is done with panache and decorum. Your Greatest Strengths
Intellectual vigour and precision; enthusiastic dedication to ideals and
hard work; quiet charm and warmly helpful attitude to others; ability to
convey ideas objectively and to persuade others with your clear
arguments as well as your calm integrity. Your Greatest Weaknesses
Proneness to mental obsessions and nervous anxieties which deplete
your creative energies; tendency to be moralistic, overcritical and
judgemental of others’ imperfections; discomfort with emotional
needs; desire for certitude, which can make you pedantic and narrowminded. Images for Integration
An athlete gives a fundraising performance for charity … A
philosopher presents a perfect mathematical vision of the nature and
meaning of the universe … The Ten Commandments. Famous Personalities
Ursula Bloom (prolific writer and journalist), Kenneth Branagh (actor
and film director), Thomas Carlyle (historian, essayist and
philosopher), Jaye Plutão . Morgan (singer), George Moscone (politician), Jean Sibelius (composer), Baruch Spinoza (philosopher), Francis
Thompson (poet). —103—
S UN S AGITTARIUS
M OON L IBRA
Happiness in marriage is purely a matter of chance.
Let other pens dwell on guilt and misery.
JANE AUSTEN
There is more treasure in books than in all the pirates’ loot on
Treasure Island …and best of all, you can enjoy these riches every day
of your life.
WALT DISNEY Themes
FIRE/AIR Optimistic; warm-hearted; philosophical mind; social
conscience; generous spirit; romantic; prophetic; chivalrous;
graciously gregarious; an interested observer of humankind; frequenter
of coffee shops and theatres; ardent communicator; fun-loving
companion.
Outspoken and iconoclastic, yet considerate and warmly available to
others, you are the romantic anarchist who wins people over to your
view because nobody can resist your charisma and joie de vivre. Selfdramatizing and independent, you are a visionary with a strong need to
communicate your ideas and to have them passionately received and
affirmed.
Communication for you is a fiery experience, an expression of
love, an experience of myth and meaning, and this driving need to get
your ideas across can take you on to the stage, or it may find its outlet
in the written word, especially fiction or poetry. People-watching and
the intricacies of human relationships may fuel your inspirational mind. But whether attracted to more serious pursuits such as law or
politics, or a more artistic milieu, you will always have a fresh, vital
approach to life that makes you a wonderful teacher and companion.
Honourable and just, you nevertheless often have to compromise
between your sentiment about situations and people and the detached,
broad, mental view of things by which you aim to live your life. You
are a person of integrity, originality and scruples. Deploring any form
of injustice, you will readily and vociferously support the underdog,
the innocent child and the eccentric artist – for you are a little bit of all
three.
You are a natural salesperson, and could excel in public relations or
marketing where your heart and mind come together in persuasive
rhetoric. Whatever you do, you need scope for the expression of your
artistic flair, your strong social conscience and your intense
conviviality. Your sense of humour and gift for arbitration may often
be useful in defusing tense or dangerous situations; hence you may be
attracted to politics, where the hustle and bustle satisfies your need for
mobility, and your social savvy lands you very much on your feet.
Your social grace, love of beauty and mischievous sense of fun make
you an extremely resilient and popular person wherever you decide to
hang your hat.
You have the gift of the gab and love to wax lyrical about your
latest inspiration. Getting people together to collaborate on projects is
one of the things you enjoy and are especially good at, and you excel
at playing the great compromiser and coordinator, oiling the wheels of
joint ventures with flair and ease. Although quite amenable to others’
views, you are an assertive person and can display a lively temper
when challenged or unjustly thwarted. Relationships
You thrive on social stimulation, friendship and love, and to be happy
you certainly require substantial amounts of affection and admiration.
But you run away from heavy displays of emotion. You are passionate
and idealistic in love, but not soppy, and you try to keep your emotions
under the control of your mind. You want to share the grand journey of life with your loved one –
the drama, the beauty, the elegance – and you want to keep things
positive and happy-go-lucky. When it comes to changing nappies,
however, you may get restless. Luckily, your love of learning and
discovery should also help you in the more mundane journey of
domesticity, paying bills and sticking to some sort of healthy routine.
Taking care of the latter is not your strong point, but fair’s fair, and
when you sense that your partner needs a lift you can always come up
with a ‘treat’ that cheers up the down-hearted. Likewise there are
plenty of times when you need lots of tender, loving care, and you will
happily switch roles from time to time, being able to play parent or
child, daddy or mummy, teacher or student with equal panache. Your Greatest Strengths
Outrageous, unstuffy sense of humour; warm sincerity; your love of
people; fine intellect; acute observations; quick wit; honesty, which
both shocks and delights your friends; openness to adventure; your
strong, resilient, positive approach to all the challenges life presents. Your Greatest Weaknesses
Over-expansiveness in both your ideas and style so that you are
frequently forced to come down to earth; gullibility; reliance on luck;
restlessness and need for constant activity and social advancement; an
on-going conflict between independence and needing others. Images for Integration
Amidst a whirl of gaiety, a writer sits in a coffee house taking notes,
and a painter paints … The Dead Poets’ Society. Famous Personalities
Gregg Allman (singer), Jane Austen (author), Maria Callas (operatic
star), David Carradine (actor), Emily Dickinson (poet and author), Walt Disney (leader in film animation), Betty Grable (actress), Werner
Heisenberg (physicist), Liv Ullman (actress), Saki (writer), Henri
Toulouse-Lautrec (artist). —104—
S UN S AGITTARIUS
M OON S CORPIO
Trial by jury is the lamp that shows that freedom lives.
LORD DEVLIN
I don’t let her watch anything that teaches her false values or
encourages this hideous materialism that is so prevalent.
BETTE MIDLER (TALKING ABOUT HER YOUNG DAUGHTER)
Everyone is psychic; it’s just that the majority of people don’t use their
powers or even realise they have them.
URI GELLER
If you can actually count your money, you are not really a rich man.
J. PAUL GETTY Themes
FIRE/WATER Moralistic intensity; confident; judicial and exacting
mind; emotional fervour; sensual; satirical; sociable; serious; fiercely
loyal; vivid imagination; powerful desires; keen instincts; the victory
of optimism over despair; entrepreneurial spirit.
Innocence coupled with a splendidly dirty mind – that’s you! You
optimistically look to new experiences as you love to learn, to respond
to challenges, to feel stimulated and alive. But you also have a shrewd
sense of both your own powers and your limitations, your need for
security, and the needs and motivations of other people.
You combine warmth and hopefulness with emotional reserve; an
eager morality with an ever-present awareness of primitive proclivities – desires, jealousies, obsessions. A vivacious intensity exudes from
every pore, although you are very capable of deliberately restraining
your affections if you think it appropriate.
You are sensitive to situations and people, sizing up the atmosphere
and hidden signals therein, and this makes you a good detective and an
astute judge of people. It is not that you are paranoid, although you can
be suspicious enough about hidden motives; it is just that you are no
fool because you know well the inner struggle between triumphant
faith and the downward pull of black moods. You are fairly clear about
your own standards and ideals; in fact, you have a strongly judicial
temperament and register people’s actions and words very vigorously.
No one gets away with anything in your presence.
In many ways, you are the passionate philosopher, acutely aware of
the seriousness of life and the urgency of primary issues: good versus
evil, freedom versus oppression, hope versus despair. And this makes
you a profound and fascinating companion, never light-weight but
always ready to experience the heights and the depths because you
know you are going to learn something important.
You would make a good barrister as you love grappling with
demanding moral issues or anything that pushes your wits to their
limit. You may also be found in politics or social work, where your
personal feelings about social concerns can find expression.
Whatever you do, you think and feel passionately about things, and
you will approach your relationships and career with the intensity of an
artist. Your controversial and exacting mind enjoys a good argument,
and you are likely to stir things up if you feel bored, or if you smell
complacency creeping in. Relationships
Given the choice, you would want an intense life in which you could
often drive yourself to the edge. In love, this tendency makes you
volatile, unpredictable but 100-per-cent involved – and you demand
the same commitment from your partner. Extremely passionate,
needful of intimacy and capable of lasting loyalty, you are either a deep, dark enigma to your partner, or a jovial companion ready for
adventure.
Part of your creative dilemma is your inner swing from
possessiveness and dependency to a fiery, independent stance which
says ‘I can do it myself – I’m the world’s best survivor!’ This attitude
is great for climbing Mount Everest but not very conducive to
intimacy. And a lack of humility can wear a bit thin as well. You are
always biting off a bit more than you can chew and then defiantly
pushing full-steam ahead to prove to others (and to yourself) that you
have heroic qualities. And you want heroic excitement in your lover,
too, although a sensible, down-to-earth type will help to balance your
intensity and imagination.
If you can lighten up a bit and direct some of your emotional
intensity into creative hobbies, relationships will go more smoothly,
and your potential as a compassionate, humorous and wise individual
can be realized. Your Greatest Strengths
Magnetic charisma; emotional commitment and dedication to life;
courage and resilience in the face of pain or fear of the unknown;
powerful intellect and talent for investigation; spontaneous honesty
and thirst for self-knowledge. Your Greatest Weaknesses
A rigid, overly-critical attitude to weaker souls; a tendency to become
over-zealous about your loves and hates; proneness to proud retaliation
and condemnation of contrary views; a rebellious tendency to create
trouble when bored. Images for Integration
A missionary sees himself as a secret agent for God … A psychiatric
nurse and a criminal cross-examine each other. Famous Personalities
Eileen Agar (painter), Hector Berlioz (composer), Dave Brubeck (jazz
musician), Lord Devlin (lawyer and High Court judge), Phil Donohue
(chat-show host), Paul Eluard (surrealist poet), Douglas Fairbanks, Jr
(actor), Cesar A. Franck (composer), Uri Geller (psychic), J. Paul
Getty (oil magnate and art patron), Bette Midler (actress and singer),
Captain Bertram Ratcliffe (soldier and writer), Steven Spielberg (film
director), Robert Welch (founder of John Birch Society), Laurens van
der Post (writer, explorer). S UN S AGITTARIUS —105—
M OON S AGITTARIUS Give happiness and joy to many other people. There is nothing better
or greater than that.
LUDWIG VAN BEETHOVEN
Intellect distinguishes between the possible and the impossible.
MAX BORN Themes
FIRE/FIRE Laughter and solemnity; certainty and anarchy; doubt and
single-mindedness; intuitive; gregarious; intensely enthusiastic;
resilient; funny; freedom lover and fundamentalist; sheer enjoyment
and zest for life and nature.
Are you a wise-cracking comedian full of provocative witticisms and
lively banter? Or are you an earnest, high-sounding preacher full of
moral certainty and determined to put the world to rights?
Life for you can feel like a never-ending adventure, a major quest
into the furthest reaches of a great cosmic joke for the next source of
fun and enjoyment; or it can be a well of endless wonder, education
and philosophical and theological speculation which you want to tell everyone about. So the trick here is to get the balance right between
frolic and fiercely important morality. When you combine your sheer
vitality and zest for life with your capacity for broad understanding,
however, you can command an endless reservoir of intellectual
enthusiasm, which can stimulate and encourage all with whom you
come into contact.
You are a person of intense, vivid feelings, whose mind is at first
captured by variety but then inspired by the meaning behind the
various threads of your life experience. You opt for the large view and
have a flair for seeing the big picture and the central issues in any
situation. Legal and moral issues fascinate you, and you would enjoy
making evangelical pronouncements in the courtroom, pulpit – or the
pub. Doing the right thing is important to you, and you will let others
know in no uncertain terms if their behaviour does not meet your
standards.
You are totally wholehearted, a kind of archetypal incarnation of
sincerity itself, and as a result you find insincerity, cruelty and
corruption pretty unbearable. Freedom of thought and movement are
central to your wellbeing, yet your heart seeks to devote itself with a
sense of moral certainty to some over-arching creed or philosophy.
Extreme high-mindedness could lead you to espouse a particular belief
with a fanaticism that covers up your inner doubts, and protects you
from asking questions about yourself which you fear may be
unanswerable.
Although you hate to be pigeon-holed, you hanker after the
security of a Utopian social and moral order where justice reigns and
everyone has a definite place. It is quite likely that the breakdown of
values in society will occupy your thoughts and motivate you towards
improving the situation. You may do this through social work,
teaching, writing or the ministry. Making and/or starring in comedy
films will give you an even better outlet for your goals, as even when
you recognize waste and despair, you rarely lose faith in the goodness
and potential brilliance of your fellow human beings. And you know
that a good laugh goes a long way.
You are highly independent and probably physically restless. Lots
of outdoor space and opportunities for travel are what you want, and these will help you to relax. Intensely loyal in your own fashion, you
keep old friends for ages, even though you will easily pick up new
ones along your many journeys. You are strongly intuitive with an ear
and an eye for what will catch on, and you can usually turn your hand
to a wide variety of pursuits.
Although there may be a romantic, wandering gypsy inside you,
you are a serious person at heart whose inner principles define exactly
who you are. You may change the way you express those principles
throughout your life and, as a result, evoke criticism from more
conventional people. But you understand that ‘the times are achanging’, and if there is anyone who can marry expediency with
eternal verities and make it work – profitably – it is you! Relationships
People in all sizes, shapes and sentiments fascinate you. Each fresh
personal relationship can feel like the ultimate revelation, but can
quickly become claustrophobic. This can either lead you to flit from
flower to flower, treating each with equal enthusiasm whilst it lasts; or
it can create a need for stability and certainty. If the latter applies, you
will be drawn to a feet-on-the-ground Earth type, whose ease with the
daily round and capacity for sensual enjoyment gives you a deep sense
of roots and security.
Once committed to a relationship – and it must be one that is ‘fun’
and allows some freedom for adventure – it can be the focus and
foundation of all your beliefs. But emotional maturity will demand that
you do battle with your restlessness, face your childish ways, and stay
put when the going gets tough. Your Greatest Strengths
Optimism; humour; resilience; broad, questing mind; courageous
devotion to principles; faith in the future and the essential benevolence
of life. Your Greatest Weaknesses
Tendency to hold forth with self-righteousness and ‘good advice’;
reluctance to grow up and admit to having limitations; tendency to be
slapdash and sloppy with details; proneness to sudden downers when
life’s realities clash with your noble ideals. Images for Integration
A top-speed crazy comedian combines sheer silliness with profound
spiritual and philosophical insights … Beethoven’s ninth symphony
and Ode to Joy. Famous Personalities
Ludwig van Beethoven (composer), Max Born (philosopher and
physicist), Carl Ferdinand Cori (biochemist), Joan Didion (novelist and
writer), Georg Kaiser (writer), Max Kester (comedian), John McCrae
(poet), Randy Newman (musician), Elissa Landi (actress and novelist). —106—
S UN S AGITTARIUS
M OON C APRICORN
My main themes are exploration (space, sea, time), the position of Man
in the hierarchy of the universe, and the effect of contact with other
intelligences.
ARTHUR C. CLARKE (AUTHOR)
We only begin to awake to reality when we realise that the material
world, the world of space and time … is nothing but a sign and a
symbol of a mystery which infinitely transcends it.
BEDE GRIFFITHS Themes FIRE/EARTH Philosophical humour; serious exploration; both facile
and profound; judicial; enthusiastically loyal; imposing personality;
moral courage; self-importance; eager for success; leadership; verbose;
committed friendship; generous; kind; social conscience; civil rights;
Peter Pan and Captain Hook.
Although you are a freedom-loving explorer who feels challenged by
every new horizon, you are also a closet businessman with the
potential to make an empire out of each new discovery. You are the
romantic maverick and the sober traditionalist all rolled into one, and
when your inner masculine and feminine work together it is a bit like
Father Christmas forming a limited company to ensure success and
security for all concerned.
One part of you believes in the abundance of the universe, but the
other part tends to hedge its bets in the game of life. Life is a game for
you, but a serious one – and you do not like losing. This is a major
component of your inner creative tension – the need for unabashed
self-expression versus your desire for self-control, respect and concrete
attainment.
You are expansive, impulsive and optimistic, eager to learn, travel,
discuss, socialize and proselytize. Yet you also like to feel you are
getting somewhere, making an impact, holding the reins, moving
forward materially and socially, carrying responsibility and authority
and building up material security for yourself and your family. Should
you play or should you work? Should you put on your favorite
Beethoven album or should you practise your scales? You may
sometimes feel like an old soul who is dying to let that crazy inner
child out. You want control over the known, but are attracted to the
excitement of the unknown. Ultimately you want to extend your
horizons – emotionally, intellectually and spiritually – but you want to
connect them with the meaningful traditions of the past as well.
Your appetite for life is big, and one person will not satisfy it – you
need a career, hobbies, stimulating people and personal challenges.
You have a lot of energy and make time for an active life in politics,
business or teaching whilst also trying to master some art form. But no
matter how much you take on – which is likely to be considerable because you love the journey as much as arriving at your destination –
your devotion to your family is deep and consistent. You have the
personality of the caring, patriarchal uncle who takes his
responsibilities seriously and enjoys them as well.
You are happiest when you have achieved the status of the soughtafter expert in some area, so that you can be your generous, positive
self while basking in the limelight of recognition. And you are not
averse to being rewarded with a high standard of living and plenty of
creature comforts, even though you are quite capable of living rough
whilst journeying onwards and upwards towards your ideal. You can
be a friend and a father, a mate and a mother, and a seeker of sound
principles, self-knowledge and social relief! Relationships
Emotionally you are passionate and wholehearted, if somewhat
detached and hard to satisfy at times. And you can be suprisingly
touchy and imperious if you feel your dignity has been ignored or
unappreciated. You are big-hearted and trustworthy, dedicated to your
partner, to family and to friends, although sometimes you have to go
your own way to ponder vital issues on your own.
You are naturally, if somewhat restrainedly, assertive, and you
readily impress others with your offbeat, eccentric, somewhat nervous,
authoritative, but always friendly and ready-to-help ways.
Conservative and altruistic, you feel responsibility keenly and always
try to live up to your moral obligations. In relationships, however, you
need mental affinity and a fair amount of independence. Sometimes
you like it hot, and sometimes you like to be alone! You may keep
others guessing, but your loyalty will never be questioned. Your Greatest Strengths
Moral integrity; enthusiastic quest for both meaning and usefulness;
generosity; responsible handling of authority; honesty; expansive
intellect; delightfully witty sense of humour. Your Greatest Weaknesses
Verbosity and occasional dogmatic bluntness; tendency to take
yourself too seriously; to be overly materialistic and opportunistic;
your urge to run the show and assume more power than you have. Images for Integration
In the year 2999, a courageous explorer goes on a quest for knowledge
of the past which opens up for man a hopeful future on another planet
…With patient skill a rock climber scales a seemingly impossible
mountain peak. Famous Personalities
Kenneth Baker (politician), Kim Basinger (actress), Benjamin Bratt
(actor), Arthur C. Clarke (writer), Helen Douglas (actress turned
politician), Helen Frankenthaler (artist), Bede Griffiths (monk and
author), John Malkovich (actor), Christina Onassis (heiress), Ozzy
Osbourne (rock star), Brad Pitt (actor), Carlo Ponti (film producer),
Richard Pryor (actor and comedian), Bhagwan Shri Rajneesh (New
Age guru), Lillian Russell (entertainer turned politician), Anton
Webern (composer), Maurice White (musician, Earth, Wind & Fire). —107—
S UN S AGITTARIUS
M OON A QUARIUS
The machine threatens all achievement.
RAINER MARIA RILKE
As a people we have developed a life-style that is draining the earth of
its priceless and irreplaceable resources without regard for the future
of our children and people all around the world.
MARGARET MEAD I don’t want to be immortal through my work, I want to be immortal by
not dying.
WOODY ALLEN Themes
FIRE/AIR Friendly; intellectual; visionary; seeker of truth; tolerant;
independent; socially concerned; breezy; outspoken; loquacious;
broad-minded and philosophical; kind-hearted eccentric; high ideals;
philanthropic; romantic; open and honest.
You are the benign patriarch, egalitarian in feeling and forwardlooking in method. A humanitarian at heart, ready to share your
knowledge and profound insight with any and all who come under
your beneficent umbrella, you immediately impress your audience
with your sincerity and idealism. You may also impress them with
your verbosity, your deft logic in concocting arguments and your
tendency to say everything that is on your mind. Thus you can be
somewhat overpowering at times. Your affection is immediate, if
somewhat cerebral, but your word is as good as your bond. This, plus
your intense individualism and refusal to be pigeon-holed, makes you
a popular person who will always stand out in a crowd.
All your interests are tackled with high intelligence and vigour, and
transacted with a warm personal manner which makes long-lasting
friendships. People feel your earnestness and desire to keep human
relations and the world in general as ideal as possible. In a sense, you
live in a world of your own, insisting on the greater reality of abstract
truth and the importance of pursuing possibilities without any personal
accountability. You like to work on insoluble problems, make original
discoveries and contributions, and say outrageous things that make
people think. Usually you can do this with such wonderful humour that
you get away with your outlandish ways.
You are primarily an intuitive thinker, something of an eccentric
genius, and your thinking may sometimes be so Utopian and futuristic
that others find you trying to live with. Because of your originality and
awkward intensity you may, in fact, often be a few steps ahead of everyone else, and feel like the odd man out. Nevertheless, you need
people – you watch them, study them, communicate, play and fall in
love with them. Your ideas about people en masse and how we should
all best live together will play a central role in your outlook and
behaviour.
You need a definite medium through which you can express your
creative insights, plenty of space in which to be an authority. But you
tend to spread yourself too thin, so it is best to remember that you
cannot be an authority on everything. Even if you are not particularly
academic, you are capable of seeing beyond cultural norms and
boundaries, and have an instinctive understanding of the common aims
of the nations of the world. This gives you a lofty compassion for your
fellow man and a desire to do something worthwhile, to make a
difference to the world. You are a natural for teaching and academia,
but you may also have enough energy left for a part-time career in
politics, social work, theatre, the ministry or some wild
entrepreuneurial venture. Relationships
Intimate relationships can be somewhat problematic for you due to
your large appetite for experience and need for independence. And yet
there is no one more thoughtful and loyal than you when you have
given your heart away – as long as he or she does not start telling you
what you can and cannot do.
You need an intelligent, stimulating partner, someone with a strong
ego who can stand on their own at times, someone you respect and
who shares some of your own passionate interests. You are much more
interested in sharing a football game or an evening at the theatre,
cinema or concert hall than you are in sharing domestic
responsibilities. Your partner may at times be driven crazy by your
absent-mindedness: while your head is in the clouds thinking about
your next exciting project, he or she is getting the practical things done
and may get tired of waiting for the lecture to finish.
Although you are romantic, you have a strong need for friendship
and group enterprise, so that even the most passionate relationship will have a brotherly-sisterly quality about it. Your Greatest Strengths
Your intellect and breadth of vision which can accomodate all types of
viewpoints; friendliness and easy-going adaptability; positive outlook
and willingness to take risks; ability to generate many creative
alternatives to a problem; love of learning and discussion, with the aim
of finding a deeper truth. Your Greatest Weaknesses
Tendency to be too impractical and out of touch with mundane
realities; high-minded, crusading zeal, which can be insensitive to
subtle details and sentimental souls; inclination to overgeneralize and
live life purely in the realm of abstract ideas, in your belief that routine
crushes creativity. Image for Integration
On a tour of primitive lands, a university professor goes through a
tribal initiation and becomes a blood brother of the chief. Famous Personalities
Louisa May Alcott (writer), Woody Allen (actor and film director),
Andrew Carnegie (industrialist and philanthropist), Philip K. Dick
(writer of science-fiction), Manuel de Falla (composer), Caroline
Kennedy (daughter of John F. Kennedy, former American President),
John Kennedy Jnr (her brother), Richard Leakey (anthropologist),
Margaret Mead (anthropologist), Rainer Maria Rilke (poet), Britney
Spears (pop star), Tommy Steele (entertainer). —108—
S UN S AGITTARIUS M OON Plutão ISCES The salvation of mankind lies only in making everything the concern of
all.
ALEXANDER SOLZHENITSYN
I love mankind – it’s people I can’t stand.
CHARLES SCHULTZ
Life can’t be all bad when for ten dollars you can buy all the
Beethoven sonatas and listen to them for ten years.
WILLIAM F. BUCKLEY
There is no cure for birth and death save to enjoy the interval.
GEORGE SANTAYANA Themes
FIRE/WATER Emotional; fervent; restless; humanitarian; visionary;
rich imagination; helpful; sympathetic; philosophical; spiritually
sensitive; deep convictions; an irrational logician; generous;
moralistic; forgiving.
Do you want to broaden the horizons of your experience, or enrich the
dreams of your fantasy life? Do you want to understand more but find
intellectual principles too cold for comfort? You are a thinker and a
dreamer, a sentimental philosopher, a moralistic mystic whose inner
eye will scan the pitiful plight of humankind, but whose heart will
understand, forgive and absolve all.
No matter how tied down you may be in the mundane world, your
spirit will do a lot of travelling via your imagination and emotions. A
kind of divine discontent keeps you preoccupied with broad beliefs and
ideals, ever concerned with the deeper spiritual needs of people, and
you may indeed have a very profound intuitive understanding of universal truths. A trusting openness and a need to give endears you to
many, but due to your incredible restlessness you may find it difficult
to settle on one person.
Your tremendous sensitivity to the human condition and to people
in general gives you an artistic temperament with a loveable and
somewhat wistful humility. You would, and probably often do, give the
shirt off your own back to friends and underdogs in need. Receiving
impressions readily, you communicate and give back eagerly and
generously of your insight and feelings. You may often need to stop
and collect your thoughts and feelings, learn to hold back and assess,
in order for you not to dissipate your energies and to overpower others
(as well as yourself) with the unrestrained effusiveness of your
emotional expression.
Likewise, you can be just as lavish with mundane expenditures. As
you are not particularly practical, you will have to make an effort to
not give in to that mischievous wastrel sub-personality within you
which just wants to be careless, lazy and self-indulgent. It is not that
you are materialistic; far from it. But you need to develop
concentration and a healthy sense of boundaries, so that insead of
drifting in and out of jobs and debt and ‘isms’, you can more
purposefully cultivate enough security to allow the best development
of your considerable talents.
You love to tell your personal story and give advice because you
can so clearly see the folly of others’ ways. In situations where you
cannot decide what advice is appropriate to give, you may just tell a
joke instead. Your heart and your mind are inextricably linked. This
can result in profound superstition or invaluable wisdom.
You need social stimulation – you are a veritable barometer of
social climate – but you also need time alone when you can commune
with music, nature and silence, and imbibe that non-verbal sustenance
which is so essential for your wellbeing. During these contemplative
periods you can also sort out the real from the non-real, your feelings
from others’ opinions, outrageous behaviour from inner motives. You
have the strength of the philosopher’s mind and the compassion of the
mystic’s heart. Relationships
You can be gushy, sentimental, romantic and totally devoted to your
family and friends. Exuding a kind of woe-begotten affection for
others, you make yourself irrisistible. You yearn for meaningful
contact but know beforehand that no one is likely to really understand
you and the deep well of love you have to give.
You may fall hopelessly in love, idealize your lover, and then
despair because he or she does not live up to the mythological ideal.
But not for a petty fault do you take back your love. Indeed, you value
the heights and the depths of emotional experience because they teach
you about yourself. Eventually, love makes you wiser and more stable.
And your resilience and compassion make you a revered friend. Your Greatest Strengths
Openness to life and adventure; expansive intellect and intuition;
ability to work with people and ideas in an open, versatile manner;
warm, sensitive, forgiving and humorous nature. Your Greatest Weaknesses
Gullibility and vacillation; lack of concentration and discrimination;
emotional instability; tendency to alternate between optimism and
pessimism without the patience to ground your ideas. Image for Integration
A jolly, shabbily dressed vicar tells raucous jokes to down-and-outs,
children and high society at the Church garden party. Famous Personalities
Ian Botham (cricketer), William F. Buckley (writer and television
personality), Cathryn Crosby (television hostess), Adrienne Hirt (sex
therapist), Raja Rao (author), Little Richard (rock star), George Santayana (philosopher), Charles Schultz (cartoonist), Georges Seurat
(artist), Frank Sinatra (singer, actor), Alexander Solzhenitsyn (author
and philosopher), Michael Tilson Thomas (conductor), Evelyn
Underhill (mystic). Chapter Thirteen
SUN IN CAPRICORN
—109—
S UN C APRICORN
M OON A RIES
Man must cease attributing his problems to his environment, and learn
again to exercise his will – his personal responsibility in the realm of
faith and morals.
ALBERT SCHWEITZER
I haven’t asked you to make me young again. All I want is to go on
getting older.
KONRAD ADENAUER
Today’s woman is too intelligent to be exploited by the fashion world.
DIANE VON FURSTENBERG Themes
EARTH/FIRE Wilful; magnetic; intensely ambitious; self-interest;
purposeful; quick-thinking; rational; action-oriented; restless; rides
roughshod over others; takes command; successful; powerful;
rebellious; impressive personality.
Are you an establishment person or a rebel determined to rewrite the
rules of the game? You have the energy of a steamroller, the mental
astuteness of a criminal lawyer, and enough vitality and ambition to
run three parallel lives. But since you have to make it all fit into one, you frequently bulldoze your way to success and then, desirous of
further conquests, start all over again.
Even if you are not in business, you have the temperament of the
zealous entrepreneur, determined to make the rules work for you in a
big way. If you are running a family, then you will direct your
considerable energies into the system, warmly but firmly imposing
values and objectives that you feel are right. Family life is important to
you, and when you can contribute your special brand of wit and
wisdom, playfulness and leadership, you feel affirmed and appreciated.
If, however, you do not have enough challenge in your life you will
tend to be irritable and bossy, difficult to live with, and you may need
to branch out to feel really satisfied. Combining the competitive spirit
of the athlete with the determined, well-organized consciousness of the
business tycoon, you do not waste time in deciding what you want and
planning exactly how to get there.
You love to organize and lead, and you usually do it with great
panache which tends to inspire confidence in others. You have a good
opinion of yourself and a brontosaurus-sized ego. All the same,
however, you have a deep need to prove your own worth to be really
happy. Such intense personal investment in your goals can make you
rather ruthless and self-seeking, but you are not likely to see it that
way. For you, nothing short of total self-reliance and commitment will
get the job done, and you learn early on that you are the most reliable
person around.
Your goals often take on a larger-than-life importance. With
obsessive single-minded enthusiasm you go for broke, but may end up
emotionally bankrupt. You do not like losing in any sense –
intellectually, emotionally or professionally. Your temper can flare up
quickly but because you do not like to be seen in an undignified light
you try hard and learn to control yourself.
You respect people who stand up for what they believe, who know
that you have to take risks if you want to stand even marginally above
the masses. You like people who match their heroic words with heroic
actions. Indeed, you admire heroes and fancy yourself as one, and so
you are usually found at the cutting edge of life. Even when you fail, you will have enjoyed your bravura performance, and after singing ‘I
did it my way’ will pick yourself up and start again. Relationships
Emotionally you are passionate, demanding, moody and, once you
have seen that your loved one really knows how wonderful you are,
devoted. You can be deeply romantic, but you also want to be proud of
the one you love. You can be hard to live with because you have such
strong desires and such high standards for yourself, and you can get
irritable when things are not going your way.
You are so self-motivated that you naturally tend to run the show in
relationships. Trying for more sensitivity and equality with your loved
one may be your challenge. Your Greatest Strengths
Shrewd tenacity; clever and astute thinking; excellent organizational
skills and leadership abilities; positive attitude; amazing resilience;
love of a challenge, which mobilizes all your tremendous energy and
personal courage; honesty and deep sense of responsibility. Your Greatest Weaknesses
Tendency to overvalue career success and material reward – and
getting your own way; brusque manner and insensitivity to other
people’s needs; restlessness and constant desire for excitement and
challenge; tendency to be a poor loser. Images for Integration
A Roman city-state is attacked by barbarians but its solid walls keep
the marauding bandits at bay … An impetuous entrepreneur persuades
a conservative banker to back an ambitious project. Famous Personalities
E.M. Forster (novelist), Vincent Gardenia (actor), Patricia Neal
(actress), Johnny Ray (singer), Albert Schweitzer (medical missionary
and musician), Patti Smith (rock singer), Michael Stipe (singer), Jon
Voight (actor), Diane Von Furstenberg (fashion designer), James Watt
(inventor of steam engine), Richard Widmark (actor), Jane Wyman
(actress), Princess Yasmin (Swiss heiress and opera singer). —110—
S UN C APRICORN
M OON T AURUS
An idealist – that implies you aren’t going to achieve something.
ARTHUR SCARGILL
I’m a Catholic … it’s my duty to believe in humanity.
PAOLO BORSELLINO
A government that is big enough to give you all you want is big enough
to take it all away.
BARRY GOLDWATER Themes
EARTH/EARTH Solid and sensible; great integrity; stubborn; patient;
possessive; good organizational skills; shrewd; worldly; kind and
caring; loyal; resourceful; aesthetic; dependable and practical; good
teacher; staunch supporter of status quo; good eye for value; a realist.
Do you want high achievement or comfortable security? Recognition
and prestige or longevity? The fact is, both position and permanence
are very important to you. You usually manage to succeed in obtaining
both, however, because when you get to the summit you innately know
when to stop pushing your luck. Your ideals are based on a sound assessment of what is possible
and what is just, and this innate sense of both moral and material
organization makes people respect you, and often lean on you. You are
earthy through and through, a stalwart and healthy member of society,
very much at home in the world of tangibles, pounds and pence,
comfortable living and beautiful artifacts.
Hard-working, diligent and frugal, yet also capable of enjoying
luxury and the best in food and finery, you have a healthy inner
balance of opportunistic get-up-and-go and ability to relax and smell
the roses. For you there is a time and place for everything – you get
down to basics when it is time to work, and you lay out lavishly (but
not excessively) when it is time to party. And due to the relability of
your fine-tuned inner barometer of instinctive needs, you do not have
to go to extremes. Your sense of self-preservation is too wise for that.
Your virtues can, however, become your vices if your love of
security turns into a fear of change – in either the domestic or
emotional sense. You need to know where you are as, for you, the
unknown is anathema. You are good at controlling your bank account,
children, emotions, work-and-play schedule, and most things in your
life, but not so good at letting go of the familiar.
If, however, you decide that change is a good idea, you will
gradually learn to accept it. This is because, essentially, you are
nature’s child adhering to society’s values – you are adaptable, shrewd,
and you know that you can trust your instincts, as well as your
excellent reasoning abilities. The fact that there is a slow, cyclic
development of human needs, desires and ambitions makes good sense
to you.
You value common sense even more than predictability. This
quality makes you a good teacher or executive leader because you can
combine both discipline with patience, scruples with understanding,
and commitment with compassion. Relationships
You have an innate sense of dignity as well as a friendly
approachability. A tireless worker and a trustworthy friend, you like people and usually understand them, but perhaps expect and make
allowances for what you consider to be normal human weaknesses.
Feeling a sense of duty to do the best you can for yourself and
those you love, you assume others want to do the same. Since you
have a way of making it all look easy, you can usually inspire others to
be productive and resourceful. And if they are not, they may feel your
icy, disapproving gaze, and sense the judgements you are making
underneath your calm exterior.
As you are basically a conventional person who values tradition
and old-fashioned security, you may settle for the predictability of a
relationship long after the savour has gone. Nevertheless, you are
capable of being very sensual, loving and generous, and are generally
not very moody. You tend to assume things will turn out okay, and that
material supply will always be forthcoming. Your positive outlook and
capabilities will always have a supportive and uplifting influence in the
lives of those in your care. Your Greatest Strengths
Tenacity and sense of responsibility; your moral strength and honour;
sound intellect; immense practicality; sense of proportion and justice;
allegiance to sound, traditional values; down-to-earth style and
enduring devotion to loved ones, colleagues and friends. Your Greatest Weaknesses
A inflexible system of values; possessiveness of people; attachment to
familiar routine; tendency to be overly materialistic and pedantic;
stubbornness, which especially comes out when you work with people
who will not follow the rules. Image for Integration
A wealthy grandfather opens a savings account for his granddaughter
on her day of birth; she later becomes a famous artist, inherits a fortune
and makes her own. Famous Personalities
Isaac Asimov (writer), Paolo Borsellino (lawyer and anti-Mafia
magistrate), Mel C (‘Spice Girl’), Carlos Castaneda (anthropologist
and writer), Graham Chapman (member of the ‘Monty Python’ team),
Danny Kaye (singer and actor), Yvette Mimieux (actress), Arthur
Scargill (union leader). —111—
S UN C APRICORN
M OON G EMINI
There are no such things as applied sciences, only applications of
science.
LOUIS PASTEUR
Teach us delight in simple things, And mirth that has no bitter springs;
Forgiveness free of evil done, And love to all men ‘neath the sun!
RUDYARD KIPLING Themes
EARTH/AIR Erudite; talkative; clever; adaptable; resourceful;
practical thinker; good teacher; seriously silly; adaptable; intellectual
pursuits; shrewd; gossip; astute; love of irony.
Do you want stability or variety? Concentration or conversation?
Solitude or society? For you this is a difficult question, but you would
not waste time trying to answer it because you know the answer is
‘yes’ and ‘yes’. You are about dedication and diversity, persistence and
subtlety, integrity and wicked wittiness – a combination that makes
you an extremely capable, articulate and popular person.
Respected for your wit and decorum, you speak your mind but with
charm and diplomacy so that others are easily persuaded to see the
reasonableness of your argument. You could be a superb diplomat, judge, teacher, writer, broadcaster or comedian – and there is probably
a touch of all of them in you.
You are the straight man and the funny man, the traditional,
conventional businessman who surprises everyone with his roguish,
playful wit and pranks. At your core you are serious, obdurate and
tough, but around that core there is much of the comedian and tease
about you, a lightness of touch which lifts your essentially heavy
demeanour out of the dangers of ponderousness and gravity.
Mentally acute and observant, you can usually translate your
perceptions into delightfully expressive, crystal-clear images, and
deliver them with effortless polish. Although you are not particularly
ambitious or perfectionist, you have a utilitarian view of things, which
makes you enormously efficient. You are economic with words, both
spoken and written, as well as with your creative energies generally.
You have a good eye for what needs doing and you will create original
ways for accomplishing mundane tasks and have fun in the process.
You are sincere, earnest, resolute, very aware of the need to be in
control and to progress in a purposeful way. Highly resourceful and
mentally quick, you can, along the way to achieving your purposes,
pick up a lot of fascinating information which will be grist to your mill
one day. Because of your fundamentally serious nature, your jokey
side never makes you appear superficial. In fact, your opinions and
views carry great weight, due as much to their precision as to your
blithesome delivery, and you can at times get carried away by the
glibness of your own intellect.
Exceptionally good at communicating your enthusiasm to others,
you make you a good teacher. You may love changing your
appearance, nimbly moving from conservative grey suits to
habiliments of a more exotic kind. Equally at home in courtroom
drama as at an outrageous fancy-dress party, you are also good at
telling stories or jokes – as long as the joke is not on you. Your
inventiveness can be extremely lucrative, and you keep busy at what
you are good at whilst always keeping an eye out for more
opportunities. Relationships
You are a very companionable individual. Normally self-restrained,
alert and emotionally conventional, you nevertheless like to do the
unexpected, and often turn rules and convention on their head. You
want stability, but within the bounds of your emotional commitment
you will remain as mobile as a quark eluding measurement.
If you are not careful, your mental strengths can become your
emotional Achilles heel. This is due to your tendency to cleverly avoid
what feels like emotional demands or conflicts by literally sneaking
out of the window – at least in your mind – or to argue your ‘view’ of
things and distance yourself from your feelings.
You thrive in a close, committed relationship and are loyal and
affectionate. A part of you will, however, always remain noveltyseeking, restless and youthful. Your Greatest Strengths
Inventive and studious intellect; the breadth of your interests and
enthusiasms; essentially hard-working and serious inner core; capacity
to move with grace and flair in many different circles; droll sense of
humour. Your Greatest Weaknesses
An over-emphasis of the rational, which deprives you of emotional
maturity; tendency to be satisfied with a pragmatic but surface
understanding of people and things in general; your love of playing
jokes on others but hating being laughed at yourself; flippant (but
innocent) pomposity. Images for Integration
An aged philosopher wins first prize in an international crossword
puzzle competition … A travelling salesman wins an award … A college don reads the letters section of the paper while eating
breakfast. Famous Personalities
Joan Baez (singer, songwriter and guitarist), Jim Carrey (actor),
Charles Goodyear (inventor), Anver Joffrey (dancer and
choreographer), Johannes Kepler (astrologer and astronomer), Rudyard
Kipling (writer), George MacBeth (writer and poet), Giuseppe Mazzini
(Italian patriot), Sarah Miles (actress), Walter Mondale (American
politician), Louis Pasteur (chemist and bacteriologist who discovered
pasteurization), Robert Stack (actor). —112—
S UN C APRICORN
M OON C ANCER
If I have been able to see further than others, it was because I stood on
the shoulders of giants.
SIR ISAAC NEWTON
I want you to let me know when I’m ahead so I can quit.
JANIS JOPLIN Themes
EARTH/WATER Tough and tender; sensitivity and self-control;
ambitious; highly observant; self-absorbed yet kind and helpful;
supportive; conservative yet open to new ideas; pragmatic; loves
nature.
Is life essentially sweet and light or really a dark, challenging testing
ground? Are you wedded to the simple, natural world of the past and
traditional values or do you embrace whatever technology will help
you do what you want to do better? Do you want to shout your personal beliefs from the roof tops or whisper them quietly to those
who will listen?
Thinking about yourself quite a lot, as you most probably do, you
are likely to be highly aware of some of your inner dilemmas. One of
them is that you are both a toughie and a softie, aware both of your
ambitions and your fear of risk. You are a strong, thoughtful individual
who enjoys intimacy but who can use solitude productively. During
your reflective moments you assess your goals and needs, and the best
way of satisfying them. You are a serious, sensitive and immensely
capable person with an uncanny understanding of human nature.
Sometimes you wonder if you should allow your feelings to overflow,
or if self-control is the name of your game.
At your most creative, you combine the qualities of a gentle mother
and a firm father. This great personal sensitivity and a shrewd,
practical, no-nonsense toughness where your career is concerned can
make you an extremely purposeful, hard-nosed professional who is
good with people. It makes you determined to achieve whatever goals
you have set yourself, whilst at the same time being an extremly
caring, supportive individual with a deep love of home and family.
Having said this, you do not always find your personal life and
career to be two masters that are easily served, and may be tempted to
sacrifice one or the other. In fact the central dilemma in your life will
normally revolve around the conflict between your inner and outer
worlds, between your desire for closeness, intimacy and gentleness,
and your perception that much of life is harsh, challenging and
unsentimental, and that you want to end up with some real
achievement to your credit. Having your own business and working
from home is one solution, but one way or another you flourish best
when you are able to do your own thing in your own way, and in your
own time.
There is something of the artist and the scientist in you, and you
thrive on work that combines a sense of mission with a deep,
emotional, indeed often religious, commitment. When your attention
turns away from your own internal sensitivities to the affairs of other
people, you are a natural psychologist with a ready insight and understanding of what motivates people; such natural insight will help
you in your ability to work with others in any occupation.
When your gift for seeing the larger, long-term picture is coupled
with your determination and sensitivity to other people’s needs and
abilities, you can become an extremely capable manager of people and
projects. Able to get the best out of people, you can generate a strong
sense of belonging and togetherness. Your ability to combine hard
facts with a rich imagination, whether in the area of science, art,
education or commerce, encourages others to face and celebrate both
the challenges and richness of life. Relationships
Relationships are central to your life, even if you can find it difficult to
admit it, for you can be both deeply engaged and yet very distanced.
You care for people and you deeply want to find your ‘other half’, yet
you may at the same time find such intimacy claustrophobic. On one
level you thrive on solitude, whilst on another you yearn for an allconsuming at-oneness with a soul mate.
Your own parents may have pulled you in opposite directions, and
intimate personal relationships can bring out the same childhood
dilemmas. On the one hand you need to be needed; on the other you
feel you are strongest when you stand alone. When really centred, you
are highly sensitive to the needs of others and can be one of the kindest
and most considerate and thoughtful of people. This genuine concern
for others, as well as your deep need for intimate companionship,
makes you a very loyal and supportive partner once you have
wholeheartedly committed yourself. Your Greatest Strengths
Strong powers of observation and love of nature; practical concern for
the good of others; ability to capture and express the moods and
emotions of others. Your Greatest Weaknesses
The conflict between your tough and tender attitudes to life; wide
swings of mood and oversensitivity to other people’s views; tendency
to take criticism personally; self-absorbed preoccupation with your
own feelings. Images for Integration
A priest blesses his family before setting off on a pilgrimage … A
water clock … Carol Reed’s films of The Third Man and Oliver … A
politician kisses a baby without pretence. Famous Personalities
Michael Aspel (actor, broadcaster and writer), William Blatty (author
of The Exorcist ), Pablo Casals (cellist and conductor), Jean François
Champollion (Egyptologist), Claude Adrien Helvetius (philosopher),
Janis Joplin (rock singer), Isaac Newton (physicist and alchemist), Sir
Carol Reed (film producer), Frank Sinatra Jr (singer son of Frank
Sinatra), Mary Tyler Moore (actress). —113—
S UN C APRICORN
M OON L EO
Daffodils so beautiful … some rested their heads upon these stones as
pillows for weariness and the rest tossed and reeled and danced and …
verily laughed with the wind.
DOROTHY WORDSWORTH
Wherever we go, we must unite with the people, take root, and blossom
among them …
CHAIRMAN MAO Themes EARTH/FIRE Laughter and hard work; inferiority and superiority;
forceful; vibrant; authoritative; powerful; proud; honourable; creative
and capable; responsible and ambitious; dignified warmth; assertive
and theatrical; romantic but sceptical.
Deeply serious yet poetically playful, you may be torn between the
self-imposed responsibilities of your career and social ambitions, and
your desire to make a splash and have fun. Should you wear that sober
city suit or go for that dashing piece of haute couture ? And when you
so love people to enjoy themselves, why are you so tough on yourself?
Both proud and humble, at times you cannot decide whether you
are the greatest or the most inadequate person you know. When you
get your industrious and playful elements working together, however,
the world had better watch out, for in your own steady yet compelling
way you can be the embodiment of purposeful ambition. No matter
what your job is, you are a born professional. With expertly designed
flair, you want to shine for yourself and to achieve for the world. Your
reputation matters a lot to you, and when you know you have earned
your praise you savour it like nobody else.
You do not really mean to be a snob, but you have a way of
nonchalantly lording it over people. This is because your belief in
yourself and in what you feel you must do is so intense. Women born
with this combination are particularly likely to find their way to the top
of their chosen mountain, but they will also find the J. Arthur Ranks,
David Bowies and Robert Blys of this world there to party with.
This is a pairing of sunny high-summer and serious mid-winter, an
adventurous, gutsy mix of tough-willed, dedicated service carried out
with zest and pizzazz. You have the charisma of a star yet you can
work dutifully behind the scenes, laying the foundations and preparing
the party. Then on the day, you make the perfect host or hostess,
carrying out your duties with total self-possession and real style.
An air of authority and immense professionalism surrounds all
your endeavours. You will do whatever is necessary, no matter how
hard, to produce a polished performance and a superb result. With a
strong social conscience, a real sense of noblesse oblige and a desire to
make the world a better place, you may be drawn to politics or fund- raising; good works and charities flourish on your enthusiasm and
dedication. Whatever you do, you are likely to end up being put in
charge, which is just as well, for subordinate positions are not really
your scene.
At times when the sun is shining you may protest at having work
piled upon you, yet let anyone deprive you of your load and you will
feel not only hurt but somehow lost and guilty. Not all your work is
totally altruistic. There can be something of the gold-digger in you,
constantly alert for opportunities, yet you do not expect any free
lunches, even if you do enjoy getting the best for the least. You are
someone who, to quote a fellow Capricorn – Leo, Jack London, ‘will
settle for good pay, good grub and hard work rather than poor pay,
poor grub and easy work’. You have pride and confidence in your own
achievements and, yes, you think you could try harder, but you are not
doing so badly, really, are you? Relationships
Matters of the heart are a paradox for you. One day you choose to be
alone, austere, even monastic, isolating yourself from people and the
world; the next day your warm heart is brimming over with love. You
can be demanding and haughty, sometimes distant and inflexible, but
this is often a defence against your fear of criticism. Like Ouida, you
may feel that ‘with women and peaches it is only the side next the sun
that is tempting’.
Although appearances do count a lot for you, nonetheless you can
bring to a relationship a deep, inner strength, terrific loyalty, and a
desire for quiet stability. Your characteristic vanity and need for
control can be a problem in close relationships. You have high
standards and fairly conventional ideas about the give-and-take in love,
but learning to relax and give in to your more playful side will help
you enjoy life more.
Enormously passionate when you let yourself go, you will thrive
with a mate who both adores and respects you and who realizes that
you need space to express your creative drive. You are stubbornly devoted to your family and will go to great lengths to provide them
with the best – which, of course, is what they deserve. Your Greatest Strengths
Natural flair and charisma; tremendous creative drive; capacity for
dedicated hard work; organizational and leadership abilities; integrity
and devotion to excellence; loyalty to those you respect and love. Your Greatest Weaknesses
Tendency towards workaholism; snobbery, social climbing and selfimportance; self-centredness and dogmatism; your need for father
figures; inflexibility and dislike of change; tendency to become
dictatorial to compensate for your feelings of inadequacy. Images for Integration
After a lone, silent climb up your mountain you greet the spotlights
and television cameras with flair and aplomb … In the dark of the
forest a sunbeam breaks through, bringing new life. Famous Personalities
St Bernadette of Lourdes (visionary), Robert Bly (poet), David Bowie
(singer), Marlene Dietrich (actress and singer), Faye Dunaway
(actress), Gracie Fields (singer and comedienne), Jack London
(writer), Mao Tse-tung (former Chinese leader), Ouida (novelist),
Dolly Parton (country singer), J. Arthur Rank (film financier), Dorothy
Wordsworth (writer), Paramhansa Yogananda (mystic). —114—
S UN C APRICORN
M OON V IRGO
He who despises himself esteems himself as a great self-despiser. SUSAN SONTAG
The progress of the human race in understanding the universe has
established a small corner of order in an increasingly disordered
universe.
STEPHEN HAWKING Themes
EARTH/EARTH Perfectionism; quality service; craftsmanship; earthy;
good organizer; caring and careful; self-controlled; self-critical;
worrier; modest; professional critic; precise; aesthetic; studious.
Are you the boss or the servant? Do you want reponsibility or
regularity? Although you can carry the former quite well, the latter is
actually more important to you, for you want to live your life
according to principle, reason and enlightened self-interest. You excel
in streamlining the system, and in making your empire function better
and better. And most aspects of your life usually do run smoothly,
coherently and productively as you are remarkably capable, and tend
always to employ your talents wisely and for the production of the
greatest good.
You have a cautious, thoughtful, prudent personality, and prefer to
be judged by your actions – by what you actually achieve. And in turn
you will tend to judge others by their actions, and you can be quite
critical if you deem someone’s efforts too slapdash, not well thoughtout or missing the mark. You can, however, be very critical of yourself
as well. But it may be that you are too serious and sensible most of the
time, and tend to forget that life’s mistakes and messes usually provide
the spur to growth that makes it all worthwhile. You like being
prepared for all eventualities, but you may cancel out many of life’s
pleasant surprises if you go overboard with your shield of logic.
Indeed logic is a key to understanding your nature, for your sense
of self-worth derives from your ability to analyse data in a logical,
methodical manner, to arrive at a clear deduction, and then to impart
your findings to those who cannot, in your opinion, reason quite so well as yourself. There is not an iota of arrogance in your impulse to
do this; rather, your instinct is to carry out your duty in a helpful way.
You are trustworthy and caring, and want to serve others. Nothing
makes you happier than seeing the results of your individual labours
being put to good, practical use for the benefit of others. But whilst
you pride yourself in your intellectual efficiency and your loyalty to
the letter of the law, you are by no means as confident as you seem,
and find it difficult to exercise your will in stressful or crucial
situations.
You do not like being corrected by others but are always inwardly
correcting yourself and thinking of better solutions, so that being in
command just makes you nervous. All that responsibility! You would
rather be responsible just for yourself. Relationships
You have very precise, usually aesthetic taste in most things, especially
people. The paradoxical truth about you is that, despite your
fundamental inner hesitancy and self-doubt, you can be somewhat
condescending when it comes to choosing an appropriate partner.
Naturally reserved and private, you may seem emotionally distant
and cool to many, but when you feel safe and secure you open up, and
can be convivial, humourous, sentimental and devoted. You have a
gentle and faithful romantic nature, and will show your love in your
constancy and thoughtfulness. When you feel admired, respected and
appreciated, you can literally glow; and when you are unhappy you can
be cranky, gloomy and critical – although you rarely lose your
decorum. You are too pragmatic for that, and you never like being out
of control, even though you can be somewhat nervous and fastidious,
which can invite emotional upsets and unhappiness from time to time.
Although your scientific and analytical turn of mind will take you far
in a career, it can prove to be too much of a good thing in relationships.
Your loved ones will not enjoy being picked apart, even if you do it
ever so nicely and it is for their own good. In a relationship with a
water or fire type you may have the experience of mystery and
spontaneity, rather than just learning about it. Your Greatest Strengths
Dedicated and honourable nature; fine, analytical mind; refined,
articulate self-expression; practical and efficient organizing abilities;
desire to live a useful, productive life; love of knowledge and ability to
use it for the benefit of all. Your Greatest Weaknesses
Lack of confidence; over-serious approach to life, which does not
allow for the frivolous and mysterious; insistence on black-and-white
facts, which compels you to try to quantify the intangibles; tendency to
be calculating and fault-finding with yourself as well as with those you
love. Images for Integration
A famous, prize-winning scientist takes up the humble position of
chemistry teacher in a quiet village school … A psychologist analyses
the history of the human condition in an essay entitled ‘The Origin and
Purposes of Man’s Self-Contempt’. Famous Personalities
Tycho Brahe (astronomer), Jose Ferrer (actor), Mel Gibson (actor),
Oliver Hardy (comedian), Stephen Hawking (astro-physicist), John
Lilly (psychologist), Sal Mineo (actor), Aristotle Onassis (plutocrat),
Anwar Sadat (former Egyptian president), Helmut Schmidt (former
West-German chancellor), Maggie Smith (actress), Susan Sontag
(author), Stephen Stills (rock musician), Alan Watts (psychologist),
Gwen Verdon (actress and dancer). —115—
S UN C APRICORN
M OON L IBRA We are part of the community of Europe, and we must do our duty as
such.
W.E. GLADSTONE
Which requires the greater strength, letting go or restraining? It is the
greatest manifestation of power to be calm.
VIVEKANANDA Themes
EARTH/AIR Socially aware; chic; a practical intellectual; liberal yet
conservative; sense of justice; elegant; professional; clear-headed; high
principles; organizer; a friendly loner; determined; a fighter for causes;
courageous.
You are so cunningly capable and pleasantly reasonable that you will
usually seem to be totally in command of your well-regulated life. And
yet, even you grapple with certain dilemmas: are you a social creature
or a lone ranger? Do you want to look like a million dollars or be
worth a million dollars? Do you seek personal advancement or the
advancement of society? Do you flourish in the outdoors, enjoying
lively, intelligent talk or do you blossom in the quiet, reflective
solitude of your own work? Are you a person of ideas or actions? Are
you a scientist or an artist? Do you want to keep things as they are, or
do you want to create greater social justice?
When you can combine your cooperative, easy-going, extrovert
qualities with your reliability and purposeful outlook, you are someone
who can achieve whatever you set your mind to. Your dry wit and
studied charm can win you valuable friends and influence those in
authority. You care very much about doing things right; anything
which offends your sense of justice or your aesthetic sensibilities can
get you firing on all cylinders. Then your life becomes a mission and a
crusade which calls forth your wholehearted commitment.
Ignorance unsettles you, and so you learn rapidly and strive to be a
polished performer, in command of yourself and your world, whether
it is the world of business, fashion or family. With your gift for the larger view, for organization and forward-planning, and your instinct
for fair play, you can inspire the deepest confidence amongst those
with whom you work. If you play your cards right, and you usually do,
your rise to a position of leadership is only a matter of time.
Responsibility helps you mature. A natural conservative, you cherish
traditional values, although socially you are a liberal, and your desire
for justice makes you a progressive, ahead of your time.
Surprisingly for one who is so essentially shrewd and peace-loving,
you can be very much a fighter, willing to join battle in earnest for a
cause you deem worthwhile. You do not want to offend, but neither
will your healthy self-opinion put up with abuse from others. You have
a dry, rather factual approach, but this gives you a gift for
communication. You are polite, but your words have punch.
You like to follow directions, and are good at giving clear
directions to others. Business and financial matters can flourish under
your astute eye, as can all kinds of relationships and social affairs, for
you also know when it is time to stop working and start enjoying life
and the beauties of nature. Although you may have a strong aesthetic
sense, you are likely to go for the chic of understated, subtle colours. Relationships
One of your central dilemmas comes to the fore in relationships:
whether you are a romantic or a pragmatist. Although relating comes
naturally to you and consumes much of your energy, to be at your best
you also need prime time alone in your own company at the end of the
day.
Any partnership you enter into needs to be based on strong shared
interests and a common sense of purpose. Teamwork is in your blood,
and one side of you enjoys sharing all the mundane bits of life that add
up to so much. But you will need a partner who understands and
allows for your career ambitions.
There is something of the strong, silent type about you. Loyalty
comes naturally to you, and you expect others to be equally loyal and
sensible. You may not realize that others need more emotional input
than you seem to, and that a kindly pat on the head and a stiff upper lip is not the answer to all their problems. In fact, there is plenty of
tenderness in you. Try being less reasonable and more impulsive at
times; do what you want to do, not just what you think is expected of
you. Your Greatest Strengths
Strong intellect; patient pursuit of truth and justice; determination to
work hard for ideas you believe in; sense of social justice, duty,
decency and good faith; commitment to fulfilling your responsibilities
and supporting your loved ones. Your Greatest Weaknesses
Proneness to negative thinking; inclination to be opportunistic;
scepticism which can turn into outright cynicism; inclination to
become pedantic in your own areas of expertise. Images for Integration
A beautiful, formal walled garden … In time an oyster turns irritating
grit into a beautiful pearl … A visionary statesman fights a duel to see
justice done. Famous Personalities
David Bellamy (botanist, broadcaster and writer), Cyrano de Bergerac
(writer and dramatist), Louis Bromfield (novelist), Dyan Cannon
(actress), Joe Frazier (boxing champion), Jacob Grimm (collector of
fairy tales), Alexander Hamilton (American politician), Joan of Arc
(visionary and military leader), Shari Lewis (ventriloquist), Berthe
Morisot (Impressionist painter), Michael Nesmith (rock musician –
The Monkees ), Russ Tamblyn (actor and dancer), Vivekananda (Hindu
mystic and philosopher). —116—
S UN C APRICORN
M OON S CORPIO
Democracy means government by discussion but it is only effective if
you can stop people talking.
CLEMENT ATTLEE
Sex is one of the nine reasons for reincarnation … the other eight are
unimportant.
HENRY MILLER Themes
EARTH/WATER Strength of character; self-possessed; dedicated;
exacting moral standards; analytical; proud; resilient; tireless worker;
compassionate; loyal; sensual; self-repressed; brooding; tenacious; no
time for fools; ambitious.
The ambition of the mountain goat and the emotional self-mastery of
the Scorpion-Eagle combine here to create a personality with heroic
strength of character and passionate dedication. Your goals, beliefs and
values become personal obsessions; every once in a while you should
review them to make sure they are worthy of your acute intelligence
and all-consuming guardianship. Your instincts tell you to be prepared
for the onslaughts of life as it can attack from the rear, and you, more
than anyone else, refuse to be caught with your pants down.
You possess a naturally self-controlled, shrewd, judicial
temperament. Law or social reform may attract you, as in some ways
you have a resonance with suffering and the darker side of human
experience, and want to do something about it. Fully in command of
your powers and totally engaged in your path towards success and
recognition, you take yourself seriously and know exactly where you
are going and where you stand on important issues.
Extremely trustworthy, loyal and conventional, you also tend to be
a bit ruthless with yourself and others, demanding total vigilance, commitment and high standards. While this may be fine for you, others
may find your exacting moral standards a trifle awesome, a bit like a
‘Ninja Turtle’ without the sense of fun. But when you do decide to
have fun, you can be urbane and insightful, and just as dedicated to
enjoyment as you can be to anything else.
Your intensity may express itself in the form of superb satire and a
wicked sense of humour. Most of the time, however, you are fairly
intent on the serious business of mastering your role and
responsibilities. It can be that your instinctive conservatism settles into
a rather limited perspective, often made worse by a suspicious attitude
to anything foreign. You tend to emphatically deny the existence of
what you cannot conceive or believe, and want to scrutinize things
scientifically. Probably the only way you will change is through an
enlightened approach to your well-developed reasoning faculty. If it
makes sense, you may just take it on board. And ‘sense’, in fact, is an
important key to your whole nature. Relationships
You have a tremendous amount of common sense, and you cherish
traditional values which sustain the emotional and material security
you urgently require. You can be a wonderful home-maker and a
protective parent, like the mother bird who jealously protects her
babies from attack by diverting the enemy’s attention or by direct
assault. The fact that you do not give up easily often makes you the
indefatigable mainstay and power behind the throne in a family or
company.
You are also a sensualist, delighting in the fulfilment of your basic
human needs. Possessive of your own pleasures and intensely private
about your feelings, you do not let go very easily unless emotional
events strike a nerve so deeply that you go off the deep end
temporarily, only to feel much relieved when you return to sanity and
self-control. The latter you definitely prefer, but catharsis is
particularly healthy for you, helping you to release internal pressures
and tensions which result from your constant vigilance and desire to
keep out unwanted threats to your wellbeing. When you are emotionally committed to someone you are steadfast
and possessive but equally generous and passionate. ‘Life is earnest
and life is real’ could be your motto, and you usually manage to
deepen and transform – even if just a little bit – every person with
whom you come in contact. Your Greatest Strengths
Moral integrity and strength of character; perceptive and penetrating
mind; quiet but fervent support of the underdog and of those you love;
ability to focus on a goal and remain undeterred by obstacles;
compassion and courage to undergo suffering for the sake of
regeneration. Your Greatest Weaknesses
Tendency to be too serious, rigid and austere; to be accusatory and
blind to your own prejudices; to get despondent and stuck in narrow
and pessimistic attitudes. Images for Integration
A prisoner in solitary confinement undergoes a conversion and
becomes an indefatigable worker for the transformation and betterment
of the lives of his inmates … A priest turns his home into a shelter for
the sick and homeless. Famous Personalities
Shirley Bassey (singer), Nicolas Cage (actor), Kevin Costner (actor),
Jocelyn Delecour (Olympic athlete), Gerard Depardieu (actor), Ralph
Fiennes (actor), Henry Miller (author), Kate Moss (model),
Nostradamus (seer), Cynthia Payne (madame of Streatham), Francis
Poulenc (composer), Aleksandr Scriabin (composer), Rod Stewart
(singer). S UN C APRICORN —117—
M OON S AGITTARIUS Great lords have their pleasures, but the people have fun.
MONTESQUIEU
All the things I like to do are either immoral, illegal, or fattening.
ALEXANDER WOOLLCOTT Themes
EARTH/FIRE Self-motivated; zealous; authoritative; broad and
sweeping mind; honourable; philosophical; earnest; enthusiastic;
acerbic wit; proud; loyal; sincere; moral strength; idealism and
practicality; faith in values; alternately austere and humorous; high
standards.
Are you a hard-headed businessperson or a visionary social reformer?
Do you wear the yoke of responsibility only to toss it aside from time
to time in order to indulge in a crazy adventure? There is a bit of ‘old
man’ and ‘crazy teenager’ in you, and you can put them to work in a
very creative and usually lucrative way.
Your Sagittarian far-sightedness and your Capricorn earthiness
combine to give you a classy, charismatic and extremely capable
personality. Enormously persuasive and intense about ideas,
philosophies and social concerns, you are also concerned about your
personal wellbeing. You can talk others into almost anything because
you are both persistently pragmatic and genuinely enthusiastic. You
grasp the facts and hold the vision.
Your personality is forceful, powerful but sympathetic as well, or
rather humanitarian in a broad, impersonal sort of way. You are a great
debater with a kind of mission to explain things, especially the
implications of events and policies, at both the personal and perhaps
national/international level. This makes you a natural politician,
professor, priest, social critic or training manager. You care very deeply about ‘getting it right’ intellectually, about
pursuing kosher ideas and ‘isms’ and about instilling your life – and
others’ lives as well – with sound moral principles. A natural sort of
high-mindedness pervades all your central views, as well as a sense of
urgency about communicating your understanding to others. In a sense
you have the missionary zeal and the inner certitude of a monk or nun,
and this makes people sit up and listen. All the same, you can be guilty
of huge bias without being aware of it at all. And bluntness is another
thing – people will not always appreciate your straightforward, nononsense calling-a-spade-a-spade sort of delivery.
When in relaxed mode your satirical wit excels and you can be the
life of the party. You love to share ideas, compare convictions and
make absolute judgements on the nature of life and the folly of men –
and then laugh about the most serious of things. You enjoy many kinds
of people and can adapt easily to all kinds of situations. You enjoy the
intellectual challenge of unusual problems because you have an
uncanny knack of seeing into the heart of a problem and appreciating
the irony of life’s dilemmas.
You live your life with gusto and you have a nervous intensity that
can lead you into real exhaustion if you are not careful. Your mind is
going all the time and it can out-work your body, although your
enjoyment of sports and outdoor activities will balance this. Ambition
and high ideals keep you revved up most of the time, and after that you
like to party too! Relationships
Extremely devoted in personal relationships, you nevertheless find it
easier to commit yourself when you have found true intellectual
rapport with someone. You are passionate and loyal, and have a strong
feeling for the importance of family and community. Working hard to
provide for your loved ones is something you will not begrudge, as
long as there is also plenty of time for fun and doing your own thing.
You get moody and impatient if you feel your partner is being too
demanding. This is because you are not particularly sensitive to the
more subtle dynamics and emotional needs which come with intimate relationships. You easily ‘go into your head’ when difficulties arise,
and this can be a defensive tactic to protect you from your own
irrational needs as well. You may need to slow down and direct some
of your insatiable curiosity towards your own inner depths. What are
you afraid of? Nothing, you will say, and indeed your openness and
love of truth will help you relax into the cosier, non-verbal aspects of
love. Your Greatest Strengths
The range of your intellectual abilities; sense of responsibility and
integrity; spontaneous understanding of the larger implications of
different attitudes and situations; ambition and love of exploration;
ironic sense of humour. Your Greatest Weaknesses
Verbosity and occasional pomposity; tendency to exhibit intellectual
pretension when you are actually feeling insecure; to waste energy in a
nervous seeking of new pastures; to get fixated on narrow views that
become rigidly moralistic. Images for Integration
In his spare time, a High Court judge takes up the serious hobby of
gambling at horse races … A bank clerk plans a world cruise. Famous Personalities
Steve Allen (humorist and composer), Umberto Eco (novelist and
semiotician), Anthony Hopkins (actor), Kenny Loggins (rock
musician), Henri Matisse (artist), Montesquieu (political philosopher),
Brian Redhead (radio presenter), Maurice Ultrillo (artist), Alexander
Woollcott (journalist, broadcaster and critic). S UN C APRICORN —118—
M OON C APRICORN The opposition to the ordination of women is just the same opposition
as when we fought for the vote … I don’t mind people giving reasons,
but not stupid prejudices.
VICTORIA LIDIARD
To give up pretensions is as blessed a relief as to get them gratified.
WILLIAM JAMES Themes
EARTH/EARTH Responsible; realistic; traditional; clear-headed;
earthy; steadfast; self-demanding; autocratic; pragmatic; sophisticated;
self-absorbed; ambitious; serious; conscientious; professional; selfcontrolled; fearful; authoritative.
You get to grips with reality like no one else! Pragmatic and
purposeful, with your willpower completely mobilized towards
success, you naturally aspire to a position of authority and power. And
as you can keep your eye exactly on the main issue without getting
distracted, you usually accomplish exactly what you set out to do.
Enormously capable, professional and ambitious, you were born
with an old head upon your shoulders. Underneath your diffident,
serious, responsible demeanour, however, is a thoughtful, caring soul
who wants to be fair, efficient, and helpful.
You have a pathological need for security and authority, and you
usually find some way of making sure that you are immune to attack.
Perhaps early childhood experiences left you fearful of the power that
adults wield, which made you feel impotent and servile. Second to
authority, it is recognition that you require – recognition for your
professional status, strength, abilities, wisdom and accomplishments.
You can be terrifically protective and helpful, and friends and
family love you for your dependability: when you say you are going to
do something, you do it. You are not so popular, however, for your habit of not letting them be strong sometimes, too. What you hate is
appearing weak and not getting the respect and just rewards you feel
should be yours. Consequently you can sometimes overdo the
responsibility bit and take on more than you should. Is it a sense of
guilt that makes you volunteer for Atlas’s job? Could be, but you can
exhaust yourself and end up resenting the amount you do.
One of your struggles is with timidity and lack of confidence, and
at times with melancholy and depression. Early responsibilities or
burdens test you and help to form your ambitious outlook and strong
defences – life somehow tells you that these are important.
You possess both the virtues and vices of having an excellent,
pragmatic mind. You reason things out with exactitude; you plot your
way to the top through the thicket of duty and desires, safe roads and
risky byways. You can apply your indefatigable spirit and resourceful
intellect successfully to a wide variety of disciplines, but you will
always need a challenge of some kind. Relationships
You are prone to placing disproportionate value on material
acquisition, security and personal control of your life. You may,
therefore, try to build a safe citadel, materially and psychologically,
from which you can lock out the mysterious, intangible, changeable
dimension of life. That part of life both terrifies and fascinates you.
You insist that all things have a ‘rational’ explanation and it is here that
you can come unstuck, especially when faced with your emotional
needs.
You in fact have a very strong need for love and companionship,
but you are cautious and hold back until you feel that all the necessary
ingredients for a successful relationship are present. You need
constancy, security and, if possible, excellence, for you very much
need to respect your partner. You can be a very sensual person, and
once you have relaxed and feel loved you will let down your defences
and reveal your private, bawdy sense of humour. When you learn to be
easier on yourself and to accept your imperfections as part of your own uniqueness, you will find that contentment and happiness are not so
hard to come by after all. Your Greatest Strengths
Thoroughness; dependability; the serious, attentive mental attitude you
bring to all situations and concerns; protective, responsible attitude to
others; commendable self-control; practical organizational abilities;
persistent energies; shrewd common sense; indefatigable attitude to all
obstacles and challenges. Your Greatest Weaknesses
Self-centredness; lop-sided focus on self-advancement, which can
ultimately make you lonely; tendency to ignore or reject the emotional
and spiritual dimension of life; propensity to wear too much defensive
armour and to expect the worst; tendency to judge others from a
position of pious self-righteousness (try to lighten up and indulge in
some purposeless fun). Image for Integration
A hoary old grandfather sits in his chair with his grandson on his knee.
He gives him a gift for his seventh birthday – a first edition of
Pilgrim’s Progress. Famous Personalities
Clara Barton (founder of American Red Cross), Federico Fellini (film
director), Roy Hattersley (British politician), William James
(philosopher), Augustus John (painter), Annie Lennox (singer),
Victoria Lidiard (suffragette), A. A. Milne (writer), Floyd Patterson
(champion boxer), Carl Rogers (psychologist), Claude Steiner (radical
psychotherapist), Galina Ulanova (prima ballerina), Tracey Ullman
(comedienne). S UN C APRICORN —119—
M OON A QUARIUS I am an idealist. I don’t know where I’m going but I’m on my way.
CARL SANDBURG
One of the greatest necessities … is to discover creative solitude.
CARL SANDBURG
Service to others is the rent you pay for your room here on earth.
MUHAMMAD ALI Themes
EARTH/AIR Sociable yet solitary; progressive yet conservative;
purposeful; sceptical intelligence; clear; concise; thoughtful;
organizational gifts; love of order and love of change; social
responsibility and ambition; purposeful; dedicated; practical idealist.
For someone who is so friendly and up-front, you are a remarkably
private, self-contained and independent soul. So, are you a peopleperson or are you really something of a hermit? Do you want to reform
the world or to be accepted, even revered, by it? Indeed, you might ask
yourself whether you are a conventional ‘square’, masquerading in the
clothes of a rebel, or a world-shaking reformer who loves to dress the
elegant high-society part? Is your true love the old, the past, the
historical, or do you want to be one of the movers and shapers of the
future, not least your own?
One of your challenges in life will be to figure out how you can
reconcile your desire to rewrite the rules with your strong belief in the
rule of law. When you bring these contradictory sides together, you are
self-disciplined, self-motivated and a great forward-planner with good
business sense, administrative skills and a detached, ethical purpose to
all your activities.
Your clear-headed, logical approach to any enterprise you
undertake, along with your willingness to learn from your mistakes, will inspire confidence and respect in friends and colleagues. You are
objective and capable of confronting problems and difficulties head on,
which makes you a powerful ally and a formidable opponent. There is
a stylish dignity and grace about your approach which, coupled with
your insightful wit, makes you a respected authority in your field and
amongst your friends.
Both ambitious and modest, you seek to get to the top of whatever
mountain has caught your idealistic imagination, but never at the
expense of your humanitarian ideals. Whilst you are deeply egalitarian
in temperament, you know to use your power effectively, and you
think to yourself ‘someone’s got to do it’ – ‘it’ being managing things
successfully from the top. Having scaled the heights, however, you can
be self-effacing about your achievements. You have a strong sense of
duty and moral obligation towards your fellow human beings. You
want to make the world a better place, and are likely to have fairly
clear ideas as to how this can be achieved.
Your intelligence and independent mind-set does not, however,
suffer fools gladly, and you resent having to work at things which curb
your beliefs and freedom of expression in any way. But you are
prepared to work hard with consistent dedication for your ideals. To
this end, you can be drawn to those skills and professions that will
make a practical difference to the world, be they in the sphere of
politics, economics, academia, or in the humanities such as literature,
history, psychology and counselling. In the creative arts, once you
overcome your reticence about contacting and expressing your insights
and emotions, you can be a profoundly poetic soul, encapsulating the
essence of people and ideas in clear, elegant words, painting, dance or
music. Relationships
Your mix of outgoing, intelligent friendliness and self-contained inner
reserve can be something of a tantalizing mystery to others. Although
interested in a wide range of people, you are choosey about whom you
spend real time with. Intelligence and some measure of personal
achievement are essential in any prospective partner. But when you admire and respect someone, you are the soul of supportive friendship,
a natural counsellor and totally committed colleague and partner.
Although friends and loved ones may be ready to help, you can be
remarkably self-sufficient, withdrawing into your own space like a
Trappist monk or nun. You want stability and emotional security, yet
you need freedom and privacy. You are extremely sociable and like
people, yet you find it difficult to get close. Emotionally you need 100per-cent security before you can admit to yourself that you have any
emotional needs at all. This can lead you to remain overly self-reliant
and independent. ‘Still waters run deep’, however, and when you allow
yourself to be touched by emotional experience, your own passion will
astonish you. Fire – Water types are particularly adept at reaching into
your aloofness and turning you on to parts of yourself you might
otherwise shun. Your Greatest Strengths
Lucid, practical intelligence; insightful and supportive interest in
people; self-motivation; diligence; professionalism; ability to combine
personal ambition with respect for the rights and wellbeing of others. Your Greatest Weaknesses
Emotional insecurity and fear of rejection; your need to be in control
and independent of others at all costs; pride; facility for ignoring
people and matters that do not especially interest you or further your
ends. Images for Integration
A prophetic poet is awarded high honours … An historian points the
way to the future … Having struggled unaided to the peak, a
mountaineer hitches a ride on a passing helicopter. Famous Personalities Mohammad Ali (former World heavyweight boxing champion), Emily
Balch (social reformer), James Frazer (anthropologist, author of The
Golden Bough ), Marilyn Horne (operatic soprano), Diane Keaton
(actress), Richard Nixon (former American president), Juan Ramon
Jimenez (poet), Carl Sandburg (poet, writer and historian), Jean
Stapleton (actress), Denzel Washington (actor), Woodrow Wilson
(former American president). —120—
S UN C APRICORN M OON Plutão ISCES Dost thou love life? Then do not squander time, for that’s the stuff life
is made of.
BENJAMIN FRANKLIN
I want to go beyond Impressionism and make it something solid and
enduring, like the art of museums …
PAUL CEZANNE
It’s very hard to live up to an image.
ELVIS PRESLEY Themes
EARTH/WATER Scientist and poet; a pragmatic dreamer; romantic
but sceptical; a compassionate realist; an imaginative organizer;
faithful; helpful; philosophical; humanitarian; tough and tender; longsuffering humility; dependable but private.
Are you a gullible dreamer or a stodgy bank clerk? A theoretical
mathematician or an amusing mystic? Are you a lyrical poet or a hardheaded realist? Does the unknown fascinate or terrify you? Is your life
tidy and totally in order, or do you feel chaos constantly threatening to
engulf you? You could be a bit like Ratty, one side of you good at biting the end
of a pencil all day with your head in the clouds, and the other side
good at protecting weaker souls and providing well-packed picnics at
just the right moment. Although you are a softy, you are also dutiful
and work out your accounts to the last penny. You are likely to
experience an underlying tension between the world of your dreams
and rich imagination, and your need to stay in touch with ‘reality’.
Worries about being engulfed by life’s problems and whether or
not you have made the right choice may plague you often, even though
you are blessed with a concentration that pulls all the pieces of your
jigsaw together in the end. But until that happens you may fret and
feel, like one Capricorn-Pisces friend, that ‘civilization is only chaos
taking a rest’. But this turns into a strength as you gain self-knowledge,
because your ambition for order and achievement never dulls your
sensitivity to human needs and values.
Whilst you have a responsive personality and a knack of getting
along with all kinds of people, you are more of an introvert than most
people guess. You feel deeply about things; you think carefully and
penetrate into the real nature of people and ideas. Valuing the more
invisible, spiritual things of life, you try to build them into the edifice
of all that you do. You may not exactly repress your feelings but you
tend to keep them to yourself, for you are not a flashy person; rather,
you are always available to people, ready to share your views and help
in practical ways when needed.
Your self-reflection makes you a bit grave, solemn at times, but it
also allows you to understand the plight of being human, and to
forgive others for the weaknesses you try to check in yourself. As a
natural humanitarian with a good head on your shoulders, you would
make an excellent lawyer, social worker, counsellor, doctor or
psychologist. Your penchant for mystery could make you an talented
detective!
You have great insight and can often see into the hidden problems
and the dark, fantastic byways of the mind. Your logical brain seeks to
find meaning in the chaotic, and to give structure and order to the
unmanageable. But no matter how neat, logical and practical you are, there is a side of you that is instinctively drawn towards the
uncontainable, boundless poetry of life.
You like to be active and may be goal-oriented, indeed ambitious,
but not to the extent that you pass up a chance to spread a bit of
humour and encouragement. You want to get things done, but you also
want to feel your way along – a bit – and allow the fates to invade and
give you your ration of mystery. Whilst a part of you will always
remain private, your energies will need to be expressed in the world,
making a difference that really matters. Relationships
You have a very romantic side, but you try very hard – and usually
succeed – in not letting it get the better of you. Tender, kind-hearted,
devoted, loyal, almost anticipating your loved one’s need before it
arises, you may desperately want the security of emotional
containment and end up containing them.
You can either be totally needy and dependent, or you can play the
self-reliant loner. Perhaps you are not sure whether you are the cat’s
whiskers or something the cat brought in. You give the appearance of
being very self-possessed, able to cope with a whole spectrum of
problems, but when you feel safe in a close relationship you open up
and reveal the woes that weigh heavy on your heart. And the joys.
Indeed, there is a whimsical, light-hearted, fun-loving soul wanting to
get outside and forget the serious side of life. Your Greatest Strengths
Capacity to give form and substance to your imagination; compassion
and practical helpfulness; personal courage you find from selfreflection and moral precepts; gift for quietly bringing order out of
chaos. Your Greatest Weaknesses Fear of the unknown; pathetic tendency to carry the burdens of others;
propensity to lose your confidence in negative thought patterns;
willingness to bend the truth to fit your thesis. Images for Integration
A wine collector uncorks a rare vintage to celebrate a success … A
child builds a sandcastle of reinforced concrete … Bilbo in Tolkein’s
Lord of the Rings … Bathers in a Landscape by Cezanne … Elvis
Presley’s Blue Suede Shoes. Famous Personalities
Lew Ayres (actor), Paul Cezanne (impressionist painter), John Denver
(singer), Ava Gardner (actress), Paul Ferroud (composer), Benjamin
Franklin (scientist and statesman), J. Edgar Hoover (lawyer and former
director of the FBI), Sandy Koufax (baseball player), Elvis Presley
(rock ‘n’ roll singer), Keith Thomas (historian, author of Religion and
the Decline of Magic ), J.R.R. Tolkien (writer and scholar). Chapter Fourteen
SUN IN AQUARIUS
—121—
S UN A QUARIUS
M OON A RIES
More than anything life calls for confidence in oneself.
VIRGINIA WOOLF
Man has been endowed with reason, with the power to create, so that
he can add to what he’s been given.
ANTON CHEKHOV
There is in human nature generally more of the fool than of the wise.
FRANCIS BACON
I wish I could change my sex as I change my shirt.
ANDRÉ BRETON Themes
AIR/FIRE Self and society; quick and sound intellect; observant and
astute; self-interest; social conscience; prophetic; radical views;
forward-looking; analytical; disdain for hypocrisy; frank; harsh critic;
bright; off-the-wall; outrageous sense of humour; rebellious; intelligent
individualist; maverick truth-seeker.
Are you a great observer of humanity but too much of a snob to really
join in? Do you speak your own mind courageously and convincingly,
and then wonder why others do not always warm to you and your causes? Talkative and energetic, you are often wrapped up in your own
world of ideas and projects. Your excellent mind works in a nononsense, quick and efficient manner, and you tackle problems with
great appetite, getting much satisfaction from grasping essentials and
sorting everything out.
An intellectual virtuoso, hearty adventurer and spunky, wellintentioned friend, you speak your mind in no uncertain terms, with a
special knack of poking fun at the absurdities and hypocrisies of
human beings and the status quo. You may not, however, be aware of
how distant and arrogant you appear to others. Your drive to
understand the world and to champion its most urgent causes is likely
to bring you success, but your naive, overbearing self-confidence often
kills off the warm response you would like from your immediate
listeners. You expect others to be as forthright and resilient as yourself,
as eager to learn and as desirous of intellectual mastery. But you are
not easy to live up to, and few people want the glaring truth and a
sparring partner all of the time.
You are a good friend and neighbour, capable of motivating people
by your optimism and your faith in yourself to improve the future. But
are you more concerned about the welfare of others or of yourself? Do
you speak your mind or do you see yourself as spokesperson for
society as a whole? At times you are torn between the two, and you
can experience loneliness if you do not come to terms with your need
for approval and acceptance.
One of life’s zany individuals, you are a real character who is
unafraid of the challenge of self-education and self-improvement. You
develop original style and bring a fierce moral integrity to whatever
you do. You believe fervently in your ideals of a social order that
protects individual rights (yours especially!), but you are reluctant to
become subservient to the group. A friendly egomaniac, you want the
best for everyone and are prepared to fight for it – honourably, of
course. You espouse Utopian ideas, but you are sceptical of the ability
of groups to make them real. ‘Them and me’ versus ‘them or me’ –
this is your dilemma.
Since you love challenges and measure yourself against society’s
expectations, you make a wonderful social reformer or eccentric ambassador. Self-expression without the impingement of too many
rules and regulations is vital for your wellbeing, making you ideally
suited to self-employment. Although you need social activity and an
attentive audience, you will do things your way or not at all, and you
will put yourself on the line to the last.
You do not have much patience for vulnerability and emotional
complexities, and like quick, practical answers that cut through the red
tape of bureaucracy. Irritations can make you flare up into a temper,
but it usually passes quickly, and your sense of humour helps you
recover your equilibrium in most situations. Relationships
The brotherhood of man is a reality for you, but the partnership of love
with its emotional give-and-take is not quite so familiar. You live in
your head most of the time, and are therefore baffled when your
impetuous mental approach to solving emotional dilemmas does not
work.
In a romantic relationship you need to be friends with your partner,
and to share ideas and ideals. In fact, it is unlikely that you will be
attracted to someone you do not respect intellectually. You need to
slow down, however, and learn to savour the subtle nuances, to feel the
inexpressible, to not know for once so you can just ‘be’ with a person.
The warmth and romance of your fiery Moon can then come out and
add the spark that your independent life is often missing.
You are fairly restless so will need plenty of space and freedom to
do your thing. An earthy partner will help you establish useful routines
that help you realize your goals. A watery partner could help you relax
and get in touch with your feelings. Your Greatest Strengths
Lively, intelligent intellect; absolute honesty and devotion to truth;
respect for the rights and opinions of others; courage; sense of
adventure; zest for life; moral integrity. Your Greatest Weaknesses
Arrogance and overly assertive mental approach to life; self-absorbtion
and lack of sensitivity to the emotional needs of others; cool and
competitive temperament which keeps you a loner. Images for Integration
A court jester mocks the social injustices of the realm … Robin Hood
and his band of merry men outwit the evil King John once again. Famous Personalities
Anton Chekhov (playwright), Alan Alda (actor), Francis Bacon
(statesman and philosopher), Barry Humphries (‘Dame Edna
Everidge’), Nikos Kazantzakis (author of Zorba the Greek ), Fernand
Leger (painter), Harold Macmillan (former British prime minister),
John Schlesinger (film director), Dennis Skinner (radical politician),
Virginia Woolf (novelist). —122—
S UN A QUARIUS
M OON T AURUS
A hungry man is not a free man.
ADALAI STEVENSON
Only by transcending the everyday, by seeing human life in larger
terms, can the individual escape the slow strangulation of ‘permanent
errors’.
E.G. PRICE Themes
AIR/EARTH Eccentric entrepreneur; level-headed; security versus
independence; tenacious; pragmatic intellect; logical; kind-hearted; generous; ambitious; capable; friendly; self-indulgent; humanitarian;
peace-loving but strong-willed.
You are as peaceful and sensual as Ferdinand the bull lazing on his
grassy hill, but potentially as idealistic and broad-minded as the
Spectator of all time and existence. You are independent, reasonable
and dedicated to self-development and honourable values. Underneath,
however, your habits and assumptions are firmly rooted in the status
quo and in the permanence in your life of all those things that make
you comfortable, happy and secure.
You may see yourself as an open-minded, progressive thinker. It is
quite likely that you are a reformer, at least in temperament. If so, your
raison d’être is the protection and enhancement of basic human needs:
economic security; the maintenance of physical and mental health; an
aesthetic, preferably green environment; and the simple sensual
pleasures of living.
You are extremely individualistic and pretty set in your ways. A
deep inner sense of contentment and self-satisfaction can make you
appear a trifle smug. Even when you are feeling unconfident, your
basically high opinion of yourself impresses others and sees you
through rough times. Valuing peace as much as you value your own
ideas makes you a natural diplomat: gracious and sympathetic, yet
practical, reasonable and detached.
A happy union of emotional and intellectual natures within you
lends weight to your views and inspires confidence in others. You
therefore make a good leader or executive, even though you are not
really interested in selling yourself or having power over others. But
you are certainly not interested in anyone having power over you
either. In fact, your refusal to conform may become your traditional
way of preserving your position. As a result, you are one of the most
indomitable and stubborn members of society, even though you are
ever so nice at being just that. You like yourself just fine the way you
are and, all in all, you enjoy being yourself.
If there is a conflict within you it is between home comforts and
your future-oriented insight and thrust. Part of you is deeply nostalgic
for the past; the background mood of your personality is coloured with vivid feelings and deeply imbedded experiences and values. Another
part of you, however, analyses the past in order to learn from it. You
feel yourself to be very deeply attached to your roots, but you know
you are more than that.
You are excellent at making sense of individual human patterns and
needs, which enables you to push the world gently forwards in
healthier directions. You might do this by, for example, becoming
more aware of green issues, spiritual growth and complementary
therapies. You are also quite likely to be very involved with art in one
way or another, with a social world filled with artists and eccentrics.
Whatever you do, you bring a potentially powerful blend of idealism
and realism to any project or relationship, be it commercial, artistic or
philanthropic. Relationships
You can be quite loving and romantic, as well as solid and dependable.
Even though you have a strong sense of your self and your
independence, you do enjoy life more with someone at your side, but it
must be someone you can respect intellectually and aesthetically.
Although you can be very stubborn and set in your ways, you will
always be open to discussing problems rationally and harmoniously. At
times you may be just a little too maddeningly rational for your own
good, and prone to be aloof and detached when emotional protests get
too loud. But you are devoted (even possessive and maybe jealous –
although you would dispute this) to your loved one, and will instigate
the slow process of change and adjustment if you can see that doing
otherwise would threaten your happiness and security. Your Greatest Strengths
Infinite patience and common sense; reliability and loyalty to loved
ones; courtesy and broad, philanthropic approach to people; ability to
combine your distinct individuality with sensible, realistic thinking;
dedication to grounding your inspirations with persistent efforts. Your Greatest Weaknesses
Smugness and inertia; arrogance and stubbornness; a reluctance to
listen to other views; being too logical and detached in emotional
matters; riding roughshod over others in order to achieve your
ambitions. Images for Integration
A country girl seeks a conventional life with an unconventional young
man in the big city … The resident caretaker of a ‘New Age’
community sips his Beaujolais as he systematically does the year’s
accounts. Famous Personalities
Bill Bixby (actor), Charles Carter (astrologer), Juliette Greco (singer
and poet), Germaine Greer (feminist writer), James Hoffa (union
leader), Natassia Kinski (actress), Somerset Maugham (writer), E.G.
Price (novelist), Ronald Reagan (former American president), Steve
Reeves (actor), Martin Shaw (actor), Adalai Stevenson (politician),
Emanuel Von Swedenborg (philosopher and mystic). —123—
S UN A QUARIUS M OON G EMINI If I am to deal with life it must be in my own way for there is no escape
from one’s character.
MAURICE HEWLETT
The sublime and the ridiculous are often so nearly related, that it is
difficult to class them separately.
THOMAS PAINE Themes AIR/AIR Friendly; bright and breezy; witty; iconoclastic;
philosophical yet flippant; flexible yet stubborn; progressive;
communicative; language skills; strong social conscience; restless;
unsentimental; detached; emotionally naive.
Light, bright, cheerful and full of outrageous, deadpan quips, you are
an amicable ideas person with what Charles Lamb aptly called a ‘free
and holiday-rejoicing spirit’. Or at least part of you is. For whilst at
one level you can skim over life with all the practised whirligigs of a
drunken butterfly, at another you aspire to change the world and tackle
its most demanding problems.
So are you a heavyweight thinker or a lightweight mimic? Do you
take life seriously, get stuck in and do your bit to make it better, or do
you take the world as it comes and shrug off its problems with a
carefree nonchalance? It sometimes seems that one half of you is
drinking fruit juice for the good of your health, whilst the other is
breaking open the champagne and puffing away at a cigarette to steady
your nerves and for the sheer zany fun of it.
When your sober commitment comes together with your quickwitted curiosity, you possess a formidable capacity for communicating
radical ideas and sorting out other people’s problems. Your clarity,
honesty, charm, patent good will and your frank, easy-going
reasonableness inspire confidence. This enables you to act both as a
negotatiator and as a peacemaker. Likewise your capacity for lateral
thinking, your gift for words and your lightness of touch and good
humour make you a natural in such areas as sales, journalism public
relations and advertising. Equally your inventive, ingenious side may
draw you towards science, especially the sciences of people and ideas.
But whatever you do, it is important for you to work alongside more
practical types, or your ideas can simply remain ideas. This is because
you tend to be quickly bored with the nuts and bolts of things, and are
inclined to move on to the next bright thought if you find yourself
getting too enmeshed in the nitty-gritty.
You probably love to read and to lose yourself in other people’s
minds, as new ways of looking at things are your very lifeblood. And
when you light upon a new idea, you want to let everyone know about it. This can attract you to everything hi-tech, from portable phones to
computers. You are also drawn to ‘New Age’ thinking, and are
constantly moving on to the next message and possibility. For, as with
your political ideas, you are essentially a progressive, believing in the
possibilities of changing the world and improving communications and
understanding between people.
Whilst naturally drawn to city life with all its bustle and busy
exchange of ideas, you find that the country and contact with the soil
can earth your restless soul, releasing you from your inclination to
nervous tension and anxiety. Likewise music, and indeed the song of
birds, can be a soothing and refreshing balm for your ever-changing
spirit. Relationships
Immensely friendly, you are a people person who has no problems
getting to know whomever you want. Naturally charming, sociable and
approachable, you will strike up a conversation with anyone anywhere,
but best of all over the phone, in the open-air or over a communal
meal.
Partnerships for you need to be based on shared interests and open
dialogue. Yet even with your easy-going and co-operative nature, you
find more intimate relationships less straightforward. For whilst you
understand people’s motives and have many insights, deeper emotions
are your Achilles heel. Indeed you may find yourself drawing back
from real intimacy for fear that the irrational emotions of love and hate
may leave you feeling helpless and out of your depth. This can lead to
you finding yourself alone in relationships yet not really knowing quite
why.
You know you are safe with fellow Air types but Water types have
much to teach you, so follow up on the fascination they hold for you
and find out about your hidden depths. Your Greatest Strengths Your gift for friendship and communication; intelligence and quickwitted originality; an eye for, and openness towards, new ideas; a way
with words; idealism. Your Greatest Weaknesses
Flippancy; restlessness; tendency to squander your talents on new
ideas, projects and relationships; unsentimental reluctance to face the
darker aspects of life; unexpressed emotional needs which can trip you
up. Images for Integration
A child in a balloon drifts over the city reporting back by portable
phone on all below … A white blackbird charms the garden with its
song. Famous Personalities
Saul Alinksy (social activist), Joseph Alioto (American politician),
Vicki Baum (novelist and dramatist), Jack Benny (comedian), Ernst
Henkel (aeronautics designer), Maurice Hewlett (writer), William Bill
Knott (poet), Charles Lamb (essayist), John McEnroe (tennis player),
Jack Nicklaus (golfer), Thomas Paine (political writer), Proclus (neoPlatonic philosopher), Georg Trakl (poet), Joseph Wambaugh (writer
of detective novels). —124—
S UN A QUARIUS
M OON C ANCER
The best of prophets of the future is the past.
LORD BYRON
What is poetry? The suggestion, by the imagination, of noble grounds
for the noble emotions. JOHN RUSKIN
I am aware of very strong gregarious tendencies in myself. My natural
disposition is to be very easily influenced … and above all by anything
collective.
SIMONE WEIL Themes
AIR/WATER
Humanitarian;
vivid
imagination;
idealistic;
compassionate and helpful; social conscience; companionable;
popular; lofty emotions; progressive thinker but emotionally oldfashioned; a sensitive individualist; democratic spirit; the kind-hearted
rebel; the friend of the people; the poet and the social worker.
Are you the sort of person who sets out to buy a book on home-made
wine but returns with a treatise on the future of modern society? And
why is it that when you feel like putting your feet up by the fire with
cakes just like mother used to make, you end up spending the evening
at the local charity meeting? It is something to do with your fondness
for folks and the warm popularity that this brings you. You cannot help
getting involved in some way because you were born with a very
developed social conscience. You possess a healthy self-respect and
feel that others deserve the same, no matter where they come from.
Although you may have eccentric ideas, you are blessed with the
common touch; you can listen with great perception and respond with
understanding and sensitivity. Your heart yearns for shared intimacy
but your head pursues objective truth and collective concerns.
Although you have a logical, scientific mind, you are actually drawn to
things because of your great feeling for them. It is this personal feeling
for larger causes and for the family of man that you are able to
communicate to people, and therefore you are capable of truly
motivating the masses.
When at peace with yourself, you possess a most pleasantly
paradoxical personality, for you are a friendly, modern, future-oriented
visionary whose inspiration derives from the cradle of the past. Wherever you have belonged – in terms of family, community, or
nation – you will carry it with you as a central inner drama into your
future.
Traditional values inform all you do, even if you are not
consciously aware of them, and irrespective of whether you kick
against them or embrace them utterly. It is easy for you to get attached
to beliefs and to remain unaware of the influence of your security
needs. But one of your potentially great strengths is holding and
honouring the best values from the past without becoming a slave to
them, for your Aquarian spirit is two steps ahead of everyone else, and
must feel free to add its unique contribution.
You come into your own where the personal and impersonal meet,
where your personal feelings, lofty ideals and social conscience can
work fruitfully together, as in teaching, politics, social work, art,
literature or drama. You will aim to justify your love of something by
studying and analysing it, and finding out how it is valid for others. In
this way, you often end up universalizing your personal experiences
and turn them into a cause, into a mission. Your best creativity hinges
on the acknowledgement that you are not only the past but also the
future, not only collective but also personal, not only an observer but
also a passionate participant in the panorama of life and human history. Relationships
Your conscious Aquarian side has a charmingly naive, detached way of
studying and scrutinizing others, as if each person were a fascinating
object d’art in a museum. Underneath the cool, friendly veneer is a
very vulnerable, clannish, possessive heart which needs lots of
affection and a sense of belonging. You can be moved to tears by a
memory but then seemingly indifferent to the emotional needs of your
nearest and dearest – if they are too cloying.
Needing space but also a cosy niche where you are the ‘special
one’, you are not always the easiest person to live with. Basically, you
suffer from the ‘freedom-closeness’ dilemma: you want emotional
security but also freedom to do your own thing, to keep a few doors
open. You think you are independent but old behaviour patterns will shape your responses to loved ones now more than you care to admit.
The more you become aware of this, the more freely will you be able
to give and receive love without the nagging suspicions and fear, and
without the knee-jerk escapist reaction. Your romantic soul can relax,
open up and enjoy the human exchange that is so vital to your
wellbeing. Your Greatest Strengths
Genuine warmth and capacity for intelligent kindness; far-reaching
imagination; devotion to both truth and the uplifting of human life;
ability to express universal insight through personal images. Your Greatest Weaknesses
Unconscious prejudices; ability to rationalize irrational actions; a
tendency to get absorbed in abstract causes which cuts you off from
your feelings and keeps you emotionally immature. Images for Integration
A social worker bypasses bureaucracy to save a mother and child … A
childhood memory becomes the basis of a new world order. Famous Personalities
Humphrey Bogart (actor), Lord Byron (poet), Fritjof Capra (physicistphilosopher), Christian Dior (fashion designer), Farah Fawcett
(actress), Clark Gable (actor), John Hurt (actor), Norman Mailer
(novelist and playwright), Franklin D. Roosevelt (former American
president), John Ruskin (critic and sociologist), Babe Ruth (champion
baseball player), Simone Well (philosopher), Boris Yeltsin (Russian
president). —125—
S UN A QUARIUS
M OON L EO
I was a triumph, Darling!
DAME GWEN FFRANGCON -DAVIES (ACTRESS)
My people and I have come to an agreement … they are to say what
they please, and I am to do what I please.
FREDERICK THE GREAT
I am the incarnation of everybody and the zones of reassurance. I am
the obstetrician of good fortune, I live in the social cages of joy.
THOMAS MERTON Themes
AIR/FIRE Great gentleness on the surface and strength within; fearless
defender of principle; wise and generous in helping others; fount of
wisdom; integrity; visionary; artistic; renaissance man; friendly;
trustworthy; despotic; arrogant; emotionally idealistic; romantic;
chivalrous; creative imagination.
Are you a democrat or a despot? An individualist or a social being? An
egalitarian or a snob? Probably all of these, in your own warm and
wonderful way. You have a proud, regal, magnanimous disposition, a
fine intellect, bags of personal flair, and you invest much passion and
fervour into all your personal relationships, of which there will be
many.
A strong sense of your own individuality and ideals is what you
exude to the world, and others know they are dealing with a person of
deep integrity and honour. They will also be affectionately aware of
your vanity and spasmodic imperiousness, but will love you
nonetheless, for despite your autocratic ways, your need for affection
and admiration makes you vulnerable, approachable and very human.
You need friends and can make a real family of them. Generous,
encouraging, able to make everyone feel they are special, you have a way of ennobling whomever and whatever you touch. Great gentleness
and respect for the heights of the human spirit, coupled with enormous
inner strength, make you in your best moments a veritable fount of
wisdom and inspiration, full of the type of friendly charity which
accepts, embraces and forgives human inconsistencies. Likewise,
however, if your dignity is offended or your generosity and talents go
unappreciated, you can be difficult, retreating into a sulky silence and
pious dismissiveness. At these times you are be stubborn, unbending
and arrogant.
You are a romantic and a visionary at heart, and a good performer
too, fully aware of your effect on others. Not that anything you do is
feigned, for the purity and depth of your feelings, your inner ‘truth’ as
a human being is what motivates you and touches others. But you
possess tremendous creative flair and artistic sensitivity, and quite
simply, you are a ham. All this combined with your fervent self-belief
and noble ideals makes you a real character in any circle. You have a
broad intellectual outlook and a lively, fertile imagination. You are a
natural leader, communicating from your heart in clear, honest,
straightforward ways.
You could be a social reformer, radiating a powerful commitment
to uplift and improve the quality of life for others, but your
humanitarianism and egoism can get mixed up. Sometimes you care
very much about exterior things and how you are being received, and
other times you are completely uninterested in convention, manners
and protocol.
You rebel with flair and style – nothing mediocre or ordinary for
you. You are truly gregarious and interested in the welfare of people,
but it is still your show and your myth you are living out, and your
desire is to grow into and express as much of your (glorious) self as
you can. You can make categorical decisions for the greatest happiness
of the people in your kingdom. Your validity and meaning as a unique
individual is intimately linked with the role you play in your larger
network of friends and colleagues. Relationships Romantically you are trusting, passionate and loyal, and you thrive on
warmth and affection. Love plays a big part in your life, and you tend
to need a real adoring mate.
You are a tender-hearted idealist, a potential romantic poet whose
predisposition is to see the best in people, wanting to believe they are
as good and worthy as your ideal. But when they are not you are
deeply disappointed, and you feel your personal misfortunes as
monumental tragedies. Channelling some of your self-dramatizing
powers into creative avenues – such as the theatre, art or music – may
help to stabilize your emotional life. Your Greatest Strengths
Radiant humanitarianism; enthusiasm for new and original ideas;
integrity and trustworthiness; unique blend of rational logic and
romantic imagination; openness and helpfulness to others. Your Greatest Weaknesses
Vanity and the need to be loved; tendency to glamorize people so that
you cannot always see their true colours; arrogance and stubborn need
to control; inclination to get carried away by romance and adventure
and forget to come down to earth. Image for Integration
A modern actress takes a bow, then leads the audience to a political
demonstration. Famous Personalities
Evangeline Adams (astrologer), Dame Gwen Ffrangcon-Davies
(actress), Frederick the Great (King of Prussia), James Joyce (poet and
literary giant), Harvey Korman (actor), Edouard Lalo (composer),
Thomas Merton (Trappist monk and mystic), Graham Nash (folk musician), Rene Russo (actor), Tom Selleck (actor), Clare Short
(politician). —126—
S UN A QUARIUS
M OON V IRGO
A rose is a rose is a rose.
GERTRUDE STEIN
A novel is a mirror walking along a main road
STENDHAL Themes
AIR/EARTH Intellectual; puritanical; studious; devoted researcher;
social worker; helpful; kind-hearted; common sense; emotionally
naive; detached; clever; sense of propriety; truth-seeker; innovative
mind; rebellious yet conventional; radical yet uptight.
You are a purist in heart and mind, a streamlined self-styled individual
whose special eccentricities express themselves paradoxically in a
worthy, utilitarian world view. Efficiency and happiness are nearly
synonomous for you, and you are perhaps happiest when others agree
with your cleverly reasoned arguments on ‘questions of principle’. You
then feel appreciated, maybe even loved.
Emotional experience baffles you somewhat as you are first and
foremost an intellectual, and rely on your formidable mental powers to
solve any kind of problem. Some of your greatest strengths are your
objectivity and ability to carefully think things through and convince
others of the utter reasonableness of your position.
Your mental outlook tends to be dispassionate, pristine,
humanitarian and based on facts and practical considerations.
Extended to the world of emotions and feelings, however, this
approach can be hygienic, cold and aggravatingly ‘goody-goody’. Your
emotional detachment may create misunderstandings, for despite your seeming self-sufficiency you really need affection and intimacy much
more than others realize.
Your Virgoan Moon seeks to analyse and organize your inner life,
your instinctive responses and reactions to your environment, and your
need for security and nurturance. You therefore do not welcome
emotional chaos into your highly categorized mindset. You need
method, routine and clarity to feel right, and so you become very adept
at pushing out all unpleasant and unorganizable aspects of your
emotional world. Your Aquarian Sun is very idealistic anyway, and so
on the surface will co-exist happily with your Virgoan side which
beavers away industriously, working out all the fine details of the
larger ideals you espouse and on which you base your life.
Your happiness would be nearly complete if you could find a
method, a kind of mathematical formula, which would allow you to be
both the unconventional eccentric and the sane, sanitized, law-abiding
citizen. There is something about you that cherishes the traditional
recipes for happiness in the family and society. Curiously, however,
you find they are not for you because you are different – a gregarious
loner, with exquisite original flair but a hypercritical nature which can
sting.
You have an excellent mind, and when you get to the nub of things
your instinct is to render your superior understanding practical and
beneficial to others. You may enjoy the world of computer technology
where your instinct for logical systems will flourish; or you may be a
zealous and capable social reformer, as the whole business of health
comes naturally to you. Fascinated by the relationship between mind
and body and the laws that make for efficient, harmonious living, you
will tend to advocate a proper diet, regular exercise and mental fitness. Relationships
Intimate relationships can pose a real challenge for you. Although you
are devoted and kind-hearted, you do not feel comfortable with overly
demonstrative shows of emotion. You show your feelings in friendly,
practical ways. In a sense, you are a bit naive when it comes to love – utterly pure
and sincere in your affections but unsure as to what to do next. You are
innately independent, even eccentric, but you blossom with a little
emotional excitement and nourishment. Basically, you need a gentle
response in order for your emotional confidence to develop, and when
it does you make the most loyal and altruistic of mates. Your Greatest Strengths
Mental dexterity; capacity for detailed research, objective reasoning
and critical analysis; refined aesthetic sense; willingness to help and to
do what needs to be done; genuine kindness; devotion to ideals. Your Greatest Weaknesses
Tendency to be obsessed with sanity and order; an overcritical, nitpicking attitude to people and relationships, in an assumption that life
is about ‘functioning’ and that emotional conundrums can be solved by
a mathematical formula, and in your tendency to take yourself and
what you know too seriously. Images for Integration
A psychiatrist makes an accurate analysis of a neurotic’s symptoms
and then works patiently, devotedly, consistently to facilitate the
patient’s return to health … Aliens extract human genes to breed and
rebuild the human race on a planet of superior design … Inspector
Maigret. Famous Personalities
Max Beckmann (painter), Emma Bunton (‘Spice Girl’), Frederick
Delius (composer), Vanessa Redgrave (actress), Georges Simenon
(writer), Boris Spassky (chess player), Gertrude Stein (writer),
Stendhal (writer), John Travolta (actor), Alessandro Volta (physicist). —127—
S UN A QUARIUS
M OON L IBRA
Do you think it pleases a man when he looks into a woman’s eyes and
sees a reflection of the British Museum Reading Room ?
MURIEL SPARK
As for the men in power, they are so anxious to establish the myth of
infallibility that they do their utmost to ignore truth.
BORIS PASTERNAK
But if a man happens to find himself …he has a mansion which he can
inhabit with dignity all the days of his life.
JAMES MICHENER Themes
AIR/AIR The art of sociability; highly idealistic; charming; romantic;
good intellect; love of truth and beauty; reasonable; broad-minded;
humanitarian; independent but devoted; artistic sensitivity; tolerant;
understanding; avant-garde tastes; civilized; gentle dignity.
Are you the charming, easy-going member of the gang who can
suddenly get rebellious if your ‘rights’ and your sympathetic nature are
abused or taken advantage of? Are you the broad-minded idealist who
is constantly inviting disappointment when people turn out to be mere
mortals?
You are a social creature, combining breezy affability with high
nobility, and your humane, friendly personality knows how to go with
the flow and create provocative but enjoyable social intercourse. It is
important for you to know what the hoi poloi think, to be part of the
‘in’ group, but you are not always sure you want to join it. You will
settle for being an associate member – keeping the faith, but in your
own unique way.
You can be torn between the need to belong and your deep
conviction in the sanctity of individualism and independent thought. Intellectually you see life as one inter-related whole, and you can
express your ideas and convictions with feeling and a lively sincerity.
You believe in revolution but in the nicest possible way, because you
would hate to actually offend others. How to combine freedom and
friendship, causes and courtship – that is your dilemma.
You are long on theory and ideals but not always very practical. In
an ideal world you would prefer to lead your life according to clearly
thought-out beliefs which leave little room for irrational passions,
prejudices or presumptions. If, however, you do not come down to
earth and join the mess from time to time you can appear
unapproachable and fickle, cerebral and poetic, but much less effective
than you could be if you got really involved with life.
You are involved, though, in a typically airy way – you are
observant, talkative, socially aware and concerned to promote ideas
and ‘systems’ that produce a better, brighter outlook for humanity.
Indeed, this is your strong point: you are an ideas person and will
thrive in education, communication, public relations and literary
pursuits. You love beauty and could be found in the world of art and
fashion. You have a unique way of imbibing the aesthetic atmosphere
of your surroundings and then giving your impression through
conversation, painting or intellectually astute commentary.
As an extreme idealist you tend to have one foot in heaven and the
other in the royal court of reason. There is not too much room in your
universe for the dark, the macabre, the sinister. You will deal with all
that intellectually, putting it very firmly in its place. You may enjoy
philosophy and can easily get carried away with dry discussion and
argument on abstract points. You have good taste in people and
knowledge. A friendly, understanding person who readily sympathizes
with human problems, you may well be accused, however, of making
up your philosophy as you go along so as to protect yourself from the
messy side of human involvement. Relationships
You are a very charming, romantic person who is always seeking the
ideal relationship, even if you are already in one. But when asked how you feel about someone you may reply that you think you feel suchand-such. That is, you may have to stop thinking to get in touch with
your feelings.
You like a bit of stylishness and glamour in your relationships, as
well as intellectual stimulation and emotional challenge. In short, you
can be a bit fussy – you need a friend, you need a lover, not too close,
not too distant, not too tall, not too thin, not too secure, not too wayout; the list could go on. Certainly you need someone who amuses you
– humour and fun are a big part of your life – but you also need
someone who brings you down to earth a bit, who helps you physically
relax and become more happily resigned to the ordinary side of life.
You are capable of real devotion and friendship within a love
relationship, as long as there is plenty of room for manoeuvre. Your Greatest Strengths
Lively, far-reaching intellect which works with principles easily and
sees life from endlessly new vantage points; refined sociability and
global interest in people, places and purposes; romantic idealism and
intelligent kindness which enobles all you do and endears you to
friends; integrity and colourful pursuasiveness which impels others to
look again at the old beliefs they hold dear. Your Greatest Weaknesses
Overly intellectual and abstract approach to life; romantic idealism and
emotional naivety which invites infidelity and disillusionment; lack of
stamina and dislike of imperfection which keeps you out of the main
fray of human life and distanced from your real power. Images for Integration
Anarchists form a committee to overthrow the tyranny of committees
… Good friends fall in love and get married. Famous Personalities
Edwin Aldrin (astronaut), Arcangelo Corelli (composer and virtuoso
violinist), Wilhelm Furtwängler (great conductor), Valéry Giscard
d’Estaing (economist and politician), Edouard Manet (impressionist
painter), Joseph Mankiewicz (film director), James Michener
(novelist), Boris Pasternak (novelist), Burt Reynolds (actor), Ruth
Rendell (writer), Muriel Spark (novelist). S UN A QUARIUS —128—
M OON S CORPIO A little theory makes sex more interesting, more comprehensible, and
less scary – too much is a put-down, especially as you’re likely to get it
out of perspective and become a spectator of your own performance.
DR ALEX COMFORT
Politics, as a practice, whatever its professions, has always been the
systematic organisation of hatreds.
HENRY BROOK ADAMS Themes
AIR/WATER Powerful intellect; keen insight; charismatic; detached
intensity; strong-willed; egotistic; stubborn; fiercely principled;
dogmatic; self-judging; ambitious; reformer; proud; self-reliant; an
astute observer; controlled sexuality; passionate yet dispassionate.
You have a powerful, magnetic personality which may have a hypnotic
effect on many people. Your character possesses a compelling blend of
broad social-intellectual concerns and passionate self-interest;
detached idealism and dark cynicism, the latter based on an intimate
understanding of your own appetites and emotional needs.
In general a ‘people’ person and an avid student of human nature,
you are popular because the intensity of your personality rarely lets up. Your obsessive individualism commands recognition – you convince
people of your importance and capability, inspiring some to follow you
to the ends of the Earth. Indeed, you may have the magnetism of a
demi-god and the confidence of a guru, but when you can conquer an
unbalanced desire for power and develop a more impartial approach
your achievements will have longer-lasting success. Freedom from
obsessive self-interest should be your aim.
A sort of commanding haughtiness and inner conviction that you
are ‘It’ usually draws people into your spell. But you are equally
capable of detached withdrawal and even contempt, especially if your
ego has been injured or unfairly treated. You may try to rise above
petty feelings, but you can carry resentment around inside for a long
time if injustice has been done. It is important that your conscious,
rational Aquarian side, which ‘knows’ itself to be fully self-determined
and uniquely in charge of your life, comes to understand and respect
your proud, emotionally possessive, instinctively voracious Scorpio
side, whose primitive needs, if unmet, can lead to manipulative
behaviour that can undermine your chances for emotional fulfilment.
In order for you to maintain peace between these two sides of yourself,
you must dig down deep to see what buried assumptions and denied
needs are at the root of a possible mind/feeling split. Like Dr Jekyll
and Mr Hyde, your intellectual and creative potential is enormous as
long as both sides are working harmoniously together instead of living
unconnected and mutually antagonistic lives – and this can only come
through profound self-knowledge.
Your Aquarian Sun is the rational scientist; your Scorpio Moon is
the hungry sensualist. Being deeply rooted in both realms gives you
powerful insight into the vast spectrum of human nature. You are a
good investigator of the human psyche and/or body, and you have the
instincts of the reformer who sees the hidden potential in the discarded
souls of life and can facilitate in their transformation. Can you embrace
the whole of yourself? Your brooding desires, hatreds, jealousies,
cravings, as well as your iconoclastic, individualistic Self which gazes
out over the pitiful human race in detached wonder? Relationships
Emotionally you are inclined to blow hot and cold. You have an ability
to marshal your passions in an almost machine-like manner, giving
total and all-absorbing attention to your loved one and demanding the
same in return. Your intensity guarantees that you get it, too.
You can be quite passionate when you decide to let yourself go.
Never frivolous with your feelings, you are pretty much an all-ornothing person who can become totally absorbed in a relationship. You
can surprise yourself with how deeply attached you become, and you
may use rational defences to protect you from your emotional
vulnerability. Your Greatest Strengths
Intense dedication to principles; loyalty to friends and family;
persevering and thorough approach to work; investigative turn of mind
and devotion to truth at any cost; courageous enthusiasm for reform
and desire to improve the welfare of others; capacity for living life to
the full. Your Greatest Weaknesses
Egoism and self-importance; tendency sometimes to get stuck in
prejudice and dogmatic opinions; a stern, exacting eye and unbending
standards; potential for ruthless behaviour and manipulation. Images for Integration
A scientist dissects a scorpion with great tenderness and absolute
precision … A researcher presents his findings to colleagues at a
‘Science For Humanity’ Conference … Jules Verne’s 20,000 Leagues
Under the Sea. Famous Personalities Henry Brook Adams (historian, writer), Princess Caroline of Monaco,
Carol Channing (actress), Alex Comfort (sexologist), James Dean
(actor), Guy Fawkes (English dissident), Zsa Zsa Gabor (actress),
Helen Gurley Brown (editor of Cosmopolitan ), Emily Harris
(revolutionary), Mario Lanza (singer and actor), Sinclair Lewis
(writer), Merle Oberon (actress), Paul Scofield (actor), Jules Verne
(writer), Kaiser Wilhelm Gêmeos (former German ruler), Robbie Williams
(actor). S UN A QUARIUS —129—
M OON S AGITTARIUS When I am … completely myself, entirely alone … my ideas flow best
and most abundantly. Whence and how these come I know not nor can
I force them … Nor do I hear in my imagination the parts successively,
but I hear them gleich alles zusammen (at the same time all together).
WOLFGANG AMADEUS MOZART
Liberty’s in every blow!
Let us do or die!
ROBERT BURNS
I am a sociable worker.
BRENDAN BEHAN Themes
AIR/FIRE Independent; philosophical mind; gregarious; adventurous;
rebellious; humanitarian; intellectual; inspirational; social concerns;
urge for expansion; verbose; big-hearted; tactless; confident; good
teacher; optimistic; zany humour.
Your character is large, open and breezy, and intensely honest, and you
have a marvellous lucidity of thought and expression that allows you,
in most cases, to go straight to the point. And you make your points (and plenty of them) with such impressive enthusiasm, conviction,
authoritative eloquence and wit that people tend to sit up and take
notice.
Your fine intellectual grasp makes you a natural leader, or at least a
leading thinker, in your social circle. You easily assume this role
because you are unafraid of speaking your mind, not because you want
the responsibility of leadership. You believe that uncompromising
courage and independence of character is the birthright and norm of all
peoples, and it takes you a while to learn that more emotional, fragile
souls feel differently. Timid folk admire your forthright, noble style
and many will envy your easy confidence. Likewise, however, people
occasionally suffer from your tactlessness as you charge full steam
ahead into your next exciting and worthy project.
You will attract many admirers and friends, people who know that
you do not compromise with Truth, and that what they see and hear is
what they will get. Optimistic, forward-thinking, something of a
visionary in many ways, your exceptional integrity makes your
deductions, opinions and viewpoints all the more valuable and weighty
in effect.
A natural teacher and moral authority, you thrive in areas where
your intellect is stretched and where your inventiveness can express
itself. Film and theatre work is also a natural place for you to express
your idealism and flair for the unusual. Sometimes you appear
detached and imperious, with the result that others may not challenge
or enter into debate with you since you are, without realizing it or
wanting to be, a little high-minded and abstract.
Something of an eccentric absent-minded professor, you have a
robust, gregarious, inspirational personality with tons of magnetism,
and a need for substantial variety, adventure, and intellectual challenge
in your life. Physical challenge will interest you, too – anything that
gets you out into the wide, open spaces. Relationships
Emotionally you are a bit difficult to bring down to Earth. You need
friendship, intellectual rapport, and have a great capacity for spontaneous play and spur-of-the-moment adventures, but you are not
particularly keen on commitment. Surprisingly, there is an awkward,
almost childlike, shyness about you – or perhaps it is more of an
innocence and trust in the goodness of people and the sense of
excitement that you bring to new relationships and activities.
Your instinct is to remain open to the possibilities that abound in
people and situations, but at the same time you seek intense personal
experiences. You need to remain in charge of your life, and a partner
who understands this, as well as being able to help you learn to relate
more sensitively, is the kind of partner with whom you will flourish.
You have to know that it is you who is choosing to remain faithful
rather than obeying some external restriction to your freedom of
movement. You like sharing your interests with your partner, but by
learning to pay attention to the more subtle details of relationships and
others’ needs, you will find your life expanding emotionally as well as
intellectually. Your Greatest Strengths
Ability to see the broad view; intellectual speed and agility;
philosophical resilience; optimism; love of learning; natural ability to
teach and inspire others; humanitarian heart; outrageous sense of
humour. Your Greatest Weaknesses
Tendency to rationalize and make sweeping generalizations; a rather
austere moral fervour; impatience with mundane details and the
restrictions of domestic life; proneness to preach when advancing your
pet causes; tendency to be tactless, blunt and unaware of the subtleties
of social intercourse. Images for Integration
A distinguished sociology professor throws a fancy-dress party for her
best friends … Indiana Jones founds a new university in the heart of the jungle … Alice in Wonderland. Famous Personalities
Jennifer Aniston (actress), Brendan Behan (playwright), Marisa
Berenson (actress), Robert Burns (poet), Lewis Carroll (writer), Alice
Cooper (singer), Ellen Degeneres (actress), Charles Dickens (writer),
David Jason (actor), Charles A. Lindbergh (aviator), Wolfgang
Amadeus Mozart (composer), Yoko Ono (wife of John Lennon), Justin
Timberlake (rock star). S UN A QUARIUS —130—
M OON C APRICORN With malice toward none, with charity for all, with firmness in the
right as God give us to see the right.
ABRAHAM LINCOLN
In Genesis it says that it is not good for a man to be alone, but
sometimes it’s a great relief.
JOHN BARRYMORE
It can be less painful for a woman not to hear the strange, dissatisfied
voice stirring within her.
BETTY FRIEDAN The Feminine Mystique Themes
AIR/EARTH Steadfast; resourceful; independent; honest; common
sense; dependable; shrewd; organizational talent; understanding;
practical wisdom; foresight; economic; paternal; brotherly; broadminded; practical reformer; applied technology; inventive.
You are a broad-minded, deeply thinking citizen of the world who feels
the yoke of personal responsibility to those less capable than yourself. Your complete integrity and dedicated search for a truth that is
practicable and helpful to the majority makes you loved and respected
by friends and colleagues. Honesty, firmness of purpose, and crystalclear foresight are your finest gifts, and make you an individual others
will not forget. They feel they can depend upon you utterly because
you believe in the highest and best in others, and therefore tend to
bring out the best.
You are like Old Abe – honest to the core, but as shrewd as they
come; the wielder of authority, supporter of the weak, the father and
the brother, the equal, the neighbour and the friend. A social being,
you are interested in society and its norms and needs, and you will
concern yourself with people in some way – leading them, thinking
and writing about them or taking care of them. You may sometimes be
torn between your humanitarian idealism and your instinctive cynicism
about human nature. In time and with effort, however, you will
normally be able to combine these two sides of yourself as you seek to
discover the good and valuable side of life and to adapt your
humanitarian values to the world as you find it.
You readily identify with all types of people, but you also know
how to get the best out of them and instil them with a sense of their
own dignity. Like Old Abe, you think that ‘God must have loved the
common man; he made so many of them’. And you, like God, will
love them too, more often than not in a paternalistic sort of way.
You are a rugged individualist. Directing your stern, selfdemanding ambition into realizing your whole, honourable self, you
create your own success. It is all the more splendid because of your
utter conviction to solid principles and because of your respect for
human worth and ethical conduct. All these qualities give you an
enormous appeal to many different types of people – superiors,
inferiors, royals, down-and-outs, strangers, next of kin. Talking to each
one in their own language, you can put them at ease, for they sense that
you understand them and that they are being treated as an equal in the
most exalted sense of the term.
Your natural authority seldom offends because it has an egalitarian
quality. You make a good manager, teacher, writer or actor – professions which require maximum self-motivation but which allow
for contact with and guidance of others. You stand on your own two
feet readily and happily, and very rarely do you lose sight of your aim.
Ambitious, yes, but only to be yourself, to find and perform your true
vocation, and hopefully to help others to do the same along the way. Relationships
Loyal and devoted to family and loved ones, you have difficulty,
however, in feeling really dependent on others. This keeps you
somewhat emotionally detached. Intimacy is not your strong point, nor
are you likely to go in for wild displays of emotion. You may be
attracted to emotional people – fire and water types – who help you to
overcome a certain austerity when it comes to enjoying yourself.
Losing control is not your style – it is messy and illogical and
somewhat beneath you. But despite your very rational approach, you
will always enjoy a challenge and a calculated risk – which
relationships will present. ‘Comport thyself with decorum’ could be
your unconscious watchword. Try not to dismiss emotional needs in
yourself and in others as a sign of weakness. Your Greatest Strengths
Integrity and personal honour; shrewd honesty; savvy of human
character; unspoilt fearlessness and dependability; sardonic sense of
humour; unique combination of common sense and humanitarian
feeling; foresight and willingness to work in the present for the future
good; ingenuity and problem solving. Your Greatest Weaknesses
Overstrict adherence to principles; no-frills approach to social life
which makes you a bit Spartan and uptight; logical approach to matters
of the heart with a tendency to remain aloof and self-contained; the
occasional proneness to pride and stubbornness. Images for Integration
A revolutionary is elected president … An alien civilization comes to
Earth to rescue man from imminent destruction. Famous Personalities
John Barrymore (actor), Thomas Edison (inventor), Mia Farrow
(actress), Betty Friedan (grandmother of feminist movement),
Abraham Lincoln (former American president), Rosa Parks (civil
rights leader), Ayn Rand (writer), Christina Ricci (actress), Mary
Quant (fashion designer), Franco Zeffirelli (film director). S UN A QUARIUS —131—
M OON A QUARIUS A religion can no more afford to degrade its Devil than to degrade its
God.
HAVELOCK ELLIS
Our differences are politics. Our agreements, principles.
WILLIAM MC KINLEY
Man-Watching: A field guide to human behaviour
TITLE OF BOOK BY DESMOND MORRIS Themes
AIR/AIR Detached friendliness; gregarious; eccentric lifestyle;
independent; highly observant; clear-headed; objective; progressive
thinker; scientifically oriented; helpful; well-meaning; open to the
unusual; idealistic; impractical; loyal; law unto yourself.
You may be sceptical of what follows because, more than anyone else,
you hate to be pigeon-holed. You are original, one-of-a-kind – aren’t
we all? But you do want the truth, the whole truth, and nothing but your truth – although your truth tends to encompass a very wide area
of abstract principles.
Are you the ever helpful friend or the rebel without a cause? Are
you the detached observer of society or the committed reformer? Are
you in fact torn between your humanitarian concerns and a fierce love
of your own independence? You are all these and an advanced thinker
as well, open to new ideas and social, philosophical and scientific
innovations. Your forward-looking and prophetic vision of the world
helps you see what needs doing long before most people do, and as a
result you are rarely shocked by the bizarre.
Although you consider yourself to be, and indeed are, an
emminently reasonable person, your own eccentricities, which you
may not notice yourself, can often startle others and rock the boat. You
would hate to be thought of as selfish or difficult – you espouse the
complete opposite in terms of values – but your maverick spirit seems
to demand total acceptance. And you prefer to keep relations on an
intellectual basis – surely, you think, it is possible to solve all problems
by bringing them to the bar of reason. This attitude taken to the
extreme can make you an unfeeling sort of person who turns
everything about life into a mechanism to be rationally understood.
Your idealism may take you into politics or social work where your
genuine compassion for human problems can be practically applied.
Although you may not be the most socially well-adapted person, you
are always there for your friends – being a generous, selfless person is
your ideal. But no-one should ever take you for granted, for you are no
doormat and you can say ‘No’ quite as strongly as you can say ‘Yes’ if
your good nature is abused.
You value tolerance, cooperation and harmonious camaraderie, and
will assume that you behave according to these ideal norms, but in
practice no-one can tell you what to do! You genuinely care about the
greatest good for all, but you want to do things in your own way. This
can produce run-ins with authority figures. You abhor petty rules and
regulations and imagine that everyone is as honest as you are.
Whether a friend or foe of society, it is society that makes you tick.
That is, people, their beliefs, and the way they make the world turn
round is what interests you. You look at the ideas that underlie human behaviour and try to think of some even better ones that will improve
things for everyone. It is the fact that you identify with this ‘everyone’
so much that leaves you short-changed when it comes to a sense of
personal self. It might be hard for you to say what that would be,
divorced from the group and the ideals that give your life meaning. So
whilst your idealism can be a great thing for the world, it makes you a
difficult person to know intimately. You feel more comfortable
working to make the world a better place than you do working on a
one-to-one relationship. You need plenty of rest and respite to calm
your overactive mind and to allow you to come back to Earth. Relationships
You are a wonderful friend, loyal to the end and willing to help others
realize their goals. Indeed you know no stranger, and your zany,
independent personality means you make friends with all types of
human beings – you find each one interesting and valuable in some
way.
When it comes to close relationships and real passion, however,
you can feel uncomfortable and inadequate. You may find it difficult to
engage emotionally with one person. Because you dislike restraints of
any kind and tend to live in your head, you may wrongly assume that
you do not need the day-to-day, cosy and dependent sort of
relationships which, you may feel, tie you down and rope you in. In
fact, your partner does need to be adaptable and understanding to allow
for the surprises and abrupt inspirations of your highly individualistic
nature. But you would benefit from someone who can show you that
feelings are not so frightening, and that your emotional and physical
needs are just as valid as your intellectual ones. Interestingly, you may
be drawn to dramatic and highly-charged relationships so that you can
be opened to the passion and intimacy that you secretly crave. Your Greatest Strengths
Gift for friendship; ability to understand objectively the principles
underlying any problem you observe; humanitarian concern for the welfare of your fellow human beings; courage and commitment to
your ideals; eternal sense of hope and belief in human potential. Your Greatest Weaknesses
Emotional naivety and impersonal approach to relationships; tendency
to over-identify with causes; a blunt, insensitive and overcritical
approach to comparing people with your ideals; proneness to leave
abruptly when the going gets too emotional and impinges on your
freedom. Images for Integration
A friend to all the world looks in the mirror and takes time out to
befriend herself … The living, breathing entity we call society … The
Jolly Green Giant. Famous Personalities
Claire Bloom (actress), Ronald Colman (actor), Angela Davis (militant
social activist), Havelock Ellis (physician and psychologist), William
McKinley (former American president), Desmond Morris
(anthropologist and writer), August Piccard (physicist and balloonist),
Jackie Robinson (baseball player), George Segal (actor), Belle Star
(who sheltered Jesse James), Princess Stephanie of Monaco, François
Truffaut (film producer), Charles Young (American footballer). —132—
S UN A QUARIUS M OON Plutão ISCES Who relies on the natural currents of God’s will attains freedom from
all worldly cares and anxieties, and nothing can ever chain him again.
RAMAKRISHNA I don’t want to sound pious and prudish, but my responsibility is … to
proclaim something which I believe it is my duty and my calling to
proclaim.
REVEREND DONALD SOPER Themes
AIR/WATER Independent but vulnerable; thinker and poet; altruistic;
loyal; universal outlook; eccentric; gullible; kind; sympathetic; kind
and humorous; intuitive; social conscience; humanitarian;
psychological insight; loves people; reverent; forgiving; committed to
a cause.
Are you the observant, sensible, scientific type who is strangely
attracted to weird phenomena? Are you open, easy-going, and friendly,
available and helpful to all, but quaking inside because you fear that
your soft, vulnerable little voice will not be heard? You are an enigma,
as much to yourself as to others at times. At one level you are perky
and independent, and at another you are a dreamy sentimentalist,
happy to blend in with your surroundings. You appear to have a
confident mental grasp on life and know exactly where you are, but
inside you often struggle with self-doubt.
You are genuinely gregarious and intelligently concerned about
people and about a mixture – perhaps an odd one – of social causes
and metaphysical ideas. Your friendliness hides a sensitive and
precarious inner core, however, which few people ever really get to
know. You are one of the most sociable people in the zodiac –
sympathetic, helpful, enjoying the fellowship of a wide range of people
and eager to learn. Your inclination is to reach out to people – you
want to be involved in a way that makes a difference, and you are
deeply nourished and your ego is boosted when your efforts elicit a
positive emotional response.
You strive to be an independent thinker and generally like to do
your own thing. You will make a stand for the things you believe in,
but you secretly hope you will not have to do it alone. Whether it is in
science, the arts or metaphysics, the challenge of new frontiers attracts you, and it will be due as much to the romance of the role you might
play as to the soundness of the principle at stake. Your insights can be
very creative and fertile because you back up your thinking with real
feeling – you care deeply about both the ideas and the people in your
life. Your broad, almost visionary viewpoint and your disarming
sympathy for other people makes you a touch eccentric but popular,
too.
If your Aquarian side is dominant, you may have a view of
scientists as an international brotherhood striving to uncover the truth
for the benefit of humankind. If your Piscean side is stronger, you may
feel that circuses and seances are as essential to a healthy life as three
meals a day and eight hours of sleep.
You want to be of service to the world, to be connected in a
meaningful way. No matter how busy you are you will make time for
whatever philanthropic pursuit grabs your imagination. People know
you are honourable, and if you ever chastise someone you do it with
gentle humour – you know you have been there yourself. Your
compassion for and understanding of human nature makes you well
suited for work with people, either in education, the ministry or the
caring/medical professions. You treat people as equals, and with great
respect. You make a wonderful teacher because you are able to bring
out the inner resources in others which they do not even realize they
possess. Relationships
Matters of the heart bring out the paradox of your intense romanticism
and rational realism. In close relationships you have a quality of
detachment yet involvement that can make you very alluring
emotionally. Your mixture of spontaneous, warm sympathy and
detached intelligence makes you a wonderful friend, but sometimes
your partner will want a lover when you feel like being friends and
vice versa.
You want gentleness and intimacy but you may hide behind the
nonchalance of your airy Sun when you feel too vulnerable. Often you
will want to abandon yourself completely to the object of your affections, and yet you cannot help noticing his or her shortcomings.
Your sensitivity makes you rebellious as well, ready to run or escape to
some Utopian dream-world when you feel badly treated or fenced in.
Basically, you are both likeable and loveable and very loyal to
loved ones in your own fashion. You just need to stay in the ‘real
world’ a bit more and accept the fact that you are tough enough to
survive the ups and downs of love. Your Greatest Strengths
Rich imagination and universal outlook; devout commitment to social
causes; friendly, accepting and understanding nature; ability to work
and mix with all types of people. Your Greatest Weaknesses
Tendency to be impractical and evasive; proneness to drift too much
and waste energy in day-dreams, and to let your idealism turn into
gullibility. Images for Integration
A scientist sings grand opera … A brilliant inventor takes a sabbatical
on a desert island. Famous Personalities
George Balanchine (choreographer), Sacha Distel (singer), Eddie
Izzard (comedian), Eartha Kitt (singer and entertainer), Dick Martin
(comedian), Paul Newman (actor), Ramakrishna (Hindu mystic), Franz
Schubert (composer), Roger Vadim (film producer), King Vidor (film
director). Chapter Fifteen
SUN IN PISCES
—133—
S UN Plutão ISCES M OON A RIES There is nothing – absolutely nothing – half so much worth doing as
simply messing about in boats.
THE WIND IN THE WILLOWS , KENNETH GRAHAME
Every day in every way, I am getting better and better.
EMILE COUE Themes
WATER/FIRE Romantic; independent; sensitive; affectionate;
adventurer; big talker; understanding; touchy; quarrelsome; humble
but self-centred; fun-loving; moody; vivid imagination; artistic; wilful;
nervous; quick thinker.
Are you a sensitive, introverted poet, or a confident explorer and
crusader for the truth as you see it? Sometimes you feel passive,
dreamy, private and emotional, preferring to observe the world around
you from your inner sanctum whilst you let your keen intuition absorb
data and form opinions and preferences from a position of safety.
Other times you express your self-sufficiency and alert, analytical
mind in no uncertain terms, and suprise people with your sudden
authority and independence.
You exude an easygoing but gutsy sort of exterior which protects a
very emotional, sensitive heart. Very much your own person, you are courageous enough to explore ideas, people and different avenues of
self-expression, and you do not shrink from claiming your rights and
declaring what you want. But you are also sympathetic and yielding
when emotional harmony is what you want (which is most of the
time), and certainly friendly comraderie and affectionate relations are
essential for your wellbeing.
You are a curious mix of the meek and mild, and the militant. You
can be defensive and moody, temperamental and argumentative if your
fragile ego is disturbed or if you are defending a pet cause. You know
what you know and demand to be heard. This trait can cause a lot of
ups and downs in your close relationships, for though you thrive on
intimacy and affection, you tend to rock the boat the minute you think
your loved one has assumed your compliance on some issue. You feel
with your ego and think with your heart, which makes your reactions a
bit biased. If, instead of reacting so quickly, you could slow down and
respond reflectively to friends, lovers or imagined opponents, the inner
calm that you need so much would not be threatened.
In fact, your selfishness is not as gargantuan as it sometimes
seems, and you are really one of the most gentle souls around. Your
creative conflict is to do with the fact that you are partly a ‘me first’
person and partly an ‘I’ll do anything in the world for you’ sort of
person as well. The extreme paradox between romantic vulnerability
and forthright assertiveness keeps you pretty restless and your
imagination easily aroused.
Essentially easygoing, adaptable, readily imposed upon because of
your kindness and helpfulness, you may often feel you must defend the
know-it-all maverick individualist inside who wants to be recognized
as the winner, the hero, the best. Ultimately you combine gentleness
and spunk, imagination and energy, compassion and frankness. You are
a quietly theatrical virtuoso, unselfconsciously in tune with people as
well as with your own substantial talents and the joy they bring you. Relationships
One of the most romantic of all Sun – Moon combinations, you yearn
for the bliss of union and then, when you have found him or her, you throw yourself impetuously into a relationship. You can be sweet, selfsacrificing, and sympathetic, but then you suddenly pull away, pick a
fight, or in some way reclaim your sense of self. You are moody and
not always easy to live with, but you would not wilfully hurt your
loved one, and are always ready to forgive.
You may remain something of an enigma to your loved one, but he
or she can usually boast that you are a devoted friend, a lively
companion and a romantic artist who can turn any adventure into a
song or a poem. You may in fact find that music is your best medium,
as it helps to soothe the emotional flare-ups that disturb your repose. Your Greatest Strengths
Quiet charisma; warmth and optimism; frank spirit and jovial fellow
feeling; combined sensitivity and impetuosity, which makes you fun to
be with; ability to enter the race whilst at the same time encouraging
the very best in your opponents; capacity to laugh at human nature and
bounce back. Your Greatest Weaknesses
Fear that your abilities and worth will not be noticed, making you go
overboard in your efforts to win; tendency to be touchy and
argumentative and to take yourself too seriously; inclination to be at
the mercy of emotional fluctuations between selfishness and
consideration for others, and an inner frustration when to do one seems
to totally deny the other. Image for Integration
In tattered rags, the small, obscure young servant named Arthur pulls
the sword from the stone and becomes king of Camelot. Famous Personalities Virginia Bottomley (politician), Emile Coue (psychologist), Jean
Harlow (actress), Holly Hunter (actress), Galileo (astronomer), Rex
Harrison (actor), William Hurt (actor), Renoir (artist), Johann Strauss
Snr (composer), Richard Tarnas (philosopher/author). —134—
S UN Plutão ISCES M OON T AURUS Castles in the air – they’re so easy to take refuge in. So easy to build
too.
HENRIK IBSEN , THE MASTER BUILDER
Does the poet create … the thing called a poem, or is his behaviour
merely the product of his genetic and environmental histories ?
B.F. SKINNER Themes
WATER/EARTH Caring and capable; emotionally demonstrative; a
practical romantic; sensual; sociable; charming; seductive; fairminded; sensitive to beauty; love of harmony; devoted; helpful; bighearted; artistic; musical; moody; manipulative; strives for security; a
dreamer and a realist.
Do you easily drift off into your vivid fantasy world or do you get
stuck into the practicalities of everyday life? Are you a pushover for
romance but turned off by material insecurity? Do you need lots of
love and affection but surprise yourself by your own capacity for
shrewd, independent, decisive action when it comes to your best
interests?
You are a warm, idealistic, sweet-tempered person, and can makebelieve – for a while – that you are not interested in the things of this
world. Beauty, art, music, love, the intangibles of life are what matter
to you. This is true, but if you deny your material wants you become
deeply unsettled. Emotional and spiritual values inform your behaviour and dealings with the world, but you know that a solid material
foundation will support your dedication to loftier or more personal
pursuits.
Your gentle, compassionate nature is backed up by a real stubborn
streak which serves you well. You may appear compliant and lowprofile, but you instinctively know what is right for you, and your quiet
strength lets people know that you are not to be trifled with.
You combine a vivid, rich imagination with a solid, down-to-earth
pragmatism. Once you have put down roots and feel secure, your
fertile imagination can blossom. Even if you do not develop a career in
the arts, you will need some outlet for creative self-expression in your
life. Whilst you may have elegant, artistic taste and a highly developed
appreciation of music and literature, you are also something of a
simple nature mystic who comes alive when your senses meet the
sounds, scents, sights and tactile sensations of the countryside.
You have a deep love for life and all its delights, and your capacity
for enjoyment can have a beneficial effect on others, helping them to
relax and enter into the convivial ambience and magic of the moment.
Although in many ways you are a conventional creature of habit, you
have enough common sense to know when to abandon the chores for
the spontaneous picnic, party or sing-along.
In happy, harmonious atmospheres you become more of an
extrovert and more confident in sharing your thoughts and feelings
which are never far from the surface. When you have the harmony,
beauty, love and comforts you feel you need, you can be the most
contented of people. You are loyal, sensitive, and imaginatively
attentive with both friends and family. You want the same treatment for
yourself, and you will not stand for harsh treatment or anything less
than what you feel you need and deserve. This quality, plus your innate
dependability and patience, makes you ideally suited for work with
people, such as in education, medicine and social work. Relationships
You have a charming, sociable, sensual nature which comes to life
when you are in love and in a satisfying relationship. In fact, a rich, happy love life is central to your sense of well-being. Romantic and
yet domestic and practical, soft-hearted and sensitive yet unflappable
in times of struggle, you enjoy making your nest and are an ideal mate
– as long as your partner does not want to go trekking in the
Himalayas.
You love the good life but it would be pretty meaningless without
someone to share it all with. This makes you a very satisfying person
to be with as you have a natural instinct for keeping the daily round
ticking over whilst also stopping to smell the roses as often as you like.
But there is a paradox within you that could cause some conflict in
relationships: your Taurean side is independent, capable, and wants to
get on with its own concerns, whilst your Piscean side is more
vacillating, insecure, and needy of encouragement. It is best to be
honest with yourself about your neediness (and your possessiveness!)
so that you do not unwittingly manipulate loved ones into giving you
what you need. It does not take much to win you over – lots of
physical affection and the sharing of dreams will keep the romance
alive no matter how much is in the bank. Your Greatest Strengths
Sensual imagination and feeling for music and art; vivid awareness of
other people’s feelings; warm, accepting and affectionate nature;
appreciation of beauty and the simple pleasures of life and friendship;
ability to bring your romance down to earth and realize your dreams. Your Greatest Weaknesses
A strongly subjective and emotional view of life; possessiveness;
tendency to manoeuvre situations to satisfy your security needs, and to
be stubborn, old-fashioned, and to cling to the past. Images for Integration
A nature mystic bakes bread in an earth oven … An artist decorates
her home lavishly. Famous Personalities
André Breton (poet), Edgar Cayce (clairvoyant), Tirso de Molina
(playwright), Pico Della Mirandola (neo-Platonist), Fats Domino (jazz
musician), Bobby Fischer (chess champion), Kenneth Grahame
(author), Henrik Ibsen (writer), Jerry Lewis (actor), Pier Paolo Pasolini
(poet, novelist and film director), Courtney Pine (jazzmusician),
Andres Segovia (classical guitarist), B.F. Skinner (psychologist), Julie
Walters (actress). —135—
S UN Plutão ISCES M OON G EMINI No good opera plot can be sensible, for people do not sing when they
are feeling sensible.
W.H. AUDEN
A professor is one who talks in someone else’s sleep.
W.H. AUDEN
If youth is a defect, it is one that we outgrow too soon.
ROBERT LOWELL Themes
WATER/AIR Fanciful; eccentric; humorous; poetic; intuitive; love of
language and symbolic logic; wordy; expressive; lack of confidence;
intellectual versatility; alternating sociability and shyness; blow with
the wind; quick thinker; temperamental; nervous; talkative; eternal
youth; fun-loving.
Do you sometimes say what you feel before you have even thought it?
Do you consider yourself a rational, sensible person whose willingness
to look at the whole spectrum of views sabotages your confidence?
You think with your heart and feel with your head. Trying to make those lines of communication hook up inside you can sometimes feel
like trying to solve an unsolvable maze.
At your best you are the epitome of feminine intuition – acute
perceptions and a rich imagination enable you to respond to people and
situations with accuracy and subtlety. But at your worst you use
perverse inflexibility to mask your indecision and lack of confidence.
There is something about you which is eternally youthful, magically
spontaneous and vividly expressive of the ideas and images that inspire
you. You are full of hopes and wishes, plans and schemes, interests and
hobbies, things you ‘might do’ if … if you do not have a change of
heart mid-stream. For you, the answer is always blowing in the wind,
and you are the original weather-vane personality.
Extremely sensitive, sympathetic and receptive to others, you
delight in congenial companionship and can be wooed into intimate
confidence easily. Your natural emotional inclination is to trust, to feel
at one, to relax and let down barriers. You are fascinated by people and
know no strangers, although at the same time your receptivity and
vulnerability at first makes you timid. You test the water before you
jump in, but all the same you are like the child who just cannot wait to
have a good splash.
Inwardly you have a kind of running commentary on how you are
experiencing people and situations, and you tend to think on your feet
and to find out what you are really feeling whilst talking out loud. You
have a love of images and words, and can be seduced by the sound of
your own voice. But although you may often sound impressive and
clever, you are not nearly as stable and self-assured as you seem. You
do not exactly make it up as you go along, but you have to keep
yourself from going down blind alleys and pursuing red herrings. You
easily get worried, nervous, doubtful and disoriented, and need to take
care that negative thought patterns do not consume all your creative
energy. Relationships
A strong, unwavering partner is good for you, as stability is the thing
you lack. Affectionate and playful, you love the romantic word-play of relationships, and will evaporate like an ephemeral undine under the
dead hand of rigid, possessive love. Variety, poetry, romance and lighthearted fun is what you want. And plenty of tenderness, for you are
ultra-sensitive and can get your feelings hurt easily through
misunderstandings. You need intellectual rapport and emotional
sensitivity, and if you begin to lose interest you can develop a roving
eye.
You can unwittingly become overdependent on your partner to
supply interest, stimulation and, ultimately, purpose in your life.
Boredom is often a sign that you need to take yourself more seriously.
You need a variety of friends, but you also need to apply your own
talents in a committed way. Your strengths and talents find an excellent
outlet in music, painting and acting, as well as areas that require quickthinking, diplomacy and playing the host. You can adapt yourself well
to almost any sphere of endeavour if you practise staying in tune with
what you really think before jumping into action. Your Greatest Strengths
Potential creativity of your intellect and imagination; ability for fun
and mimicry; diplomacy and appreciation of a wide variety of people;
fluency and original self-expression; forgiving nature; open, childlike
attitude to life. Your Greatest Weaknesses
A lack of confidence in who you really are; tendency to vacillate and
skim the surface; to be fickle and uncommitted in relationships;
proneness to wallow in daydreams, self-doubt and self-pity; and to live
according to an ever-changing relative morality. Images for Integration
A child grips his magic red balloon as it lifts him into the sky and over
the sea onto an island of eternal beauty … A schoolboy daydreams of
heroic deeds during a class on the romantic poets. Famous Personalities
Anthony Armstrong-Jones (photographer), W.H. Auden (poet), Ray
Bremser (poet), Adelle Davis (nutritionist), Henry Dixon Cowell
(composer), Roger Daltry (singer), Douglas Hurd (politician), Robert
Lowell (poet), Stephane Mallarme (symbolist poet), Richard Burton
Matheson (writer of science fiction), Bob Richards (track and field
Olympic champion), Gioacchino Rossini (composer), Ann Sheridan
(actress), Albert Carel Willink (neo-realist painter), Harold Wilson
(politician). —136—
S UN Plutão ISCES M OON C ANCER Attention is religious, or it is nothing.
ALAIN EMILE CHARTIER
Many people consider the things which government does for them to
be social progress, but they consider the things government does for
others as socialism.
JUSTICE EARL WARREN
For observe, that to hope for Paradise is to live in Paradise, a very
different thing from actually getting there.
VITA SACKVILLE -WEST Themes
WATER/WATER Ultra-sensitive; emotional; romantic; thoughtful and
caring; social awareness; philanthropic; nurturing; colourful
imagination; introspective; vacillating moods; intuitive; timid; healer;
poetic; funny; good mimic; sense of humour; versatile; retiring.
Matters of the heart rule your life utterly – you need to be in love, to be
loved, and to give love (not necessarily in that order). Your emotional life is the hub of your world and you need to be in a relationship to be
happy.
You instinctively give generously and unconditionally, but can
easily get hurt and moody if you sense your ministrations are not
appreciated and returned. Extremely protective and secretive, you
nevertheless end up wearing your heart on your sleeve. Your emotional
antennae are so fine-tuned that you may occasionally need to turn the
volume down so that you can just get on with normal life. Unpleasant
atmospheres will do you no good. You soak in the vibes, merge with
the mood, and probably alternate between romantically rushing in with
open arms and scampering away to hide under a rock.
You want to get involved, for being closely involved with others is
your life-blood. Your sympathetic attitude, and your ability to know
others psychically, draws people to you. They feel that their deepest
secrets can be trusted with you, and this characteristic makes you
ideally suited for counselling or healing work, or for a life in the
ministry, or in the police force. You can identify with people’s pain and
fear because you have had plenty to deal with of your own. But when
you are in touch with your innate strengths, you can transform fear of
the world into understanding, and then can apply it with wisdom in
your work.
Although you want to be close to others, you will find that the
more closely you are involved with your own artistic impulse and selfexpression, the less like an oceanic storm will your emotional life be.
You do not always make it easy for people to get to know you. You are
cagey, defensive, wily, even devious if you feel it is necessary. Early
on you figure out ways of protecting yourself whilst obtaining what
you want.
Sometimes it is difficult for you to express yourself clearly, and
then you get moody and unreasonable and retreat even more. Normally
quiet and unobstrusive, when you open up you can be a riotous clown
and a hilarious mimic. With family and friends, you let down your
guards and become a zany bon vivant.
There is a very theatrical side to you, and you need to honour your
fantasies and imagination by expressing yourself artistically – through
painting, photography, music or poetry. You feel the pathos of life and may successfully take your need to communicate your own inner
drama onto the stage. Relationships
Although you fear getting hurt, you are far more emotionally resilient
than you think. You come alive in a warm, happy relationship in which
you can give of yourself generously and be appreciated and adored. At
times you may play the role of the parent, clucking and cooing over
your loved ones whilst they bask in your maternal love. But you can
just as easily slip into the role of the naughty child who periodically
abandons him or herself to fantasies. You have a way of losing
yourself to the drama and sweet sorrow of love, so you must be careful
not to become the martyr and doormat in a relationship that has
become an addiction.
Although you have an enigmatic quality to your love nature, you
actually tend to be quite conventional and traditional, loving
domesticity and family life. As a natural carer, you will thrive when
people need you, depend on you, and give you that blissful feeling of
indispensability. You give your loved ones enormous consideration and
tenderness, and if you do not get the same back you worry and
eventually feel resentment. You need a partner you can rely on, and
you may even develop a knack of looking slightly pathetic and needy
so that he or she will dissolve in sympathy for you. Your Greatest Strengths
Genuinely compassionate and warm-hearted nature; instinctive
understanding of the human mind and heart; adaptability and
versatility in the face of vacillating fortunes; colourful imagination and
flair for the dramatic. Your Greatest Weaknesses
Timidity and fearfulness; oversensitivity and tendency to take offence
at the slightest provocation; proneness to let other, more extrovert, personalities define or limit your creative potential. Images for Integration
An actress plays Clara Barton and is so inspired by her life that she
leaves the theatre to become a doctor … A school of fish … A medical
missionary voyages to the east … We’ll meet again. Famous Personalities
Drew Barrymore (actor), Shelley Berman (comedian), Cyd Charisse
(dancer), Alain Emile Chartier (philosopher), Kurt Cobain (rock star),
Vera Lynn (singer), Meissonier (artist), Liza Minelli (actress), Linus
Pauling (Nobel prize-winning chemist), Vita Sackville-West (poet),
Heita Villa-Lobos (composer), Nancy Wilson (singer). —137—
S UN Plutão ISCES M OON L EO To be a liberated woman is to … acknowledge that the CinderellaPrince Charming story is a child’s fairy tale.
CLARE BOOTH LUCE
The relative positions to be assumed by man and woman in the
working out of our civilization were assigned long ago by a higher
intelligence than ours.
GROVER CLEVELAND
These odd bits of drama are all part of the business of survival; a
small price to pay for the joy of being able to see, taste, hear, feel …
AINSLIE ROBERTS Themes WATER/FIRE Emotional; moody; sociable; articulate; sensitive; lively
inner world; idealistic; imaginative; apparent sureness but inner
insecurity; flair for the dramatic; strong moral sense; humanitarian
artist; receptive; big-hearted; compassionate; the tragic romantic; hero
worship; self-hood through self-immolation.
Do you have visions of great stardom and original accomplishment but
find in reality you are temperamentally a servant? Do you give the
impression of confidence and capability but quietly quake at the mere
thought of competition?
Your essential nature is one of humility, devoted affection and
service. But within you is an image of yourself which is heroic, grand
and regal, wanting pride of place and position and needing huge
amounts of admiration and attention. You may not always express this
side of yourself in outward activities, for you are never as sure of
yourself as you would like to be – or as you seem to be.
You are a good actor – effusive, demonstrative, vivacious, selfindulgent and warm. But you are also moody, and prone to spending a
lot of energy brooding, worrying and feeling inadequate underneath
your convivial and kind-hearted persona. It is as though a part of you
feels strangely invisible to the world whilst at the same time yearns for
the spotlight, admiration and respect.
You are a person of strong moral convictions and often unwordly,
rarified aspirations. Extremely kind-hearted and generous, your
instinct is to enliven and encourage others, to demonstrate in your
behaviour and relationships the most noble way to live a life. This may
seem a tall order, and indeed sometimes you dissolve under the weight
of your own honour.
A strong humanitarian feeling could take you into a public-service
role of some kind where you derive both a sense of usefulness and
importance. On the other hand, you may eschew noble service for a
more artistic way of life, on the stage or in some similar area (music,
writing or painting) where you can live out your colourful fantasies
and romantic longings.
Your inspirations fluctuate wildly, as does your confidence. In fact,
confidence has a way of eluding you when it comes down to the real contest of life – unless you have really discovered your purpose and
have realized that your individuality can shine and radiate force and
magnanimity in even the most menial of positions.
Sometimes you feel invisible around people, and then you have to
burst with dramatic self-expression to let others know there is a lot
going on inside you – and that you are not to be taken lightly. Your
personality is a blend of the most feminine understanding and tender
sympathies, with the most masculine creative vitality and dignity. In
your heart of hearts you are a servant and an artist, a whimsical poet
and a noble autocrat, and you have to find some way of blending into
the larger scheme of things whilst at the same time expressing what is
deeply and personally meaningful to you. Relationships
When it comes to love, you are up there with the top five per cent of
the most romantic Sun – Moon combinations. You need romance and
love; you need to be adored. And there could not be anyone more
generous, loyal or kind-hearted than you. But you are often an enigma
to live with. One minute you are warm, self-assured and upbeat; the
next you might clam up in a mysterious mood of self-pity and
huffiness.
Emotionally volatile and vulnerable, you need to be aware of just
how impressionable and dependent you can be. This is because you
imagine yourself, and often seem to be, very strong and independent
when actually you are quaking inside. You must learn not to expect
your loved one necessarily to know how you are feeling or what you
are thinking. You have high standards, although you are forgiving and
will put up with a lot if someone has won your respect and love. A
stable, earthy partner will help you settle down and establish the secure
home you so much need in order to thrive. Your Greatest Strengths
Intuitive insight; artistic talents and flair for self-dramatization;
undying service and devotion to loved ones. Your Greatest Weaknesses
Tendency to worry and doubt your abilities; fear of competition;
moodiness and instability; proneness to dramatize your weaknesses in
order to manipulate others’ sympathy. Image for Integration
Cinderella sits by the fire mending her ballgown and daydreams about
her romantic evening of dance, glamour and high drama. Famous Personalities
Clare Booth Luce (politician and journalist), Tanya Boyd (model and
actress), Gordon Brown (politician), Chelsea Clinton (daughter of Bill
and Hillary Clinton), Mikhail Gorbachev (former president of the
Soviet Union), Tony Lema (golfer), David Mellor (politician), Ralph
Nader (consumer advocate), Ainsley Robert (writer and painter),
Ronald Searle (cartoonist), Jimmy Swaggert (televangelist), John
Updike (novelist and critic), Antonio Vivaldi (composer), Lawrence
Welk (television-show host). —138—
S UN Plutão ISCES M OON V IRGO Without forgiveness life is governed by … an endless cycle of
resentment and retaliation.
ROBERTO ASSAGIOLI
It is well for people who think to change their minds occasionally in
order to keep them clean.
LUTHER BURBANK
Every parting gives a foretaste of death; every coming together again
a foretaste of the resurrection. ARTHUR SCHOPENHAUER Themes
WATER/EARTH Analysis and synthesis; wide-ranging mind; good
memory; nervous and fretful; thoughtful; witty; analytical; perceptive;
kind; large-minded but good with detail; discerning but forgiving; an
artist-scientist; a logical metaphysician; a quiet thinker; ironic;
humorous; refined tastes; devoted servant.
Are you an artist who is impossible to pin down, or are you a down-toearth realist? Do you want to take everything apart and put it under a
microscope, or do you want to stand back and capture the grand
design?
Your personality is a potentially very creative combination as it is a
confrontation between intuition and reason, imagination and practical
logic, the capacity for infinite understanding and for fastidiously
precise judgements. You get an overall ‘feel’ for things – people or
ideas – and then your fine analytical mind comes into play, putting
your hunches to work in precise ways. The true essence of a person or
situation speaks to your heart in a manner that defies scientific
explanation. You then mould your behaviour in a modest,
conscientious way that serves the emotional impression which has
moved you.
When you get it together, you have natural organizational gifts.
The broad brush-stroke and the fine line detail come equally easy to
you, giving you an ability to hold the wider vision whilst attending to
specifics. When you are able to combine your accurate sense of detail
with your rich imagination, and your instinct for duty with your
romantic, intuitive grasp of life’s meaning, you can be a powerful force
for good and an accurate barometer of soundness in people, policies
and ideas.
The dilemma in you between your instinct to keep your feet on the
ground and your desire simply to escape from life’s pressures can be
very strong. As the saying about Pisces goes, you cannot stand too
much reality. This is due to your extreme sensitivity, and you need to be careful about what kind of atmospheres you live and work in. Crass
and cruel traits in people can really get you down, yet you do
sympathize with suffering, and want progress in real terms. You will
happily work for the goals of improving social conditions, offering the
principles and practices that restore health, helping lives become more
sane and worth living.
The health of mind and body is often a primary interest. You know
that you cannot have one without the other. Because you are a fullMoon personality, however, the interaction between your irrational,
emotional nature and your instinct for orderly categorization of
experience may at first be felt as difficult, and the two sides of you
may seem irreconcilable. Your feelings and hunches may lead you in a
direction you feel you must defend logically, and so you end up
weaving intricate arguments that make your philosophy believable. If
it makes sense to you, then it is alright. An individualist with a deep
moral conviction about all you do, you are not, however, inflexible or
dogmatic. Your views develop with experience, your outlook changes,
your compassion deepens whilst your sense of duty remains intact.
A mystic can be defined as someone whose head is in Heaven and
whose feet are on Earth. And that is a trick you manage with admirable
ease, moving between the loftiest visions and their most down-to-earth
and prosaic implementation. This combination of mysticism and
matter-of-factness makes you one of those rare individuals who feels at
home in almost any environment. Relationships
The ‘other’ in your life is of immense importance to you, so much so
that you may not want to admit that you need him or her as much as
you do. Although your kindness and helpfulness is appreciated by
many, living with you is not altogether easy. On the one hand you can
be dreamy, devoted and caring, and on the other hand you can be cool,
overly efficient and critical.
Although you are affectionate and sentimental rather than wildly
passionate, your desire to drift off into romantic reverie can alarm your
tidy, cerebral side. You try to defend yourself from the vulnerability of your feelings by slotting yourself into routines, by escaping behind a
book or a garden patch. This can make you nervous and vacillating,
unsure and unsettled with your lot in life.
You need intellectual rapport with your partner, and you thrive with
a little encouragement, respect and trust. Your gentle adaptability,
original brain and sense of humour make you a tremendously
enjoyable person to know and love. Your Greatest Strengths
Breadth of outlook; ability and willingness to look at any question
from all angles; equal strengths of intuition and logic; kindness;
forgiving nature; ironic sense of humour which helps you redeem the
tragic side of life. Your Greatest Weaknesses
Perfectionism; overly critical attitude to others; tendency to worry, feel
unsettled and escape into fantasies or defensive addictions; proneness
to confuse what you feel about something with what you rationally
think you should do about it. In your combination, heart and mind can
complement each other or clash. Images for Integration
A mosaic picture of the universe, each piece perfect in itself … Small
events bring enormous consequences … Faith and reason shake hands. Famous Personalities
Douglas Adams (writer), Roberto Assagioli (psychologist), Alexander
Graham Bell (physicist and inventor), Luther Burbank (geneticist),
Peter Fonda (actor), Gabriel Garcia Marquez (writer), Charles Goren
(contract-bridge master), Otto Hahn (research chemist), John Irving
(writer), Karl Jaspers (psychiatrist and philosopher), Edward Kennedy
(politician), Jack Kerouac (beatnik writer), Glenn Miller (band leader), Lou Reed (singer), Arthur Schopenhauer (philosopher), Gloria
Vanderbilt (heiress, actress and painter), Irving Wallace (writer). —139—
S UN Plutão ISCES M OON L IBRA How do I love thee? Let me count the ways.
ELIZABETH BARRETT BROWNING
As life is action and passion, it is required of man that he should share
the passion and action of his time, at peril of being judged not to have
lived.
OLIVER WENDELL HOLMES JR. Themes
WATER/AIR Sensitive and whimisical; intuitive; great insights;
diplomatic; romantic; charming; gregarious; dependent; cagey; artistic;
gentle and compliant; love of beauty and harmony; movement; easygoing; agreeable; trusting; gullible; co-operative.
You have a conciliatory, tender, unworldly sort of personality, loving
beauty and beautiful ideas as much as you abhor injustice and ugliness.
You exude a wistful, intangible glamour, as if you were king or queen
of the forest fairies incarnate, come to entice clumsy mortals to a place
exquisitely serene and joyful. You are therefore essentially of an
artistic temperament, very intuitive, ethereal, emotionally fragile, but
opportunistic and resilient as well.
Terrifically sympathetic and agreeable, you are also receptive and
understanding, romantic and sensuous, easy-going and somewhat selfsacrificing due to your very strong need for relationships. You love
people, especially witty and fascinating people who stimulate you, and
you really come alive at parties or in refined artistic or literary
gatherings. Flirtatious and loquacious, you can be a warm, considerate, generous companion, and whether it is romantic or platonic, you will
bring a touch of elegance and dignity to all your dealings with others.
A natural diplomat, you know how to get the best out of people.
Sometimes you are not sure whether you are an intellectual or an artist,
but you are one of those people who should always trust their inner
hunches rather than dissect and analyse them to the point of confusion.
Powerful feelings and intuitions can wash over you, and your need to
express them is strong, be it through poetry, music, dance, theatre or
social service.
Your mind is clear and balanced, you can see objectives and soar
with ideas, and your instinct is to communicate your inner world
effectively and eloquently. You need the input and encouragement of
other people, and can work well with them. If, however, you try to
intellectualize too much, you may vacillate and lose your confidence,
thus halting the creative flow which is so essential for your wellbeing.
At your heart of hearts you are deeply emotional, inspired by a
profound reverential love for truth and an intuitive understanding of
what is important in life.
You will want to combine intellect and feeling in whatever you do.
Your exceptional adaptability and sensitivity to group needs means you
can work well as a group facilitator of some kind. But this personal
talent is even stronger when it is balanced by a firm sense of self and
healthy boundaries, which is something you may have to work on.
You have so much flowing flexibility and such a deep desire for
social harmony that you can easily lose touch with your own needs and
instinctive responses. You wince painfully if anyone looks at you
cross-eyed; conflict is anathema to your emotional nature and throws
you off-beam, as if it were a very tangible karate chop. When you can
learn to deal effectively with self-doubt, your creativity will begin to
flow.
The theatre is a natural environment for you, where you can
express your many-sided, sensitive personality with flair and feeling.
Likewise the caring professions may attract you, as people inspire you
and you enjoy receiving insights from others. You are forever learning,
open to the magic of life, and your innocence, elegance and
vulnerability help you to create a world of beauty and delight. Relationships
You are a real romantic and can enjoy the good life to the hilt. It is
easy for you to become dependent on your loved one, and in order to
keep the peace you may cling to a bad relationship for far too long, and
this only eclipses your own creative power. Your underlying fear of
confrontation is due to an even deeper fear of being rejected and alone,
for you need others and you thrive when you are with someone who is
earthy, grounded and stable. Your Greatest Strengths
Intuition and imaginative faculties; charming, gracious and sensitive
treatment of other people; refined, cultured, artistic approach to life;
the ability to inspire others with your gentleness and graceful selfexpression; your capacity for collaboration and joint projects. Your Greatest Weaknesses
Holding unrealistic ideals by which you live and evaluate others;
tendency to rationalize and believe what is most pleasant and
expedient; proneness to indecision and overdependence on others. Images for Integration
A theatrical-musical artist entertains his entourage of friends and fans
… Two lovers dream the same dream … A team of writers create a
masterpiece. Famous Personalities
Elizabeth Barrett Browning (poet), Sir Richard Burton (explorer),
Michael Caine (actor), Chopin (composer), Sandy Duncan (actress),
George F. Handel (composer), Patty Hearst (kidnapped heiress),
Quincy Jones (jazz musician), Rudolph Nureyev (dancer), Sidney Poitier (actor), Michael Redgrave (actor), Oliver Wendell Holmes Jr
(jurist). —140—
S UN Plutão ISCES M OON S CORPIO It is the nature of a man as he grows older … to protest against
change, particularly change for the better.
JOHN STEINBECK
Love is a gift from God to man, obedience is a gift from master to man,
and surrender is a gift from man to master.
MEHER BABA
Know how sublime a thing it is To suffer and be strong.
HENRY WADSWORTH LONGFELLOW Themes
WATER/WATER Emotional; intuitive; psychological insight; the
agony and the ecstasy; passionate; complex; stubborn; rich
imagination; strong in adversity; helpful; the will to expose
exploitation and hardship; embraces the comic and tragic together;
self-sacrifice v. self-control.
Truly, madly, deeply emotional – that is you. Overflowing with feeling,
you are entirely subjective in approaching life and people. For better or
for worse, your emotions, convictions and opinions rule you.
Enormously perceptive about people, motives and the vagaries of
human nature, you could be drawn into detective work where your
morbid fantasies can run riot. Likewise, you may find yourself in
medical or scientific research where your intuitive hunches and deeply
searching mind can come together to make healing discoveries for
humankind. Or the world of psychology and alternative therapies may
lure you into its fascinating realm of the underworld, for you are amazingly at home with the unconscious and all that is there, including
madness. Private and brooding, but feeling like an open book, you are
often like a crucible where the whole gamut of human emotions play
themselves out.
Strongly intuitive, you are aware of various levels of interaction
between and among people, and in any sort of gathering your quiet
strength and intensity is felt by others. You can see through anyone,
and at different times easily identify with the ecstatic, the funny, the
depressed and the tragic in your friends and family. You have an
instinctive understanding of people and can marshal much compassion
for yourself and suffering humanity.
Nevertheless, you can be quite scathing when it comes to
criticizing things you do not like or agree with. You can suddenly dig
in your heels and become stubborn and cantankerous. This can develop
into a negative tendency of jumping to emotionally charged
conclusions, not realizing that rigid feelings and notions about issues
prevent you from getting genuine new input and insight. And if these
judgements are based on dark suspicions and fears, you will often end
up needlessly sabotaging your own happiness.
Although you tune in sympathetically to people, you have
difficulty in articulating your emotions, and can get terribly frustrated
with feeling misunderstood. But once you have decided something is
worth your effort you are blessed with fanatic dedication and
perseverance. Hence you are fiercely loyal to your partner when you
have found the right person, even though he or she may never
completely fathom your private depths.
Your intellectual capacity is truly amazing when you get beyond
your prejudices, and you could be interested in all manner of mysteries
and miracles, including birth, death, reincarnation and the ancient
wisdom traditions. In fact, to compensate for your tremendous
emotional bias, you may swing into very heady areas, such as maths
and computing, in order to keep a grip on life. You can appear to be
laughing at yourself and taking things lightly when actually an
awareness of the gravity of life and all its pain and injustices never
leaves you. You prefer your own company much of the time; in silence
you analyse and work things out for yourself. Relationships
Just as your emotional nature is complex and at times unfathomable, so
your relationships will tend to be intense, turbulent, and the focus of
tremendous passion.
You have an enormous need for love and intimacy, and you can
become quite dependent. There is a poignant vulnerability about you
which makes others want to care for you, and their hearts go out to
you. But equally you can be possessive, jealous and demanding,
wanting nothing less than total and complete adoration from your
loved one.
Not only is it no surprise to you but you actually expect love to
involve pathos and suffering. Dramatic self-abandon versus total
domination – no, you are not easy to live with, but you are exciting and
unafraid of the truth about yourself that relationships will reveal to
you. Your Greatest Strengths
Acute perception and vivid imagination; tenacity, courage, and
commitment in the face of adversity; desire and innate ability to
understand great mysteries; ability to help and heal others who are in
real despair. Your Greatest Weaknesses
Tendency to rely too heavily on personal opinion; weakness for
sensationalism; proneness to be unaware of persistent prejudices and
irrational suspicions; negative self-absorption; tendency to manipulate
in order to gain power. Images for Integration
Longfellow’s poem The Secret of the Sea … Steinbeck’s novel The
Grapes of Wrath. Famous Personalities
Prince Andrew (Duke of York), Meher Baba (Indian guru), Jim Backus
(actor and comedian), Johnny Cash (singer), Cyrano de Bergerac
(philosopher), Georges Dumas (psychologist), George Harrison
(former Beatle), David Livingstone (explorer), John Mills (producer
and actor), David Niven (actor), Bernadette Peters (actress), John
Steinbeck (writer), Sharon Stone (actor), Elizabeth Taylor (actress),
Henry Wadsworth Longfellow (poet). —141—
S UN Plutão ISCES M OON S AGITTARIUS The important thing is not to stop questioning.
ALBERT EINSTEIN
I am an atheist still, thank God.
LUIS BUÑUEL
My heart is warm with the friends I meet and better friends I’ll not be
knowing Yet there isn’t a train I wouldn’t take No matter where it’s
going.
EDNA ST . VINCENT MILLAY Themes
WATER/FIRE Philosophic mind; generous heart; far-ranging
imagination; exuberant; adventurer; religious bent; ironic sense of
humour; restless; seeker of truth; sensitive; affectionate; friendly;
resilient; strong social awareness.
Are you a mystic or a philosopher? An artist or a scientist? Whatever
you answer, the truth is that you have an inquiring mind and profound
love of beauty – the beauty both of ideals and of the world. You are a gentle, unobstrusive person, the soul of kindness and
friendly helpfulness, whimsically optimistic and genuinely humble.
Often you also seem to be not of this world, a sort of mischievous but
benevolent angel whose imagination traverses the universe on a very
large canvas, and using only grand symbols. Your mind is subtle and
deep, sensing intricate relationships and boundless meaning, and you
pursue avenues of thinking – often metaphysical, artistic or scientific –
which may leave others behind but which will eventually influence
people enormously.
Highly spiritual in essence, but tending to avoid organized religion
in practice, you exude a deep confidence in yourself and in your
calling, whatever it may be. You feel passionately about life, sensing
equally its futility and its fertility, and this means you often bring a
religious and almost reverential fervour to your endeavours and your
manner of expression. Friends will be touched by your amazing ability
to find value and meaning in the rejected and negative, and in your
capacity to use such insights as the basis for forming new attitudes.
At times you are the self-confessed lone traveller, living in your
own rich, imaginative inner world, sometimes soaring upwards with
the truth of the cosmos, at other times down into the depths of despair.
You are so sensitive and emotionally transparent that you find it almost
impossible to armour yourself against the intrusion of the often
horrendous events of the human community. You are called into action
as you have to find some outlet for your passionate sense of social
justice and responsibility.
So versatile and creative is this combination that you could go in
many different directions: you may be the intuitive scientist trying to
solve the riddle of the huge world; the priest or therapist traversing the
heights and depths of the human psyche; the satirical writer who
inveighs against all the various destructive schisms in society; or you
could even be the restless drifter, the clown who, in the face of tragedy,
knows that ‘something will turn up’. Whatever you do, it is likely that
a strange irony or conflict between beliefs and political ideologies will
demand grappling with at some point in your life so that some sort of
reconciliation is achieved. Relationships
Emotionally you are immediate, open and giving, but very effusive and
reluctant to be tied down. As long as you have a relationship that
allows plenty of room for intellectual exploration and social exchange
– preferably with people who inspire and stimulate you – you make an
adoring, affectionate, devoted partner.
Exuding a most enticing mixture of humility and nobility, you are a
generous judge of others’ weaknesses and a real sucker for a sob story.
Intimacy and companionship are important to you, but you get restless
with an inner discontent – and you need your partner to understand
this. You need periods of contemplative withdrawal so that you can
reconnect with yourself, your beliefs, your passion and your optimism.
Otherwise you may dissipate your energies in nervousness and
spreading yourself too thin. Your Greatest Strengths
Compassion; the breadth of your intellect and the depth of your
enthusiasm; creative imagination; moral integrity; resilience; sense of
humour; quiet ability to make everyone laugh and feel that you are
their friend forever. Your Greatest Weaknesses
Endearing naivety; tendency to emotionalize moral issues; misplaced
enthusiams; grandiosity and self-deception; proneness to exaggeration,
carelessness, and lack of concentration, and to be all things to all
people. Try to pin yourself down to manageable-sized problems and
tasks, keep your feet on the ground and in touch with important details,
and you will find that your ideas have much more productive results. Images for Integration
A black woman priest in the confessional hears a tale of woe from a
white converted scientist, and they fall in love … Einstein’s Theory of Relativity. Famous Personalities
Luis Buñuel (film director), Copernicus (astronomer), Billy Crystal
(actor), Gabrielle D’Annunzio (poet and aviator), Albert Einstein
(physicist), Jackie Gleason (actor), Victor Hugo (writer), Aniela Jaffe
(Jungian therapist), Rupert Murdoch (newspaper magnate), Nijinsky
(Russian dancer), Ishmael Reed (writer), Edna St Vincent Millay
(poet). —142—
S UN Plutão ISCES M OON C APRICORN Associate yourself with men of good quality if you esteem your own
reputation; for ‘tis better to be alone than in bad company.
GEORGE WASHINGTON
The only abnormality is the incapacity to love.
ANAIS NIN
But Lord! to see the absurd nature of Englishmen, that cannot forbear
laughing and jeering at everything that looks strange.
SAMUEL PEPYS Themes
WATER/EARTH Humane; helpful; charitable; serious and selfreflective; perceptive; cautious; discreetly ambitious; circumspect;
pillar of strength; fount of compassion; philosophical humour; moral
integrity; strategic; devoted; a reserved romantic; dutiful; deep sense of
justice; dependable; pinning down the elusive.
Do you identify with the down-and-outs but prefer to do so from a
position of comfy security? Do you find yourself romantically pulled towards many people and different experiences, but then you feel the
call of personal ambition which keeps you on the straight and even,
devoted to family and those you can trust? Does the mystery of life
and human love move you to fulfil personal reponsibilities and then go
on to serve in the wider world?
You are a blend of gentle compassion and stoicism, of tenderness
and taciturnity, of romance and the work ethic. Sometimes you are
yielding, sometimes inflexible. Your quiet demeanour and reserve can
be deceptive, for you have tremendous strength, initiative and selfrespect which helps you get where you want to be.
Your sensitivity to the outer world and the people that fill it is
acute; and depending on your particular interests, you will use your
perceptions – about people’s aims, needs, strengths and weaknesses –
to achieve your goals and gain the recognition and respect you desire.
In other words, you may be a successful business person, an enigmatic
actor, a self-contained artist or an enthusiastic volunteer worker for the
Salvation Army. In whatever role you choose, you use both
imagination and logic, both feeling and shrewd calculation in creating
the right scenario and asserting your gentle control.
Genuinely sympathetic and emotionally generous, you nevertheless
possess an astute awareness of life’s stark realities. Although your
Piscean side wavers and is hesitant about taking on too much
responsibility, your Capricorn side is fairly ambitious and really comes
alive when you are getting your teeth into a challenging project. Hard
times do not frighten you; in fact, they bring out both the romance and
hardiness of your combination. Your values are of the intangible realm
– love, relationship, respect, a sense of community – but you back
them up with muscle power, and often real sweat and tears. Whatever
it might be, you are willing to work with commitment to achieve your
dream.
On the one hand you are a very matter-of-fact, practical person,
and on the other a dreamy, tender-hearted romantic. Socially you can
mix with a wide spectrum of people. You have a sense of the fragility
and tragedy of life and can connect with others by feeling their plight.
You feel for the underprivileged and those who suffer, but you prefer to show your compassion in a pragmatic way, helping others to help
themselves.
You have a strong sense of yourself and can stick to your larger
long-term purposes, but because you flow with what needs doing you
make an excellent organizer and manager, able to harness the moods
and energies of those around you productively. You are expressive in
subtle but powerful ways and can be something of a practical visionary
who is able to translate your own and other people’s plans into
achievable realities. Relationships
Although sociable enough, you are really a private person who takes
love and family duties very seriously. In a relationship you are warm,
devoted, even romantic, although too much self-sufficiency can make
you overly cautious, distant and a bit austere at times.
You come to know yourself and your needs early on, as well as just
how much you will risk. Thus armed with self-knowledge, you seek
out serious, secure relationships. Your emotional side thrives on
intimacy, on shared sympathies, and self-sacrifice. But you have too
much common sense to allow yourself to dissolve completely into the
bliss of the moment if that would sabotage what is cooking on the
backburner.
Although you are loving and adaptable, you want to know where
you stand. You are sensitive, generous and protective of loved ones,
and expect affection and respect in return. There may be a paternal
quality about the way you form relationships which inspires others to
lean on you, but you do not suffer fools gladly and you can adopt a
puritanical manner when loved ones let you down. When you make a
commitment, you intend to honour it, and the person who gets your
loyalty and love knows he or she has a prize indeed. Your Greatest Strengths
Genuine kindness; sensitivity to and understanding of human need;
pragmatic and resourceful imagination; shrewd perception; quiet adaptability; abiding integrity; deep sense of duty. Your Greatest Weaknesses
Lack of confidence; timidity; proneness to pessimism and worry;
tendency to be secretive and defensive; a somewhat moralistic and
judgemental approach to human relations. Images for Integration
An old freighter chugs towards the port, bringing in the goods … A
famous actress leaves her estate to the Actors’ Pension Fund. Famous Personalities
Luigi Boccherini (Italian composer and cellist), Jon Bon Jovi (rock
star), Kenny Dalglish (footballer), Mircea Eliade (psychologist),
Percival Lowell (astronomer), William Macey (actor), Prince Naruhito
(Japanese Crown Prince), Anaïs Nin (writer), Samuel Pepys (diarist),
Philip Roth (novelist), Walter Schirra (astronaut), Dinah Shore
(entertainer and singer), Nina Simone (singer), George Washington
(first American president), Bruce Willis (actor). —143—
S UN Plutão ISCES M OON A QUARIUS The humblest citizen of all the land, when clad in the armor of a
righteous cause, is stronger than all the hosts of error.
WILLIAM JENNINGS BRYAN
Film is an art form of uniting, in peace, that family of man of which we
are all part.
DAVID PUTNAM Life will be richer and better for all of us if we will make a journey in
truth along quiet pathways of philosophy.
MANLY PALMER HALL Themes
WATER/AIR Mind and emotions; science fiction; humanitarian;
receptive; friendly; charitable; moral certitude; missionary zeal;
progressive thinker; servant of universal concerns; versatile; sociable;
easy-going.
You are one of life’s true humanitarians, an idealist through and
through, often fundamentally out of step with the status quo and yet
absolutely at one with the moral integrity of any issue. Somewhat aloof
and elusive yet kind and considerate, you belong to the world, to your
friends and to your causes. The secret and the mysterious fascinate
you, but you want to know.
Beauty and truth will always dance and interweave through your
life, and you may have artistic leanings. You seek alliances with people
who share your same Utopian dreams, but whoever you meet will not
stay a stranger for long as you are friendly, open and optimistic.
Passionate convictions and moral certitude inspire your intellectual life
and all your actions, and will involve you in various humane but
probably unorthodox organizations.
Although you have a wide tolerance for all types of people, you
come over strong when expressing and sometimes preaching your own
views, and you may need to remind yourself that people will not
always welcome your philosophical earnestness. But your idealism and
sincerity are unmistakable and hence, despite occasional conversion
tactics, you are usually loved and trusted.
Interested in people and what makes them tick, you easily get
involved with and absorbed by others, yet always manage to remain
one step removed. This makes you a good psychologist, counsellor or
social worker, and you can relate emotionally whilst your brain is
observing and adding it all up. You are both intuitive and logical, a rare combination which can
baffle others when they think they have got you pegged. One side of
you is compassionate, artistic, impressionable; another side is detached
and philosophical, broad-minded and unconventional, dedicated to
scientific truth and its application for the common good.
You have a quirky sense of humour and can accept the odd and
outrageous as the norm. Hence you pick up a bizarre mixture of
friends, and truly enjoy each individual. You are a real character, the
life of the party. But you are also a bit unfathomable and can hide a
world of woe, so deeply do you feel about so many things, both
personal and collective. Relationships
With most people, and especially with your loved one, you are tender,
devoted, considerate and understanding. You can tune into your partner
easily, and it can seem that you take on his or her colouring and live
your life according to his or her needs. In fact, however, there is a part
of your soul that belongs only to yourself, and you will need time
alone to explore your own thoughts and feelings and what you want to
do with them.
You bring your humanitarian spirit, as well as your wit and
wisdom, into your private life, and you will want to share your
concerns with your partner in some way. Intellectual rapport is
important, and so is the humour you share, which goes a long way in
soothing and smoothing out problems. Emotionally you are loyal and
honourable, but for you joy comes from many different things – music,
art, philosophy and social involvement, with your ever-growing circle
of friends. Your Greatest Strengths
Positive, friendly feeling for humanity; ability to learn with both left
and right sides of the brain; gentle but articulate and persuasive selfexpression; wide acceptance of the whole gamut of society; moral authority and trustworthiness; genuine desire to leave the world better
than when you found it. Your Greatest Weakness
Emotional gullibility; need to push your moral concerns onto others;
assumption that everyone feels as strongly as you do about whatever
your current cause may be; allowing the woes of the world and a
somewhat holier-than-thou attitude to get in the way of enjoying
yourself. Images for Integration
A musicologist plays the violin divinely as part of a demonstration of
the theory of harmonics … A boy scout swims five miles in a
campaign to raise money for the peace movement. Famous Personalities
George Abell (astronomer, writer and sceptic), Robert Altman (film
director), Ursula Andress (actress), Balthus (painter), Harry Belafonte
(singer), Jeremy Bentham (philosopher), Luitzen Brouwer
(mathematician), William Jennings Bryan (poet), Glenn Close
(actress), Prince Edward, Manly Palmer Hall (philosopher), James
Russell Lowell (poet), Elaine Paige (actor/singer), Sam Peckinpah
(film director), Baden Powell (founder of Scout movement), David
Putnam (film producer), Joanne Woodward (actress). —144—
S UN Plutão ISCES M OON Plutão ISCES I’ve seen every problem.
JENNIFER JONES
Joy is the voice of the escaped psyche. ARTHUR GUIRDHAM Themes
WATER/WATER Easy-going; emotionally receptive; unworldly;
loving; shy; impressionable; perceptive; intuitive; idealistic; love of
fantasy; generous; self-sacrificing; compassionate; romantic.
Are you going this way or that? Or rather, are you really going your
way, or that of someone else who happened to be passing by, and was
rather interesting, nice, mysterious, etc.? Do you silently commune
with your inner muse, or drown your sorrows in self-absorbed
introspection?
You are the most impressionable, receptive and romantic of all Sun –
Moon combinations, and as a result you are very hard to pin down.
You are also rather introverted and preoccupied with your inner world,
which is very real to you although it does not always bear much
resemblance to actuality. You are, in fact, quite a shy person, although
you yearn to be truly understood, and normally respond warmly in
happy social situations. Emotional sensitivity, compassion and the gift
of piercing insight are among your greatest strengths, but you need to
be careful as they can just as easily work against you.
Basically, your feelings have a sort of universal quality about them
which can attract all and sundry to your open door. You can literally
feel as much personal pain about the plight of famine-beleaguered
farmers in China as you do about the stray cat or snoring wino in the
street. Befriending and helping those in need is instinctive in you, and
you can be enthusiastically, selflessly devoted to other people’s
projects, needs and concerns. You may express your altruism by
working in the healing or caring professions, or on a more casual basis
with your friends, family and community.
In the right mood you can create an atmosphere of warmth and
conviviality, putting the stamp of unfussy enjoyment on everything
you do. But you can be gullible and easily deceived too, as if there is
something in you which is asking to be enchanted and whisked off into a romantic realm where princesses live in beautiful castles happily ever
after. You sense somewhere within you the boundlessness and unity of
all life, and, like a fish in the deep blue sea, you naturally want to swim
around in it. You need to dream, to commune, to move, to go with the
flow of your feelings.
Your shyness often makes you withdraw a bit from life in order to
avoid demands from the outside world that you ‘explain yourself’ –
something anathema to your very being. For who are you? You are
many things and many people, but you are not easily defined. You do
not relish a high profile or heavy burdens, but if you do carry public
responsibilities you will serve with heart, mind and soul.
Some Sun – Moon Pisceans deal with their vulnerability by cutting
themselves off completely from their feelings. If this applies to you,
you will know how easy it is for you to disguise your fears with a joke
or a penetrating insight. But some types go even further than that and
become ‘cold fish’, actually polarizing into precise, analytical reason
as a defence tactic.
You may be one of those unclassifiable characters whose
distinction shines through a whole personality rather than being
reflected in a list of worldly attainments. Your essence could be happy
as a poet, actor, novelist, soldier, postman, baker, ironmonger,
bookseller, socialist, saint or sinner (to name but a few). You may find
that something magical happens inside when you are on stage, as you
love the experience of communicating your feelings to others. Relationships
You are the romantic’s romantic, and you come to life when in love.
For you, love is food for the soul. You are prone to living out a whole
range of fantasies around your loved one whilst he or she is completely
unaware of what you are doing. You will sacrifice everything for love,
so just make sure your partner is worth it.
An earthy type will help you stay in touch with reality, and an airy
type will struggle to bring you some objectivity. But do not deny
yourself your dreams. Instead, try to find a creative outlet for them so
your personal relationship can live, at least partially, in reality. Your Greatest Strengths
Rich, colourful imagination; endless compassion and ability to identify
with the whole spectrum of human joy and sorrow; receptivity and
adaptability; humility and selflessness which allows you to put others
first and work for the welfare of all. Your Greatest Weaknesses
Intense subjectivity and sensitivity; proneness to think the world is out
of step with you and to wallow in self-pity at the thought; tendency to
sabotage your creativity by preferring the passive route of fantasy
rather than exercising your will in the real world. Image for Integration
Adrift at sea … the stars and the ocean together create one world, no
horizon … the sunset beckons. Famous Personalities
Paddy Ashdown (politician), Erykah Badu (neo-soul singer), Stephanie
Beacham (actress), Enrico Caruso (opera singer), Hans Eysenck
(professor of psychology), Richard Garnett (librarian and writer),
Arthur Guirdham (esoteric writer), Jennifer Jones (actress),
Michaelangelo (artist), Aidan Quinn (actor), Maurice Ravel
(composer), Nicolai Rimsky-Korsakov (composer), Bedřich Smetana
(composer). Part Three
FINDING YOUR SUN -MOON COMBINATION F INDING Áries OUR S UN -M OON C OMBINATION
This part of the book contains tables that will enable you to discover,
quickly and easily, what your Sun and Moon signs are. All you need to
know to be certain of your Sun sign and Moon sign is your day, month and
year of birth. If, however, you find from the tables that the Sun or Moon
changed sign during your birth day, you will also need to know your time of
birth in Greenwich Mean Time – the standard clock time in use in Great
Britain for which the tables are calculated.
If you were born at a time of the year when ‘Summer Time’ was in
operation, which is usually late March to late October, you will need to
deduct one hour from your birth time before using the tables. Table 3 on
page 562 gives the precise dates and times each year when Summer Time
began and ended in Great Britain from 1926 to 2010. F INDING Áries OUR S UN S IGN
The Sun changes sign about every 30 days on about the 21st of each month.
But the date of the change varies from sign to sign and from year to year. If
you were born ‘on the cusp’ – on the first or last two or three days of a sign
– it is important to check precisely which sign the Sun was in at your time
of birth in your birth year.
Table 1 (beginning on page 474) gives the date and Greenwich Mean
Time that the Sun changed, or will change, from one sign of the zodiac to
the next for each year from 1930–2010. To find your Sun sign, locate the
column giving your year of birth. Now look down until you find your
month of birth. The day and time at which the Sun changed signs is given. If
you were born even a minute before the time listed, then your Sun will be in
the preceding sign. If you were born at or after the listed day and time, then
your Sun is in the sign indicated.
For example, if you were born on 20 January 1970, you may wonder
whether you are a Capricorn or an Aquarius. Turning to Table 1 under 1970
you will find the first entry reads 20JAN 11.24 AQ. This means that on 20
January the Sun entered Aquarius at 11.24 a.m. Thus if you were born at
any time up until 11.23 a.m. on the morning of 20 January your Sun is in Capricorn, but if you were born at 11.24 a.m. or later that day your Sun is in
Aquarius. F INDING Áries OUR M OON S IGN
The Moon changes sign about every two-and-a-half days. Table 2
(beginning on page 480) gives the date and time, in Greenwich Mean Time,
that the Moon entered, or will enter, each sign from 1930–2010.
To find your own Moon sign, first turn to your year of birth, then to
your month of birth and then to your birth day, if listed, or the nearest day of
the month before your birthday. This will tell you which sign the Moon has
entered before your birth. The following entry will tell you when the Moon
next changed signs.
For example, if you were born on 20 January 1970 you will find under
1970, January, that the nearest entry is the 19th when the Moon entered the
sign of Cancer at 8.14 p.m. The next entry is for 22 January at 8.41 a.m.
when the Moon changed signs and entered Leo. Thus if you were born at
any time between 8.14 p.m. on 19 January 1970 and 8.41 a.m. on 22
January 1970, your Moon was in Cancer.
If you do not know your time of birth, then read the two possible
combinations and see which is the most relevant to you. B IRTHS O UTSIDE G REAT B RITAIN
If you were born outside Britain, and you were born close to the time that
the Sun or Moon changed signs, you will need to convert your time of birth
into Greenwich Mean Time before consulting the tables.
Table Júpiter (beginning on page 564) gives the normal time differences for
most of the major countries of the world. If in doubt you should check with
one of the firms that produces computer-generated charts such as Equinox,
78 Neal Street, Covent Garden, London WC2H 9PA. Table 1
Finding Your Sun Sign
This table shows the time at which the Sun entered each of the zodiac from
1920–2000. The time is given in Greenwich Mean Time (GMT) using the
24-hour clock. For example, 22:29 is equivalent to 10.29 p.m., 13:20 to
1.20 p.m.
The abbreviations for the signs are:
AR = Aries
TA = Taurus GE = Gemini
CA = Cancer LE = Leo
VI = Virgo
LI = Libra
SC = Scorpio SA = Sagittarius
CP = Capricorn AQ = Aquarius PI = Pisces
1930
20JAN 18:33 AQ
19FEB 08:59 PI
21MAR 08:29 AR
20APR 20:06 TA
21MAY 19:42 GE
22JUN 03:53 CA
23JUL 14:42 LE
23AUG 21:27 VI
23SEP 18:36 LI
24OCT 03:26 SC
23NOV 00:35 SA
22DEC 13:40 CP 1931
21JAN 00:18 AQ
19FEB 14:40 PI
21MAR 14:06 AR
21APR 01:40 TA
22MAY 01:15 GE
22JUN 09:28 CA
23JUL 20:21 LE
24AUG 03:10 VI
24SEP 00:24 LI
24OCT 09:16 SC
23NOV 06:25 SA
22DEC 19:30 CP
1932
21JAN 06:07 AQ
19FEB 20:29 PI
20MAR 19:54 AR
20APR 07:28 TA
21MAY 07:06 GE
21JUN 15:22 CA
23JUL 02:18 LE
23AUG 09:06 VI
23SEP 06:16 LI
23OCT 15:04 SC
22NOV 12:10 SA
22DEC 01:14 CP
1933
20JAN 11:53 AQ
19FEB 02:16 PI 21MAR 01:43 AR
20APR 13:18 TA
21MAY 12:57 GE
21JUN 21:12 CA
23JUL 08:06 LE
23AUG 14:52 VI
23SEP 12:01 LI
23OCT 20:48 SC
22NOV 17:54 SA
22DEC 06:58 CP
1934
20JAN 17:37 AQ
19FEB 08:02 PI
21MAR 07:28 AR
20APR 19:00 TA
21MAY 18:35 GE
22JUN 02:48 CA
23JUL 13:42 LE
23AUG 20:32 VI
23SEP 17:45 LI
24OCT 02:36 SC
22NOV 23:44 SA
22DEC 12:50 CP
1935
20JAN 23:29 AQ
19FEB 13:52 PI
21MAR 13:18 AR
21APR 00:50 TA
22MAY 00:25 GE 22JUN 08:38 CA
23JUL 19:33 LE
24AUG 02:24 VI
23SEP 23:38 LI
24OCT 08:29 SC
23NOV 05:35 SA
22DEC 18:37 CP
1936
21JAN 05:12 AQ
19FEB 19:33 PI
20MAR 18:58 AR
20APR 06:31 TA
21MAY 06:07 GE
21JUN 14:22 CA
23JUL 01:18 LE
23AUG 08:11 VI
23SEP 05:26 LI
23OCT 14:18 SC
22NOV 11:26 SA
22DEC 00:27 CP
1937
20JAN 11:01 AQ
19FEB 01:21 PI
21MAR 00:45 AR
20APR 12:19 TA
21MAY 11:57 GE
21JUN 20:12 CA
23JUL 07:07 LE
23AUG 13:58 VI 23SEP 11:13 LI
23OCT 20:06 SC
22NOV 17:17 SA
22DEC 06:22 CP
1938
20JAN 16:59 AQ
19FEB 07:20 PI
21MAR 06:43 AR
20APR 18:15 TA
21MAY 17:50 GE
22JUN 02:03 CA
23JUL 12:57 LE
23AUG 19:46 VI
23SEP 16:59 LI
24OCT 01:54 SC
22NOV 23:06 SA
22DEC 12:14 CP
1939
20JAN 22:51 AQ
19FEB 13:09 PI
21MAR 12:28 AR
20APR 23:55 TA
21MAY 23:27 GE
22JUN 07:39 CA
23JUL 18:37 LE
24AUG 01:31 VI
23SEP 22:50 LI
24OCT 07:46 SC
23NOV 04:59 SA 22DEC 18:06 CP
1940
21JAN 04:44 AQ
19FEB 19:04 PI
20MAR 18:24 AR
20APR 05:51 TA
21MAY 05:23 GE
21JUN 13:36 CA
23JUL 00:34 LE
23AUG 07:28 VI
23SEP 04:46 LI
23OCT 13:39 SC
22NOV 10:49 SA
21DEC 23:55 CP
1941
20JAN 10:33 AQ
19FEB 00:56 PI
21MAR 00:20 AR
20APR 11:50 TA
21MAY 11:23 GE
21JUN 19:33 CA
23JUL 06:26 LE
23AUG 13:17 VI
23SEP 10:33 LI
23OCT 19:27 SC
22NOV 16:38 SA
22DEC 05:45 CP
1942 20JAN 16:24 AQ
19FEB 06:47 PI
21MAR 06:11 AR
20APR 17:39 TA
21MAY 17:09 GE
22JUN 01:16 CA
23JUL 12:07 LE
23AUG 18:58 VI
23SEP 16:17 LI
24OCT 01:15 SC
22NOV 22:30 SA
22DEC 11:40 CP
1943
20JAN 22:19 AQ
19FEB 12:40 PI
21MAR 12:03 AR
20APR 23:31 TA
21MAY 23:03 GE
22JUN 07:12 CA
23JUL 18:04 LE
24AUG 00:55 VI
23SEP 22:12 LI
24OCT 07:08 SC
23NOV 04:22 SA
22DEC 17:29 CP
1944
21JAN 04:07 AQ
19FEB 18:27 PI
20MAR 17:48 AR 20APR 05:18 TA
21MAY 04:51 GE
21JUN 13:02 CA
22JUL 23:56 LE
23AUG 06:47 VI
23SEP 04:02 LI
23OCT 12:56 SC
22NOV 10:08 SA
21DEC 23:15 CP
1945
20JAN 09:54 AQ
19FEB 00:15 PI
20MAR 23:37 AR
20APR 11:07 TA
21MAY 10:40 GE
21JUN 18:52 CA
23JUL 05:45 LE
23AUG 12:35 VI
23SEP 09:50 LI
23OCT 18:43 SC
22NOV 15:55 SA
22DEC 05:04 CP
1946
20JAN 15:45 AQ
19FEB 06:08 PI
21MAR 05:33 AR
20APR 17:02 TA
21MAY 16:34 GE
22JUN 00:44 CA 23JUL 11:37 LE
23AUG 18:26 VI
23SEP 15:41 LI
24OCT 00:35 SC
22NOV 21:47 SA
22DEC 10:53 CP
1947
20JAN 21:32 AQ
19FEB 11:52 PI
21MAR 11:13 AR
20APR 22:39 TA
21MAY 22:09 GE
22JUN 06:19 CA
23JUL 17:14 LE
24AUG 00:09 VI
23SEP 21:29 LI
24OCT 06:26 SC
23NOV 03:38 SA
22DEC 16:43 CP
1948
21JAN 03:19 AQ
19FEB 17:37 PI
20MAR 16:57 AR
20APR 04:25 TA
21MAY 03:57 GE
21JUN 12:11 CA
22JUL 23:08 LE
23AUG 06:03 VI
23SEP 03:22 LI 23OCT 12:18 SC
22NOV 09:29 SA
21DEC 22:34 CP
1949
20JAN 09:09 AQ
18FEB 23:27 PI
20MAR 22:48 AR
20APR 10:17 TA
21MAY 09:51 GE
21JUN 18:03 CA
23JUL 04:57 LE
23AUG 11:48 VI
23SEP 09:06 LI
23OCT 18:03 SC
22NOV 15:16 SA
22DEC 04:23 CP
1950
20JAN 15:00 AQ
19FEB 05:18 PI
21MAR 04:35 AR
20APR 15:59 TA
21MAY 15:27 GE
21JUN 23:36 CA
23JUL 10:30 LE
23AUG 17:23 VI
23SEP 14:44 LI
23OCT 23:45 SC
22NOV 21:03 SA
22DEC 10:14 CP 1951
20JAN 20:52 AQ
19FEB 11:10 PI
21MAR 10:26 AR
20APR 21:48 TA
21MAY 21:15 GE
22JUN 05:25 CA
23JUL 16:21 LE
23AUG 23:16 VI
23SEP 20:37 LI
24OCT 05:36 SC
23NOV 02:51 SA
22DEC 16:00 CP
1952
21JAN 02:38 AQ
19FEB 16:57 PI
20MAR 16:14 AR
20APR 03:37 TA
21MAY 03:04 GE
21JUN 11:12 CA
22JUL 22:08 LE
23AUG 05:03 VI
23SEP 02:24 LI
23OCT 11:23 SC
22NOV 08:36 SA
21DEC 21:44 CP
1953
20JAN 08:22 AQ
18FEB 22:41 PI 20MAR 22:01 AR
20APR 09:26 TA
21MAY 08:53 GE
21JUN 16:59 CA
23JUL 03:52 LE
23AUG 10:45 VI
23SEP 08:06 LI
23OCT 17:06 SC
22NOV 14:22 SA
22DEC 03:32 CP
1954
20JAN 14:11 AQ
19FEB 04:32 PI
21MAR 03:53 AR
20APR 15:19 TA
21MAY 14:47 GE
21JUN 22:54 CA
23JUL 09:45 LE
23AUG 16:36 VI
23SEP 13:55 LI
23OCT 22:57 SC
22NOV 20:14 SA
22DEC 09:25 CP
1955
20JAN 20:02 AQ
19FEB 10:19 PI
21MAR 09:35 AR
20APR 20:58 TA
21MAY 20:24 GE 22JUN 04:31 CA
23JUL 15:25 LE
23AUG 22:19 VI
23SEP 19:41 LI
24OCT 04:43 SC
23NOV 02:01 SA
22DEC 15:11 CP
1956
21JAN 01:49 AQ
19FEB 16:05 PI
20MAR 15:21 AR
20APR 02:44 TA
21MAY 02:12 GE
21JUN 10:24 CA
22JUL 21:20 LE
23AUG 04:15 VI
23SEP 01:35 LI
23OCT 10:34 SC
22NOV 07:50 SA
21DEC 20:59 CP
1957
20JAN 07:39 AQ
18FEB 21:58 PI
20MAR 21:16 AR
20APR 08:41 TA
21MAY 08:10 GE
21JUN 16:20 CA
23JUL 03:15 LE
23AUG 10:08 VI 23SEP 07:26 LI
23OCT 16:24 SC
22NOV 13:39 SA
22DEC 02:49 CP
1958
20JAN 13:29 AQ
19FEB 03:49 PI
21MAR 03:06 AR
20APR 14:27 TA
21MAY 13:51 GE
21JUN 21:57 CA
23JUL 08:51 LE
23AUG 15:46 VI
23SEP 13:09 LI
23OCT 22:12 SC
22NOV 19:29 SA
22DEC 08:40 CP
1959
20JAN 19:19 AQ
19FEB 09:38 PI
21MAR 08:55 AR
20APR 20:17 TA
21MAY 19:42 GE
22JUN 03:50 CA
23JUL 14:45 LE
23AUG 21:44 VI
23SEP 19:09 LI
24OCT 04:11 SC
23NOV 01:27 SA 22DEC 14:34 CP
1960
21JAN 01:10 AQ
19FEB 15:26 PI
20MAR 14:43 AR
20APR 02:06 TA
21MAY 01:33 GE
21JUN 09:42 CA
22JUL 20:38 LE
23AUG 03:35 VI
23SEP 00:59 LI
23OCT 10:02 SC
22NOV 07:19 SA
21DEC 20:26 CP
1961
20JAN 07:02 AQ
18FEB 21:17 PI
20MAR 20:32 AR
20APR 07:55 TA
21MAY 07:22 GE
21JUN 15:30 CA
23JUL 02:24 LE
23AUG 09:19 VI
23SEP 06:43 LI
23OCT 15:48 SC
22NOV 13:08 SA
22DEC 02:20 CP
1962 20JAN 12:58 AQ
19FEB 03:15 PI
21MAR 02:30 AR
20APR 13:51 TA
21MAY 13:16 GE
21JUN 21:24 CA
23JUL 08:18 LE
23AUG 15:13 VI
23SEP 12:35 LI
23OCT 21:40 SC
22NOV 19:02 SA
22DEC 08:15 CP
1963
20JAN 18:54 AQ
19FEB 09:09 PI
21MAR 08:20 AR
20APR 19:36 TA
21MAY 18:58 GE
22JUN 03:04 CA
23JUL 13:59 LE
23AUG 20:58 VI
23SEP 18:24 LI
24OCT 03:29 SC
23NOV 00:50 SA
22DEC 14:02 CP
1964
21JAN 00:41 AQ
19FEB 14:58 PI
20MAR 14:10 AR 20APR 01:27 TA
21MAY 00:50 GE
21JUN 08:57 CA
22JUL 19:53 LE
23AUG 02:51 VI
23SEP 00:17 LI
23OCT 09:21 SC
22NOV 06:39 SA
21DEC 19:50 CP
1965
20JAN 06:29 AQ
18FEB 20:48 PI
20MAR 20:05 AR
20APR 07:26 TA
21MAY 06:50 GE
21JUN 14:56 CA
23JUL 01:48 LE
23AUG 08:43 VI
23SEP 06:06 LI
23OCT 15:10 SC
22NOV 12:29 SA
22DEC 01:41 CP
1966
20JAN 12:20 AQ
19FEB 02:38 PI
21MAR 01:53 AR
20APR 13:12 TA
21MAY 12:32 GE
21JUN 20:33 CA 23JUL 07:24 LE
23AUG 14:18 VI
23SEP 11:44 LI
23OCT 20:51 SC
22NOV 18:14 SA
22DEC 07:29 CP
1967
20JAN 18:08 AQ
19FEB 08:24 PI
21MAR 07:37 AR
20APR 18:55 TA
21MAY 18:18 GE
22JUN 02:23 CA
23JUL 13:16 LE
23AUG 20:12 VI
23SEP 17:38 LI
24OCT 02:44 SC
23NOV 00:05 SA
22DEC 13:17 CP
1968
20JAN 23:54 AQ
19FEB 14:09 PI
20MAR 13:22 AR
20APR 00:41 TA
21MAY 00:06 GE
21JUN 08:13 CA
22JUL 19:08 LE
23AUG 02:03 VI
22SEP 23:26 LI 23OCT 08:30 SC
22NOV 05:49 SA
21DEC 19:00 CP
1969
20JAN 05:39 AQ
18FEB 19:55 PI
20MAR 19:08 AR
20APR 06:27 TA
21MAY 05:50 GE
21JUN 13:55 CA
23JUL 00:48 LE
23AUG 07:44 VI
23SEP 05:07 LI
23OCT 14:11 SC
22NOV 11:31 SA
22DEC 00:44 CP
1970
20JAN 11:24 AQ
19FEB 01:42 PI
21MAR 00:57 AR
20APR 12:15 TA
21MAY 11:37 GE
21JUN 19:43 CA
23JUL 06:37 LE
23AUG 13:34 VI
23SEP 10:59 LI
23OCT 20:05 SC
22NOV 17:25 SA
22DEC 06:36 CP 1971
20JAN 17:13 AQ
19FEB 07:27 PI
21MAR 06:38 AR
20APR 17:54 TA
21MAY 17:15 GE
22JUN 01:20 CA
23JUL 12:15 LE
23AUG 19:15 VI
23SEP 16:45 LI
24OCT 01:53 SC
22NOV 23:15 SA
22DEC 12:24 CP
1972
20JAN 22:59 AQ
19FEB 13:12 PI
20MAR 12:22 AR
19APR 23:38 TA
20MAY 22:59 GE
21JUN 07:06 CA
22JUL 18:03 LE
23AUG 01:03 VI
22SEP 22:33 LI
23OCT 07:42 SC
22NOV 05:03 SA
21DEC 18:13 CP
1973
20JAN 04:48 AQ
18FEB 19:01 PI 20MAR 18:13 AR
20APR 05:30 TA
21MAY 04:54 GE
21JUN 13:01 CA
22JUL 23:55 LE
23AUG 06:54 VI
23SEP 04:21 LI
23OCT 13:30 SC
22NOV 10:54 SA
22DEC 00:08 CP
1974
20JAN 10:46 AQ
19FEB 00:59 PI
21MAR 00:07 AR
20APR 11:19 TA
21MAY 10:36 GE
21JUN 18:38 CA
23JUL 05:30 LE
23AUG 12:29 VI
23SEP 09:59 LI
23OCT 19:11 SC
22NOV 16:39 SA
22DEC 05:56 CP
1975
20JAN 16:37 AQ
19FEB 06:50 PI
21MAR 05:57 AR
20APR 17:07 TA
21MAY 16:24 GE 22JUN 00:26 CA
23JUL 11:22 LE
23AUG 18:24 VI
23SEP 15:55 LI
24OCT 01:06 SC
22NOV 22:31 SA
22DEC 11:46 CP
1976
20JAN 22:25 AQ
19FEB 12:40 PI
20MAR 11:50 AR
19APR 23:03 TA
20MAY 22:21 GE
21JUN 06:24 CA
22JUL 17:18 LE
23AUG 00:18 VI
22SEP 21:48 LI
23OCT 06:58 SC
22NOV 04:22 SA
21DEC 17:36 CP
1977
20JAN 04:15 AQ
18FEB 18:31 PI
20MAR 17:42 AR
20APR 04:57 TA
21MAY 04:14 GE
21JUN 12:14 CA
22JUL 23:04 LE
23AUG 06:00 VI 23SEP 03:30 LI
23OCT 12:41 SC
22NOV 10:07 SA
21DEC 23:24 CP
1978
20JAN 10:04 AQ
19FEB 00:21 PI
20MAR 23:34 AR
20APR 10:50 TA
21MAY 10:09 GE
21JUN 18:10 CA
23JUL 05:00 LE
23AUG 11:57 VI
23SEP 09:26 LI
23OCT 18:37 SC
22NOV 16:05 SA
22DEC 05:21 CP
1979
20JAN 15:59 AQ
19FEB 06:13 PI
21MAR 05:22 AR
20APR 16:35 TA
21MAY 15:54 GE
21JUN 23:56 CA
23JUL 10:49 LE
23AUG 17:47 VI
23SEP 15:17 LI
24OCT 00:28 SC
22NOV 21:55 SA 22DEC 11:10 CP
1980
20JAN 21:49 AQ
19FEB 12:02 PI
20MAR 11:10 AR
19APR 22:23 TA
20MAY 21:42 GE
21JUN 05:47 CA
22JUL 16:42 LE
22AUG 23:41 VI
22SEP 21:09 LI
23OCT 06:18 SC
22NOV 03:42 SA
21DEC 16:56 CP
1981
20JAN 03:36 AQ
18FEB 17:52 PI
20MAR 17:03 AR
20APR 04:19 TA
21MAY 03:39 GE
21JUN 11:45 CA
22JUL 22:40 LE
23AUG 05:38 VI
23SEP 03:05 LI
23OCT 12:13 SC
22NOV 09:36 SA
21DEC 22:51 CP
1982 20JAN 09:31 AQ
18FEB 23:47 PI
20MAR 22:56 AR
20APR 10:07 TA
21MAY 09:23 GE
21JUN 17:23 CA
23JUL 04:16 LE
23AUG 11:15 VI
23SEP 08:47 LI
23OCT 17:58 SC
22NOV 15:24 SA
22DEC 04:39 CP
1983
20JAN 15:17 AQ
19FEB 05:31 PI
21MAR 04:39 AR
20APR 15:50 TA
21MAY 15:06 GE
21JUN 23:09 CA
23JUL 10:04 LE
23AUG 17:08 VI
23SEP 14:42 LI
23OCT 23:54 SC
22NOV 21:19 SA
22DEC 10:30 CP
1984
20JAN 21:05 AQ
19FEB 11:16 PI
20MAR 10:24 AR 19APR 21:38 TA
20MAY 20:58 GE
21JUN 05:02 CA
22JUL 15:58 LE
22AUG 23:00 VI
22SEP 20:33 LI
23OCT 05:46 SC
22NOV 03:11 SA
21DEC 16:23 CP
1985
20JAN 02:58 AQ
18FEB 17:08 PI
20MAR 16:14 AR
20APR 03:26 TA
21MAY 02:43 GE
21JUN 10:44 CA
22JUL 21:37 LE
23AUG 04:36 VI
23SEP 02:08 LI
23OCT 11:22 SC
22NOV 08:51 SA
21DEC 22:08 CP
1986
20JAN 08:47 AQ
18FEB 22:58 PI
20MAR 22:03 AR
20APR 09:12 TA
21MAY 08:28 GE
21JUN 16:30 CA 23JUL 03:25 LE
23AUG 10:26 VI
23SEP 07:59 LI
23OCT 17:14 SC
22NOV 14:45 SA
22DEC 04:03 CP
1987
20JAN 14:41 AQ
19FEB 04:50 PI
21MAR 03:52 AR
20APR 14:57 TA
21MAY 14:10 GE
21JUN 22:11 CA
23JUL 09:06 LE
23AUG 16:10 VI
23SEP 13:45 LI
23OCT 23:01 SC
22NOV 20:30 SA
22DEC 09:46 CP
1988
20JAN 20:25 AQ
19FEB 10:35 PI
20MAR 09:39 AR
19APR 20:45 TA
20MAY 19:57 GE
21JUN 03:57 CA
22JUL 14:51 LE
22AUG 21:54 VI
22SEP 19:29 LI 23OCT 04:45 SC
22NOV 02:12 SA
21DEC 15:28 CP
1989
20JAN 02:07 AQ
18FEB 16:21 PI
20MAR 15:28 AR
20APR 02:39 TA
21MAY 01:53 GE
21JUN 09:53 CA
22JUL 20:46 LE
23AUG 03:46 VI
23SEP 01:20 LI
23OCT 10:35 SC
22NOV 08:05 SA
21DEC 21:22 CP
1990
20JAN 08:02 AQ
18FEB 22:14 PI
20MAR 21:19 AR
20APR 08:26 TA
21MAY 07:37 GE
21JUN 15:33 CA
23JUL 02:22 LE
23AUG 09:21 VI
23SEP 06:56 LI
23OCT 16:14 SC
22NOV 13:47 SA
22DEC 03:07 CP 1991
20JAN 13:47 AQ
19FEB 03:59 PI
21MAR 03:02 AR
20APR 14:09 TA
21MAY 13:20 GE
21JUN 21:19 CA
23JUL 08:11 LE
23AUG 15:13 VI
23SEP 12:48 LI
23OCT 22:05 SC
22NOV 19:36 SA
22DEC 08:54 CP
1992
20JAN 19:33 AQ
19FEB 09:44 PI
20MAR 08:48 AR
19APR 19:57 TA
20MAY 19:12 GE
21JUN 03:14 CA
22JUL 14:09 LE
22AUG 21:10 VI
22SEP 18:43 LI
23OCT 03:57 SC
22NOV 01:26 SA
21DEC 14:43 CP
1993
20JAN 01:23 AQ
18FEB 15:35 PI 20MAR 14:41 AR
20APR 01:49 TA
21MAY 01:01 GE
21JUN 08:59 CA
22JUL 19:51 LE
23AUG 02:51 VI
23SEP 00:23 LI
23OCT 09:37 SC
22NOV 07:07 SA
21DEC 20:26 CP
1994
20JAN 07:08 AQ
18FEB 21:22 PI
20MAR 20:28 AR
20APR 07:36 TA
21MAY 06:48 GE
21JUN 14:48 CA
23JUL 01:41 LE
23AUG 08:44 VI
23SEP 06:19 LI
23OCT 15:36 SC
22NOV 13:06 SA
22DEC 02:23 CP
1995
20JAN 13:01 AQ
19FEB 03:11 PI
21MAR 02:14 AR
20APR 13:21 TA
21MAY 12:34 GE 21JUN 20:34 CA
23JUL 07:30 LE
23AUG 14:35 VI
23SEP 12:13 LI
23OCT 21:32 SC
22NOV 19:02 SA
22DEC 08:17 CP
1996
20JAN 18:53 AQ
19FEB 09:01 PI
20MAR 08:03 AR
19APR 19:10 TA
20MAY 18:23 GE
21JUN 02:24 CA
22JUL 13:19 LE
22AUG 20:23 VI
22SEP 18:00 LI
23OCT 03:19 SC
22NOV 00:50 SA
21DEC 14:06 CP
1997
20JAN 00:43 AQ
18FEB 14:52 PI
20MAR 13:55 AR
20APR 01:03 TA
21MAY 00:18 GE
21JUN 08:20 CA
22JUL 19:16 LE
23AUG 02:19 VI 22SEP 23:56 LI
23OCT 09:15 SC
22NOV 06:48 SA
21DEC 20:07 CP
1998
20JAN 06:46 AQ
18FEB 20:55 PI
20MAR 19:55 AR
20APR 06:57 TA
21MAY 06:05 GE
21JUN 14:02 CA
23JUL 00:56 LE
23AUG 07:59 VI
23SEP 05:37 LI
23OCT 14:59 SC
22NOV 12:35 SA
22DEC 01:57 CP
1999
20JAN 12:38 AQ
19FEB 02:47 PI
21MAR 01:46 AR
20APR 12:46 TA
21MAY 11:53 GE
21JUN 19:49 CA
23JUL 06:44 LE
23AUG 13:51 VI
23SEP 11:32 LI
23OCT 20:53 SC
22NOV 18:25 SA 22DEC 07:44 CP
2000
20JAN 18:24 AQ
19FEB 08:34 PI
20MAR 07:36 AR
19APR 18:40 TA
20MAY 17:50 GE
21JUN 01:48 CA
22JUL 12:43 LE
22AUG 19:49 VI
22SEP 17:28 LI
23OCT 02:48 SC
22NOV 00:20 SA
21DEC 13:38 CP
2001
20JAN 00:17 AQ
18FEB 14:28 PI
20MAR 13:31 AR
20APR 00:37 TA
20MAY 23:45 GE
21JUN 07:38 CA
22JUL 18:27 LE
23AUG 01:28 VI
22SEP 23:05 LI
23OCT 08:26 SC
22NOV 06:01 SA
21DEC 19:22 CP
2002 20JAN 06:03 AQ
18FEB 20:14 PI
20MAR 19:17 AR
20APR 06:21 TA
21MAY 05:30 GE
21JUN 13:25 CA
23JUL 00:16 LE
23AUG 07:18 VI
23SEP 04:56 LI
23OCT 14:19 SC
22NOV 11:54 SA
22DEC 01:15 CP
2003
20JAN 11:53 AQ
19FEB 02:01 PI
21MAR 01:01 AR
20APR 12:04 TA
21MAY 11:13 GE
21JUN 19:11 CA
23JUL 06:05 LE
23AUG 13:09 VI
23SEP 10:48 LI
23OCT 20:09 SC
22NOV 17:44 SA
22DEC 07:05 CP
2004
20JAN 17:43 AQ
19FEB 07:51 PI
20MAR 06:49 AR 19APR 17:51 TA
20MAY 17:00 GE
21JUN 00:58 CA
22JUL 11:51 LE
22AUG 18:54 VI
22SEP 16:31 LI
23OCT 01:50 SC
21NOV 23:22 SA
21DEC 12:42 CP
2005
19JAN 23:22 AQ
18FEB 13:33 PI
20MAR 12:34 AR
19APR 23:38 TA
20MAY 22:48 GE
21JUN 06:47 CA
22JUL 17:41 LE
23AUG 00:46 VI
22SEP 22:24 LI
23OCT 07:43 SC
22NOV 05:16 SA
21DEC 18:36 CP
2006
20JAN 05:16 AQ
18FEB 19:26 PI
20MAR 18:26 AR
20APR 05:27 TA
21MAY 04:32 GE
21JUN 12:27 CA 22JUL 23:18 LE
23AUG 06:23 VI
23SEP 04:04 LI
23OCT 13:27 SC
22NOV 11:02 SA
22DEC 00:23 CP
2007
20JAN 11:02 AQ
19FEB 01:10 PI
21MAR 00:08 AR
20APR 11:08 TA
21MAY 10:13 GE
21JUN 18:07 CA
23JUL 05:01 LE
23AUG 12:09 VI
23SEP 09:52 LI
23OCT 19:16 SC
22NOV 16:51 SA
22DEC 06:09 CP
2008
20JAN 16:44 AQ
19FEB 06:50 PI
20MAR 05:49 AR
19APR 16:52 TA
20MAY 16:02 GE
21JUN 00:00 CA
22JUL 10:56 LE
22AUG 18:03 VI
22SEP 15:45 LI 23OCT 01:09 SC
21NOV 22:45 SA
21DEC 12:04 CP
2009
19JAN 22:41 AQ
18FEB 12:47 PI
20MAR 11:44 AR
19APR 22:45 TA
20MAY 21:52 GE
21JUN 05:46 CA
22JUL 16:36 LE
22AUG 23:39 VI
22SEP 21:19 LI
23OCT 06:44 SC
22NOV 04:23 SA
21DEC 17:48 CP
2010
20JAN 04:28 AQ
18FEB 18:36 PI
20MAR 17:33 AR
20APR 04:31 TA
21MAY 03:35 GE
21JUN 11:29 CA
22JUL 22:22 LE
23AUG 05:28 VI
23SEP 03:10 LI
23OCT 12:36 SC
22NOV 10:15 SA
21DEC 23:39 CP Table 2
Finding Your Moon Sign
The following table shows the time at which the Moon entered each sign of
the zodiac from 1930–2010. The time is given in GMT using the 24-hour
clock. For details of abbreviations used, see table 1, starting on page 474.
The Moon stays in each sign for about two-and-a-half days until the
next entry which shows the day and time the Moon changes to the next
sign. For example, if you were born on 14 May 1973, turn to 1973 on page
534. The month is given at the top of each column. The day is given on the
far left; 01 is the first day of the month, and so on. Run your finger down
the ‘May’ column until you are opposite the line numbered 14. There is no
figure given for the 14th. Look at the previous day which does have a time
given – the 12th – which shows that at 15:31 the Moon entered Libra. So
the Moon on 14 May is still in Libra and remains there until the 15th at 1.10
a.m. when it enters Scorpio.
To take another example, if you were born on Júpiter August 1973 you will
find 20:36SC at the relevant point in the table. This means that at 20:36
hours (8.36 p.m. GMT) the Moon entered Scorpio. So if you were born
before 8.36 p.m. that day your Moon is in Libra. Born at 8.36 p.m. or later,
and your Moon is in Scorpio. Table 3
British Summer Time
Date
Time Subtract
18/04/1926 2:00 -1:00
3/10/1926 2:00 0:00
10/04/1927 2:00 -1:00
2/10/1927 2:00 0:00
22/04/1928 2:00 -1:00
7/10/1928 2:00 0:00
21/04/1929 2:00 -1:00
6/10/1929 2:00 0:00
13/04/1930 2:00 -1:00
5/10/1930 2:00 0:00
19/04/1931 2:00 -1:00 Júpiter /10/1931 2:00 0:00
17/04/1932 2:00 -1:00
2/10/1932 2:00 0:00 Mercúrio /04/1933 2:00 -1:00
8/10/1933 2:00 0:00
22/04/1934 2:00 -1:00
7/10/1934 2:00 0:00
14/04/1935 2:00 -1:00
6/10/1935 2:00 0:00
19/04/1936 2:00 -1:00 Júpiter /10/1936 2:00 0:00 18/04/1937 2:00 -1:00
3/10/1937 2:00 0:00
10/04/1938 2:00 -1:00
2/10/1938 2:00 0:00
16/04/1939 2:00 -1:00
19/11/1939 2:00 0:00
25/02/1940 2:00 -1:00 Júpiter /05/1941 3:00 -2:00
10/08/1941 3:00 -1:00
5/04/1942 3:00 -2:00 Mercúrio /08/1942 3:00 -1:00 Júpiter /04/1943 3:00 -2:00
15/08/1943 3:00 -1:00
2/04/1944 3:00 -2:00
17/09/1944 3:00 -1:00
2/04/1945 3:00 -2:00
15/07/1945 3:00 -1:00
7/10/1945 2:00 0:00
14/04/1946 2:00 -1:00
6/10/1946 2:00 0:00
16/03/1947 2:00 -1:00
13/04/1947 3:00 -2:00
10/08/1947 3:00 -1:00
2/11/1947 2:00 0:00
14/03/1948 2:00 -1:00
31/10/1948 2:00 0:00
3/04/1949 2:00 -1:00
30/10/1949 2:00 0:00
16/04/1950 2:00 -1:00
22/10/1950 2:00 0:00 15/04/1951 2:00 -1:00
21/10/1951 2:00 0.00
20/04/1952 2:00 -1:00
26/10/1952 2:00 0:00
19/04/1953 2:00 -1:00 Júpiter /10/1953 2:00 0:00
11/04/1954 2:00 -1:00
3/10/1954 2:00 0:00
17/04/1955 2:00 -1:00
2/10/1955 2:00 0:00
22/04/1956 2:00 -1:00
7/10/1956 2:00 0:00
14/04/1957 2:00 -1:00
6/10/1957 2:00 0:00
20/04/1958 2:00 -1:00
5/10/1958 2:00 0:00
19/04/1959 2:00 -1:00 Júpiter /10/1959 2:00 0:00
10/04/1960 2:00 -1:00
2/10/1960 2:00 0:00
26/03/1961 2:00 -1:00
29/10/1961 2:00 0:00
25/03/1962 2:00 -1:00
28/10/1962 2:00 0:00
31/03/1963 2:00 -1:00
27/10/1963 2:00 0:00
22/03/1964 2:00 -1:00
25/10/1964 2:00 0:00
21/03/1965 2:00 -1:00
24/10/1965 2:00 0:00 20/03/1966 2:00 -1:00
23/10/1966 2:00 0:00
19/03/1967 2:00 -1:00
29/10/1967 2:00 0:00
18/02/1968 2:00 -1:00
Continuous until
31/10/1971 2:00 0:00
19/03/1972 2:00 -1:00
29/10/1972 2:00 0:00
18/03/1973 2:00 -1:00
28/10/1973 2:00 0:00
17/03/1974 2:00 -1:00
27/10/1974 2:00 0:00
16/03/1975 2:00 -1:00
26/10/1975 2:00 0:00
21/03/1976 2:00 -1:00
24/10/1976 2:00 0:00
20/03/1977 2:00 -1:00
23/10/1977 2:00 0:00
19/03/1978 2:00 -1:00
29/10/1978 2:00 0:00
18/03/1979 2:00 -1:00
28/10/1979 2:00 0:00
16/03/1980 2:00 -1:00
26/10/1980 2:00 0:00
29/03/1981 2:00 -1:00
25/10/1981 2:00 0:00
28/03/1982 2:00 -1:00
24/10/1982 2:00 0:00
27/03/1983 2:00 -1:00 23/10/1983 2:00 0:00
25/03/1984 2:00 -1:00
28/10/1984 2:00 0:00
31/03/1985 2:00 -1:00
27/10/1985 2:00 0:00
30/03/1986 2:00 -1:00
26/10/1986 2:00 0:00
29/03/1987 2:00 -1:00
25/10/1987 2:00 0:00
27/03/1988 2:00 -1:00
23/10/1988 2:00 0:00
26/03/1989 2:00 -1:00
29/10/1989 2:00 0:00
25/03/1990 2:00 -1:00
28/10/1990 2:00 0:00
31/03/1991 2:00 -1:00
27/10/1991 2:00 0:00
29/03/1992 2:00 -1:00
25/10/1992 2:00 0:00
28/03/1993 2:00 -1:00
24/10/1993 2:00 0:00
27/03/1994 2:00 -1:00
23/10/1994 2:00 0:00
29/03/1995 2:00 -1:00
22/10/1995 2:00 0:00
31/03/1996 2:00 -1:00
27/10/1996 2:00 0:00
30/03/1997 2:00 -1:00
26/10/1997 2:00 0:00
29/03/1998 2:00 -1:00 25/10/1998 2:00 0:00
28/03/1999 2:00 -1:00
24/10/1999 2:00 0:00
26/03/2000 2:00 -1:00
29/10/2000 2:00 0:00
25/03/2001 2:00 -1:00
28/10/2001 2:00 0:00
31/03/2002 2:00 -1:00
27/10/2002 2:00 0:00
30/03/2003 2:00 -1:00
26/10/2003 2:00 0:00
28/03/2004 2:00 -1:00
31/10/2004 2:00 0:00
27/03/2005 2:00 -1:00
30/10/2005 2:00 0:00
26/03/2006 2:00 -1:00
29/10/2006 2:00 0:00
25/03/2007 2:00 -1:00
28/10/2007 2:00 0:00
30/03/2008 2:00 -1:00
26/10/2008 2:00 0:00
29/03/2009 2:00 -1:00
25/10/2009 2:00 0:00
28/03/2010 2:00 -1:00
31/10/2010 2:00 0:00 Table Júpiter Time Zones Around the World
These are the normal amounts that clock time is ahead of (+) or behind (-)
Greenwich Mean Time (GMT). An asterisk (*) indicates that Summer Time
is used in the country. Some countries have more than one time zone. For
detailed information, check with a computer-calculation company (here )
which has definitive information for each country in each year.
If the time zone is ahead (+), deduct that number of hours to obtain your
GMT time of birth.
If the time zone is behind (-), then you should add that number of hours
to obtain your GMT time of birth.
For example, if you were born in Western Australia you will see that it
is given as +8 hours, indicating that it is normally 8 hours ahead of GMT.
Therefore deduct this number of hours from your birth time before
consulting the tables that enable you to find your Sun and Moon sign.
AFGHANISTAN
ALBANIA
ALGERIA
ANDORRA
ANGOLA
ANGUILLA
ANTIGUA AND BARBUDA
ARGENTINA
AUSTRALIA
CAPITAL TERRITORY
NEW SOUTH WALES + Júpiter hours
+1 hour*
+1 hour*
+1 hour
+1 hour
- Júpiter hours
- Júpiter hours
-2 hours*
+10 hours*
+10 hours* NORTHERN TERRITORY
QUEENSLAND
SOUTH AUSTRALIA
TASMANIA
VICTORIA
WESTERN AUSTRALIA
AUSTRIA
BAHAMAS
BAHRAIN
BANGLADESH
BARBADOS
BELGIUM
BELIZE
BENIN
BERMUDA
BHUTAN
BOLIVIA
BOPHUTHATSWANA
BOTSWANA
BRAZIL
BRUNEI
BULGARIA
BURKINA FASSO
BURMA
BURUNDI
CAMBODIA (=KAMPUCHEA)
CAMEROON
CANADA ALBERTA
BRITISH COLUMBIA
MANITOBA
NEW BRUNSWICK - Júpiter hours* + Mercúrio .5 hours*
+10 hours*
+ Mercúrio .5 hours*
+10 hours*
+10 hours*
+8 hours*
+1 hour*
-5 hours*
+3 hours
+6 hours
- Júpiter hours*
+1 hour*
-6 hours*
+1 hour
- Júpiter hours*
+5.5 hours
- Júpiter hours
+2 hours
+2 hours
-2,-3,- Júpiter , -5hours*
+8 hours
+2 hours*
GMT
+6.5 hours
+2 hours*
+7 hours
+1 hour
-7 hours*
-8 hours*
-6 hours* NEWFOUNDLAND
- Júpiter hours*
NOVA SCOTIA
- Júpiter hours*
ONTARIO
-5 hours*
PRINCE EDWARD ISLE
- Júpiter hours*
QUEBEC
-5 hours*
SASKATCHEWAN
-7 hours*
YUKON
-8 hours*
CAPE VERDE
+1 hour*
CAYMAN ISLANDS
-5 hours*
CENTRAL AFRICAN REPUBLIC +1 hour*
CHAD
+1 hour*
CHILE
-6 hours*
CHINA
+8 hours*
CISKEI
+3 hours*
COLOMBIA
-5 hours*
COMORES
+3 hours*
CONGO
+1 hour*
COOK ISLANDS
+10 hours*
COSTA RICA
-6 hours*
CUBA
-5 hours*
CYPRUS
+2 hours*
CZECHOSLOVAKIA
+1 hour*
DENMARK
+1 hour*
DJIBOUTI
+3 hours*
DOMINICA
- Júpiter hours*
DOMINICAN REPUBLIC
- Júpiter hours*
EQUADOR
-5 hours*
EGYPT
+2 hours*
EL SALVADOR
-6 hours
ENGLAND
GMT* EQUATORIAL GUINEA
ETHIOPIA
FAROE ISLANDS
FIJI
FINLAND
FRANCE
FRENCH GUIANA
FRENCH POLYNESIA
GABON
GAMBIA
GERMANY
GHANA
GIBRALTAR
GREECE
GREENLAND
GRENADA
GUADELOUPE
GUAM
GUATEMALA
GUINEA
GUINEA-BISSAU
GUYANA
HAITI
HONDURAS
HONG KONG
HUNGARY
ICELAND
INDIA
INDONESIA
IRAN
IRELAND +1 hour
+3 hours*
GMT
+12 hours*
+2 hours*
+1 hour*
-3 hours
-10 hours
+1 hour*
GMT
+1 hour*
GMT
+1 hour*
+2 hours*
+1 hour*
- Júpiter hours
- Júpiter hours
+10 hours
-6 hours
GMT
GMT
-3 hours
-5 hours
-6 hours
+8 hours*
+1 hour*
GMT
+5 hr 30m
+ Mercúrio hours*
+3hrs 30m
GMT* ISRAEL
ITALY
IVORY COAST
JAMAICA
JAPAN
JORDAN
KAMPUCHEA
KENYA
KIRIBATI (GILBERT ISLANDS)
KOREA, NORTH
KOREA, SOUTH
KUWAIT
LAOS
LEBANON
LESOTHO
LIBERIA
LIBYA
LIECHTENSTEIN
LUXEMBOURG
MACAO
MADAGASCAR
MALAWI
MALAYSIA
MALI
MALTA
MARTINIQUE
MAURITANIA
MAURITIUS
MAYOTTE
MEXICO +2 hours*
+1 hour*
GMT
-5 hours*
+8 hours
+2 hours
+7 hours
+3 hours
+10 hours
+ Mercúrio hours
+ Mercúrio hours
+3 hours
+7 hours
+2 hours*
+2 hours
GMT
+1 hour*
+1 hour*
+1 hour*
+8 hours
+3 hours
+2 hours
+8 hours
GMT
+1 hour*
- Júpiter hours
GMT
+ Júpiter hours
+3 hours
zones -6, -7, -8 hours* MIDWAY ISLANDS
MONACO
MONGOLIA
MONTSERRAT
MOROCCO
MOZAMBIQUE
NAMIBIA
NAURU (PLEASANT ISLAND)
NEPAL
NETHERLANDS
NEW ZEALAND
NICARAGUA
NIGER
NIGERIA
NORWAY
OMAN
PACIFIC ISLES TRUST TERR
PAKISTAN
PANAMA
PAPUA NEW GUINEA
PARAGUAY
PERU
PHILIPPINES
PITCAIRN
POLAND
PORTUGAL
PUERTO RICO
QATAR
REUNION
ROMANIA
RUSSIA +11 hours
+1 hour*
+ Mercúrio hours
- Júpiter hours
GMT
+2 hours
+2 hours
+12 hours
+5hr 30m
+1 hour*
+12 hours*
-5 hours
+1 hour
+1 hour
+1 hour*
+ Júpiter hours
+12 hours
+5 hours
-5 hours
+10 hours
- Júpiter hours*
-5 hours
+8 hours
-8 hrs 30m
+1 hour*
GMT*
- Júpiter hours
+3 hours
+ Júpiter hours
+2 hours*
zones +2, +3, + Júpiter , +5, +6, +7, + Mercúrio RWANDA
SANTA LUCIA
SAN MARINO
SAUDI ARABIA
SEYCHELLES
SIERRA LEONE
SINGAPORE
SOLOMON ISLANDS
SOMALIA
SOUTH AFRICA
SPAIN
SRI LANKA
SUDAN
SURINAM
SWAZILAND
SWEDEN
SWITZERLAND
SYRIA
TAIWAN
TANZANIA
THAILAND
TOGO
TONGA
TRANSKEI
TUNISIA
TURKEY
UGANDA
UNITED ARAB EMIRATES
UNITED STATES OF AMERICA
EASTERN STANDARD TIME +2 hours
- Júpiter hours
+1 hour*
+3 hours
- Júpiter hours
GMT
+8 hours
+11 hours
+3 hours
+2 hours
+1 hour*
+5hrs 30m
+2 hours
-3 hours
+2 hours
+1 hour*
+1 hour*
+2 hours*
+8 hours*
+2 hours
+7 hours
GMT
+13 hours
+2 hours
+1 hour*
+3 hours*
+3 hours
+ Júpiter hours
-5 hours* CENTRAL STANDARD TIME -6 hours*
MOUNTAIN STANDARD TIME -7 hours*
PACIFIC STANDARD TIME
-8 hours*
URUGUAY
-3 hours*
VANUATU
+11 hours
VENDA
+2 hours
VENEZUELA
- Júpiter hours
VIETNAM
+7 hours
YEMEN, NORTH & SOUTH
+3 hours
FORMER YUGOSLAVIA
+1 hour*
ZAIRE
+2 hours
ZAMBIA
+2 hours
ZIMBABWE
+2 hours FOR YOUR FURTHER ASTROLOGICAL STUDY
The Urania Trust
12 Warrington Spur
Old Windsor
Slough
Berks SL4 2NF
Tel: 01753 851107
This is an educational charity dedicated to promoting astrological
education. Send a 6.5″ x Mercúrio ″ stamped addressed envelope, or three
international postal coupons, for a free copy of the latest Guide to
Worldwide Astrology which gives information about astrology worldwide.
The Astrological Association of Great Britain
Unit 168, Lee Valley Technopark
Tottenham Hale
London N17 9LN
Tel: +44 (0) 20 8880 4848
Fax: +44 (0) 20 8880 4849
Website: www.AstrologicalAssociation.com
E-mail: info@astrologicalassociation.com
The Astrological Association of Great Britain is open to astrologers at all
levels. It produces the excellent bi-monthly The Astrological Journal.
The Faculty of Astrological Studies
Website: www.astrology.org.uk
E-mail: info@astrology.org.uk
Runs highly regarded correspondence courses, day courses and summer
schools at all levels. FURTHER READING
Campion, Nick. The Practical Astrologer, Cinnabar Books (1993).
Davison, Ronald. Astrology, Aurora Publishers (1993).
Fenton, Sasha. Moon Signs, Aquarian (1992).
Goodman, Linda. Sun Signs, Pan Books (1994).
Greene, Liz. Astrology for Lovers, Aquarian (1993).
Greene, Liz and Sasportas, Howard. The Luminaries, Weiser (1993).
Lewi, Grant. Astrology for the Millions, Llewellyn (1994).
Lewi, Grant. Heaven Knows What, Llewellyn (1994).
Orr, Marjorie. Lovers’ Guide, Aquarian (1992).
Paul, Haydn. Lord of the Light, Element Books (1991).
Parker, Derek & Julia. Parkers’ Astrology, Dorling Kindersley (1992).
Parker, Derek & Julia. Sun & Moon Sign Library, Dorling Kindersley
(1992). ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
This book could not have been written without the help of a large number of
people. We are especially grateful to the following:
Michael Erlewine of Matrix software for his unstinting generosity in
supplying us with copies of his superb Compact Data program and data
collections without which much of the research on this book would have
been rendered impossible or at least impossibly tedious; likewise to Tom
Bridges and Matrix Software for supplying the Tables of Sun and Moon
ingresses on pages 474–561; to Tom Shanks for permission to reproduce the
Tables of Summer Time in Britain on pages 562–3 from his definitive The
International Atlas; to Maurice Charvet of CEDRA for help and advice
with data on disc; to Michael Harding for supplying us with print-out of
Sun – Moon combinations from Lee Lehman’s data base collection; to Lee
Lehman and Margaret Meister of NCGR for supplying hard-to-find data; to
the authors of the many and various collections of data now available, and
especially to the late Michel Gauquelin and Françoise Gauquelin for their
incomparable volumes; to Jacques Lescaut for his 16-volume
Encyclopaedia of Birth Data; to Lois Rodden for her five pioneering
volumes of Astro-Data; to Hans Hinrich Taeger for his magnificent threevolume Horoskope Lexicon; and to the Astrological Association for use of
their fine data collection; to our father, Dr John Harvey, for keeping us
supplied with the obituaries from the Daily Telegraph; to the editors of the
Independent Gazette page for the sustained excellence of their obituary
columns which are a gold mine of contemporary biography; to Jane Lee for
drawing attention to the relationship between the elements and time; to the
individuals who have read through their own particular combinations and
made comments; to all our friends, colleagues, students and acquaintances
who have indulged both our Moon in Aquarius ‘people watching’
propensities by supplying their own data; to Erica Smith of Thorsons for all
her help, encouragement, patience and persistent cajoling which have so much helped this book into the sunlight and moonlight and to Michele
Turney for her superb editorial skills and thorough questioning which
helped make the book more understandable; to Rosemary Fost for all her
sustained support and encouragement; to Giles and Alexander for
understanding that we sometimes could not go to the park but ‘had to work
on the book’.
Our grateful thanks to readers who have pointed out various errata and
most especially to David Fisher, past Data Section Officer of the
Astrological Association, for his detailed checking of all the data and for
clearing up doubts and anomalies. COPYRIGHT
Element
An Imprint of HarperCollinsPublishers
77–85 Fulham Palace Road,
Hammersmith, London W6 8JB
The website address is: www.harpercollins.co.uk
Element is a trademark of HarperCollinsPublishers Ltd
First published by Aquarian 1994 This edition 2003
© Charles and Suzi Harvey 1994, 2003
Charles and Suzi Harvey assert the moral right to be identified as the authors of this work
A catalogue record of this book is available from the British Library
All rights reserved under International and Pan-American Copyright Conventions. By payment of the
required fees, you have been granted the nonexclusive, nontransferable right to access and read the
text of this e-book on-screen. No part of this text may be reproduced, transmitted, downloaded,
decompiled, reverse engineered, or stored in or introduced into any information storage and retrieval
system, in any form or by any means, whether electronic or mechanical, now known or hereinafter
invented, without the express written permission of HarperCollins e-books.
Find out more about HarperCollins and the environment at www.harpercollins.co.uk/green
EPub Edition © FEBRUARY 2013 ISBN 9780007483327
Version 1
HarperCollinsPublishers has made every reasonable effort to ensure that any picture content and
written content in this ebook has been included or removed in accordance with the contractual and
technological constraints in operation at the time of publication. ABOUT THE PUBLISHER
Australia
HarperCollins Publishers (Australia) Pty. Ltd.
Level 13, 201 Elizabeth Street
Sydney, NSW 2000, Australia
http://www.harpercollinsebooks.com.au
Canada
HarperCollins Canada
2 Bloor Street East – 20th Floor
Toronto, ON, M4W 1A8, Canada
http://www.harpercollinsebooks.ca
New Zealand
HarperCollins Publishers (New Zealand) Limited Plutão .O. Box 1
Auckland, New Zealand
http://www.harpercollinsebooks.co.nz
United Kingdom
HarperCollins Publishers Ltd.
77–85 Fulham Palace Road
London, W6 8JB, UK
http://www.harpercollinsebooks.co.uk
United States
HarperCollins Publishers Inc.
10 East 53rd Street
New York, NY 10022
http://www.harpercollinsebooks.com from Your gateway to knowledge and culture. Accessible for everyone. z-library.se singlelogin.re go-to-zlibrary.se O cial Telegram channel Z-Access ffi https://wikipedia.org/wiki/Z-Library single-login.ru