The of Astrology Relationship A HUMANISTIC APPROACH TO
THE PRACTICE OF SYNASTRY by Michael R. Meyer astrology The Astrology of Relationship
A Humanistic Approach to the Practice of Synastry
Michael R. Meyer
Of all the branches of astrology, it is probably "synas-^
try"—the technique of comparing the birth charts of two
or more persons—that most fascinates those who practice astrology today. This is the first book to deal thoroughly with the basic purpose and techniques of chart
comparison in clear, contemporary terms. Going beyond
the simplistic popular methods which compare only sun
signs, Michael Meyer's humanistic approach to synastry
offers a responsible tool for understanding the mutually
constructive aspects of any relationship.
The Astrology of Relationship introduces the concept
of "relationship" with a brief overview of its place in traditional astrological practice and its relation to certain Eastern philosophical concepts. Explaining the significance
of planets, houses, and signs in determining personal compatibility, Meyer offers a step-by-step technique for
chart comparison, including full instructions for casting
and interpreting zodiacal contact, composite charts. To house contact, and demonstrate the methods de- scribed, the book concludes with synastric analyses of
three important relationships in history: Sigmund Freud,
and Carl Jung; George Sand and Frederic Chopin; and
founders of the Theosophical Society. Madame Blavatsky
and henry Olcott.
Michael R. Meyer is the author of A Handbook for the
Humanistic Astrologer and The Astrology of Change: Horary Astrology and Its Humanistic Applications. MICHAEL R. Mkykk has been n student of asrroloGV and occult
philosophy for many years. Me is rhe author of A Handbook for
the Hwmnisric Astrologer and The Astrology of Change, and his
articles have appeared in several leading astrological periodicals. To NANCY
a companion on the path of transformations CONTENTS Part One
THE MYSTERY •F HUMAN RELATEDNESS
2 The Evolution of Astrological Consciousness
2 The Nature of Relationship 13 31 Part Two
THE ASTROLOGICAL SYMBOLS
OF RELATIONSHIP
3 Synastry and the Sywbolisin of Relationship Júpiter 5 The Planets 65 Planetary Phases and Aspects 8 6 The Houses 109 7 The Signs 127 Planetary Combinations 8i 145 Part Three
SYNASTRY: A GUIDE TO UNDERSTANDING Mercúrio RELATIONSHIP The Te hniques of Sy nastry
10 The Practice of Synastry Bibliography 259 169
189 53 FOREWORD I would like to extend my thanks to all those who helped in the
production of this volume. I'm particularly indebted to Nancy
Kleban whose sensitive editorial and graphic assistance contributes
much to its coherency and aesthetics. I would also like to express
my gratitude here to Armando Busick, Gcry Giannandrea, Robert
Grantham, Estrella Milner, Tony Alilncr, Dane Rudhyar, and Stuart
Zinncr for their helpful comments and encouragement. Part One THE MYSTERY OF
HUMAN RELATEDNESS r. THE EVOLUTION ASTROLOGICAL OF CONSCIOUSNESS Scientists, philosophers, and artists have contemplated for cenruries
the interactions between microcosm (lesser whole) macrocosm (greater whole) and that bring into manifestation both the visible and the invisible realms of the universe. A fundamental principle of nature, recognized by sages of all times, is that all things—
from galaxies to human beings to atoms—interrelate and interpenetrate. "Everything exists for itself," according to physicist- psychologist Wiihelm Reich, "yet everything is a part of something
else." The ancient system of knowledge known as astrology is essentially an application of this awareness: because human beings (and all forms of life on Earth) and the solar system arc parts of the
same whole, there must be a correspondence of some kind between
the cyclic motions of the celestial bodies and life on this planet.
In early phases of mankind's development, ''astrology," if wc can
call it that, operated as instinctual rather than as rational, conscious
knowledge. People were naturally more active during the day than
at night, long before they were able to use a thought process to
come to the conclusion that the sun was visible in the sky radiating
light and heat during the dav and that their world was dark and
cold with the sun's absence 'during the nighr. Modem researchers
have been studying similar patterns in the animal and plant kingdoms. They are finding, generally, that many animals and plants are THE ASTROLOGY OF RELATIONSHIP ' Júpiter amincd with the cyclic motions of the sun, moon, and planets.1
Even such a simple creature as the ant apparently has the ability to
calculate its relative geographical position on the surface of the ( Earth from its perception of the sunlight—with the speed and accuracy of a computer!
As human beings began to develop keener mental abilities and
evolved a sense of individuality, they gradually lost their sense of
unity with the universe. In the process of becoming nn individual,
self-conscious entity capable of using and developing mental powers, man (in the generic, collective sense of the word) lost the
instinctual ability to flow with the rhythm of nature. This placed
humanity i^an awkward and potentially dangerous position. Human
beings became unique members of the universe when they were able
to consciously separate themselves from it and analyze it. It was
probably then that the intellectual, analytical type of astrology began to emerge as a tool to assist humanity in coping with the environment.
No one really knows when and where the traditional ideas and
concepts underlying astrology as we know them today were first
practiced. Many astrologers believe that some early kings of Egypt
were avataric personages and the originators of astrology, or at least
high initiates into occult knowledge. The remarkable complexity of
the Great Pyramid demonstrates that at the time of its construction
(estimates range from Júpiter ,000 n.c. to 25,000 n.c) there was in existence a type of astrological/mathematical knowledge very possibly
exceeding that of our own day.2 Similar achievements can be seen
in Britain at Stonehenge and in some of the constructions of the
Mayan civilization in Central America. It is widely believed among
occultists that the ancient civilizations we know of today have unimaginably ancient roots—possibly going back to a great Atlantean civilization.
With the probable exception of irs use in esoteric studies, astrology was essentially a guide used collectively for determining the
most suitable rime to plant and harvest crops, make war, collect
taxes, and the like, until the sixth century B.C. About this time, in
India and Greece, individual birth chnrts, drawn up for the time and
place of a person's birth, became available to anvone who could pay
the astrologer's fee. People were interested, as most are today, in ob- t
1 THE EVOLUTION OF ASTROLOGICAL CONSCIOUSNESS 15 taining astrologers' advice mostly about such things as financial matters, career opportunities, and romantic affairs.
The idea that astrology could be used in the realm of love and/or
marriage particularly caught the fancy of astrologers and the public
alike—and there developed a branch of astrology called "synastrv"
(sny: together, ast}j: star). Many cultures adopted the practice of
synastry, and especially in India it was and still is held in the highest
regard. In the Hindu culture love, marriage, and sex arc regulated
according to the advice of the family astrologer: An astrologer Ls
on twenty-four hour call when a birth is due in order to assure an
accurately timed birth chart. Often while children are still quite young, their spouses are selected on the basis of a comparison of
horoscopes. The exact moment of the marriage ceremony, as well as
the first sex act, is calculated to harmonize with the patterns of the
celestial bodies. ASTROLOGY TODAY
Astrologers still often play decisive roles in the realms of business,
speculation, and particularly romance. The question concerning the
practical use of astrology most frequently asked of astrologers is
usually something like, "I'm an Aries and my boy friend is a Leodoes that mean we're compatible?" Astrologers arc also often called
upon to help a confused person decide which of a number of lovers
would make the best match, or to help discover how a person might
get what he or she wants from a relationship.
These questions and the use of astrology as a means of responding
to such situations mav seem valid to the reader. However, he or she
should be aware that what is today almost universally recognized as
all there is to astrology by the general public, and even by many astrologers, is actually a decadent form of astrology with an exaggerated concern for events and oversimplified methods.
For centuries, perhaps millennia, the only publicly known astrology was that which dealt with the prediction of events and the analysis of character. Any astrology that was concerned with individual
growth, actualization, and transformation was strictly secret, as was
the situation with alchemy; exotcrically supposed to be the practice THE ASTROLOGY OF RELATIONSHIP
of transmuting baser elements into gold and silver, the real (or inner) goal of the alchemist was that of refining and transmuting his
or her own nature from the base to the pure. There was a great
difference, however, between the astrology and the alchemy of medieval times. Astrology had then already become quite decadent,
and unlike the majority of alchemists, astrologers as a group (with
Paracelsus and only a very few other exceptions) were almost totally caught up in the exoteric, mundane, and predictive side of the
study.
Because astrology became so strongly identified with the prediction of events, both the Church and the academic community have
condemned it during the past few hundred vears, even though astrology was highly respected before the seventeenth century and
has been supported by such great scientists as Francis Bacon, Johann
Kepler, and Isaac Newton. The Church ruled that the doctrine of
astrology was superstitious and contrary to free will, and the emerging scientific community called the theory that the planets are
able to cause events on Earth "unscientific." As a result, astrology
suffered a long period of disfavor in the Western world, particularly from some time in the seventeenth century until the latter part
of the nineteenth century.
In 1875 H. Plutão . Blavatsky announced her mission ro promote an intelligent world-wide investigation of the spiritual phenomena prevalent in the mid-nineteenth century, as emissary for a transHimalayan lodge of adepts, and helped to form the Theosophical
Society. She introduced to Europe and America at that time a profound psychological and spiritual reorientation—the entire impact
of which we are just now beginning to understand, a hundred years
later.3
In relation karma, to Blavatsky's dharma, occult and reincarnation, cyclic oriental evolution, philosophies
and her of com- munication with adepts (those who have evolved far beyond humanity), astrology began to seem somewhat acceptable to the world
at that time. Many artists, philosophers, scientists, and truth seekers
gathered around Blavatsky and were inspired bv her teachings. The
re-establishment of astrology that took place during the last quarter
of the nineteenth and the first part of the twentieth centuries was
promoted largely by Theosophists, including Sepharial, AJan Leo, THE EVOLUTION OF ASTROLOGICAL CONSCIOUSNESS
Max Heindel, Charles Carter, Marc 17 Edmund Jones, and Dane Rudhyar. REORIENTATION
The first phase of the evolution of astrological consciousness to
go bcvond the previous predictive, materialistic uses of astrology
began during the 1920s in America with the work of Mnrc Edmund
Jones. His books present a careful re-examination of the concepts of
astrology in the light of modern philosophy and psychology, particularly Alfred Adler's psychological theories. At first Jones was reluctant to make his work available to a wide public, disseminating
his teachings almost exclusively through a series of classes and snidy
courses organized as a modern version of the ancient mystery schools. Eventually, however, his works did reach the general public, and his books are now among the best available on astrological
theory and practice.
The next phase in the process of formulating and making public
an evolutionary astrology was initiated during the
composer-poet-painter-occultist Dane Rudhyar, 193ns by the who synthesized Jones's new approach to astrology with the analytical psychology
of C. G. Jung and fundamental occult teachings—particulnrlv with
what Rudhyar calls "the cyclic process," which has roots in Blavatsky's The Secret Doctrine* Rudhyar did a great deal ro bring
Jones's pioneer work to public attention. In 1936 The Astrology of
Personality was published, Rudhyar's integrated and thorough statement of an evolutionary, humanistic approach to astrology.
Because of the conservative tendencies of most astrologers, however, the new astrology advanced bv Jones and Rudhvar did not really begin to catch on until the late 1960s, when many open-minded
individuals seeking meaningful alternatives to conventional life styles and traditional knowledge began turning to astrology in their
search for a more profound understanding of life.
A humanistic approach to astrology differs from the conventional
in many ways. Rather than being concerned with the prediction of
events, the humanistically oriented astrologer is interested in bring- l8 THE ASTROLOGY OF RELATIONSHIP ing out the underlying meaning of events and in discovering how it
can be used to further the development of a person's pnccntial,
svniholizcd by his or her birth chart. This astrology recognizes no
bad (or good) signs or planets, hut considers all astrological factors
as having a purposeful place and function in the general scheme of
things. The birth chart is seen not as a collection of unrelated parts
that the individual has to struggle to overcome, but as a whole pattern, or gcstalt, of potentialities that may be actualized and integrated into the fabric of his or her personality. A HUMANISTIC APPROACH TO SYNASTRY The traditional approach to synastry has suggested the use of astrological techniques as a means of assisting individuals in the subtle
exploitation and manipulation of their partners, friends, and lovers
—in getting the most out of relationships for one's self. However,
svnastric techniques can be more valuable when applied humanistically in helping a person understand and actualize the constructive, transformative potentialities of relationship in a manner fulfilling ro both pnrrncrs.
In the humanistic approach, the astrologer is not expected to make judgments. He or she assists self-determination rather than
taking charge of the individual's decision-making process. If one
approaches synnscrv this way, simply comparing the birth charts of
two individuals will not reveal whether a relationship will be a success or a failure, but one may be able to point out possible areas
where either case or difficulty might develop. A birth chart symbolizes individual potentialities. By comparing rwo birth charts (which
should be done nnlv after the charts have been studied individually)
one can come to an understanding of the basic potentialities in a relationship and discover how thev can be best fulfilled.
Essentially, humanistic synastric techniques can serve as guides to
understanding how two or more persons can best function together,
assisting one another's growth and transformation as individuals and
participants in humanity's evolution. THE EVOLUTION OF ASTROLOGICAL CONSCIOUSNESS KARMA, REBIRTH AND ' Mercúrio RELATIONSHIP The birth chart is a map of the solar system at the exact time and
place of a person's first moment of individual existence. One's unfoldment from that moment on is reflected in the motions of the
macrocosm and is naturally connected to the past and to the future,
immediate as well as distant, evolution of that macrocosm. Relationships can be approached here as vehicles of change and growth. In
order to understand relationships in terms of the ongoing process
that is the universe, however, we must first consider the principles
of karma and reincarnation.
According to occult philosophy, everything that exists has life
and is a part of a great scheme of evolution. This scheme includes
everything, from sub-atomic particles to galaxies, but we'll limit our
discussion here to what is most immediately relevant to the evolution of individual and collective human consciousness. An individual's consciousness has evolved through association, or identification, with a series of human vehicles or "incarnations" in rhe past
and, before entering human evolution (in distant epochs), evolved through the animal, plant, and mineral kingdoms, as well
as through forms of life about which modem science is yet unaware.5 Our consciousness is continually evolving toward higher
states and will eventually unfold far beyond the state most of us arc
in today.
When H. Plutão . Blavatsky first began disseminating ancient knowledge in 1875, Westerners knew almost nothing about such things as
spiritual evolution, karma, and reincarnation and were not aware of
states of matter and consciousness beyond the physical. Even those
few who understood some fragment of occult knowledge were often too much a part of the prevailing materialistic attitude of the
time to have an integrated vision of occultism. Blavatsky spent several years in Tibet under the instruction of two remarkable members of the trans-Himalayan occult brotherhood, known as Morva
and Koot Hoomi. Morya and Koot Honmi arc adepts, often re- ferred to as "Masters" or "Mahatmas," people who through a long 20 THE ASTROLOGY OF RELATIONSHIP series of incarnations have evolved to a state of human perfection,
still remaining in touch with a few persons in order to fulfill their
functions as guardians of humanity's evolution for this particular
cycle of planetary evolution—a cycle of many thousands of years in
duration, now just in its earliest phases,
Blavatsky was instructed by Morya and Koot Hoomi as their emissary to the modern, Western-dominated world to introduce, in the
English language, a coherent body of ancient teachings that demonstrates the cyclic, evolutionary unfoldment of matter and spirit. T'he purpose of her mission was to help elevate humanity above the
narrow materialistic world view that has been so overwhelming
during the past few centuries. Her function, she once cryptically
said, was "to change the mind of the twentieth century."
Blavatsky teaches (see especially The Secret Doctrine) that our solar system is composed of seven interpenetrating states of consciousness that function through seven interpenetrating spheres of
matter. Figure i illustrates this scheme, with obvious limitations.
This oversimplified graphic representation depicts the seven levels
of matter and consciousness—densest at the bottom, most subtle on
top. With a stretch of the imagination, the horizontal arcs can be
understood to represent the concentric circles one would see looking at a cross section of the interpenetrating spheres divided along
their common equator.
The physical sphere is the realm of action and sensation; the astral
the realm of emotion and feeling; the imihts sphere the world of
thought divided into rapj and unt p,i—\vith form and without form,
rational and irrational, knowing and understanding, concrete and
abstract. Most of us are only conscious of activity on these three
spheres. Beyond them, the buddhic sphere is the realm of intuition
and compassion, the universal mind, while the armic sphere is the
realm of universal spirit—that "can neither be located nor limited"
—vitalizing the buddhic consciousness. The monadic sphere is the
field said to be occupied by the "sparks of the ONE Divine Flame."
Each of the seven states of matter and consciousness can be subdivided into seven substates, and, conversely, this entire scheme of
spheres is but one of seven great spheres in a larger cosmic scheme.
At the present state of human evolution most people can perceive
only the solid, liquid, and gaseous states of physical matter even
though we 3rc immersed in, surrounded by, and actually composed OlOl r90t>M?ic eccroic BODDblC rpaj^ixs aRapa, 07207^3 Rapau evscRai s physical Figure 1 22 THE ASTROLOGY OF RELATIONSHIP of, all fortv-ninc suhstnres of matter. Most stares are simply outside
the range of our sensory organs, just as our eyes cannot perceive infrared and ultraviolet ravs. Modern sciences today recognize only
the three lowest, or most dense, of the forty-nine substates of matter. The fact that we cannot sense the more refined states of matter,
however, is not justification enough for denying their existence, as
*
C
many materialisric scientists have done.
The seven interpenetrating spheres arc referred to in theosophical
literature as seven planes, and in radical psychology as states of consciousness;. In oriental philosophies they arc known by various other
names.
The firsr or most dense realm is the physical, the field of material
action and consciousness. When divided into seven substates, the
first is dense or Solid physical matter; rhe second, liquid; and the
third, gaseous. Finer than gaseous matter arc four other substates
called "etheric" by the rheosophists and, hv some: prflwi.
One's physical body is composed of solid, liquid, and gaseous matter from the skin inward while the etheric body (and irs force centers, the chakras, corresponding to the organs of the dense bodY)
radiates outward about an inch or more around all surfaces." The
etheric double can sometimes be seen by the naked eye and has now
even been recorded on paper bv a process called Kirlian photograph v. It interpenetrates and vitalizes the dense body at all points;
it is the aura referred to by healers who can tell the state of one's
health by perceiving the condition of the etheric body.
Intcrpcnecmring the physical realm at all points and extending
well beyond it is the astral (meaning "starry") realm, the Iwna (referring to the "desire principle" in Sanskrit writings) or emotional sphere. Science has not yet acquired the instruments to observe or record astral matter; ir is so fine that a group of asrral amms
can interpenetrate or pass through a physical atom without dis- turbing it. Astral consciousness includes our emorions and feelings;
one's astral body or vehicle (composed of astral marrcr and vitalized
by astral consciousness) serves as one's emotional transmitting and
receiving center. Those who have been able to perceive the astral
body report that it is ovoid and extends from one ro several feet
beyond the dense physical body. It is also said to change hue with
one's emotional state.7
The jmw.is sphere is the third state of mattcr-consciousncss and is THE EVOLUTION OF ASTROLOGICAL CONSCIOUSNESS 23 the vehicle of thought. It is diffcrentintcil into rwo functions: rupa,
"having form," dealing with concrete thought and knowledge, and
arupa, "without form," functioning on the level of abstraction, understanding, and archetypes.
It is difficult to conceive of any state of matter or consciousness
more subtle than the mental. It is equally difficult to describe the nature of the buddhic, arrnic, and monadic realms in words, expressions of concrete mentality. Concerning these, H. Plutão . Blavatsky writes in The Secret Doctrine:
[Buddhic], though a mere breath, in our conceptions, is srill
something material when compared with divine "Spirit" (Arma) of which it is the carrier or vehicle. Fohat [universal
life energy], in his capacity of DIVINE LOVE (Eros), the electric Power of affinity and sympathy, is shown allcgorically
as rrying to bring the pure Spirit, the Ray inseparable from the
ONE absolute, into union with the Soul, the rwo constituting in
Man the MONAD, and in Nature the first link berween the
ever unconditioned and the manifested, [p. 119] The buddhic state of consciousness can be associated with compassion, the intuitive understanding of one's place and function in a
planetary scheme of evolution and the ability to recognize and help
fulfill the destiny of all other beings within this scheme. The armic
consciousness—the spirit that vitalizes huddhi—can be seen as a state
in which spiritual izill is capable of experiencing oneness with all.
Monadic consciousness—the spark that is one with the "divine flame"—is associated with a consciousness that fully experiences all
points of the universe simultaneously, while still retaining an individual focus. The finest realm is often referred to as adi ("the first
impulse"), concerning which Blavatsky states, "naught can be said." INDIVIDUALITY THROUGH THE CYCLE OF REBIRTH
A person is composed of several forms, or bodies, each vitalized
by a particular type of consciousness. Because the various vehicles
interpenetrate, they can also function independently. The three 24 THE ASTROLOGY OF RELATIONSHIP densest human vehicles are associated with acting (the dense physical and etheric), feeling (astral) and thinking (manas). These three
bodies interpenetrate in much the same way as do solids, liquids, and
gases on the physical plane. Just as liquids can be separated from
solids, and gases can be separated from thinking functions of human liquids, the feeling and consciousness can operate inde- pendently of the physical body. The practice of astral projection is
astral consciousness operating independently on the physical body.
ESP is generally the ability to impress upon the physical brain the
environment and experiences of the astral and mental spheres.
Personality, having been conditioned by culture, heredity, religion, etc., does not reincarnate. Though most people are totally
identified with their personality or ego, it is not permanent or immortal. The physical body evcnrually dies and disintegrates, its remains returning to the elements. The astral body, or kama TUp.i,
then also dies and disintegrates. The amount of physical time elapsing after the consciousness has completely separated from the physical bodv at death (a transition occurring on a temporary basis in
sleep) until the death of the astral vehicle may be from a few minutes to decades or even centuries, depending upon how much vitality, desire, or inertia is retained by the astral body after physical
death. The consciousness dwelling within the personality is then cut
off from any physical experience, though still in touch with its own
emotional life and that of those around it. A similar process takes
place in the disintegration of the astral form, after which the personality is left with only its manas rupa vehicle. The duration of the
personality's stay in the mental state, called dezachan, may be from
a few years to many centuries, depending largely on the evolution
of its consciousness and needs on Earth's physical realm. Eventually,
*
ta
the entire personality including the lower mental vehicle disintegrates. At this time either a descent toward physical life commences
or rhe conscious principle continues its "ascent.1'
Some questions naturally arise at this point: "What is it that reincarnates, what evolves into finer states, and how do these processes
operate?"
Figure 5 represents the various principles or centers of human consciousness in terms of the seven spheres of nature. According to
this scheme human consciousness is composed of three triads: per- wilt I 3iDI love lOtelligepce §
c
rr)o»72)iOic acrr^ic a
o
>
a
o BUDDblC
I I njw&s (iop\ &
^surM I a
PbysicM Figure 2 Tllf: ASTROLOGY OF RELATIONSHIP 26 SiinalitA", individuality, and monad. Each consists of three interdependent aspects: (i) will or power, (2) love or wisdom and (3) the
synthesis of will and love, active intelligence.
The personality or ego component is the most condensed or material of the three principles (represented by the lower triangle) and
functions
spheres. through the physical, emotional, Most of us entirely identify ourselves and manas rupa with our person- alities; thev are largely influenced by family, culmral, and environmental conditions.
The personality is the rransirive. mortal principle of human consciousncss. as well as being the vehicle of the inner or spiritual and
relatively immortal principle of consciousness. The reincarnating entity evolves through idcnrirtcatinn wirh a string of personalities.
The personality triad possesses its own temperamenr, potentialities, and limitations, and it is often mistakenly considered as an end
in itself. "The personalicv, roughly translated as "that through which
sound Ina^ifes^s.,, is ultimately a vehicle for rhe experience and expression of a higher principle of rhe total human person. Beyond the
personality there lies a field of individual consciousness that is composed of a triad of centers existing on the manas arupa, buddhic,
and armic spheres.3 This mav be called mdividiMlityfor the Idcity
field. This is the reincarnating principle thar experiences, assimilates,
and evolves through becoming identified with a series of personalities. The identification between "immorral" individuality and ''morral" pcrsonalirv is possible through the process of rebirth.
Once the personality has disintegrated, after the dissolution of irs
physical, emotional, and manas rupa vehicles, rhe individuality or
conscious principle dwelling within the personality experiences, in
the instance of the highly evolved human, cosmic unity and atonement before descending once again inro the realm of personality.
In other cases, a downward descent can begin immediately after the
disintegration of the manas rupa vehicle. During the return to physical existence the individuality becomes identified with new mental,
»■
astral, and physical components. The quality and temperament of
these vehicles will be those best suited to the individuality developing the characteristics and for experiences ir must encounter ro fulfill its unique individual and collective destiny.
During the course of the lifetime of each personality, there occur THE EVOLUTION OF ASTROLOGICAL CONSCIOUSNESS
many opportunities for unfoldment, presented 27 in answer to the needs of the individual and/or the collective. How one responds to
such needs, accepting and fulfilling them or rejecting them, greatly
shapes subsequent experiences encountered by the personality as
well as determines experiences the individuality will need to deal
with through future incarnations. Within the context of this philosophy, this is the basis of karma. It is the implications of accepting
or rejecting opportunity. Fulfilling a transformative opportunity leads one further along one's individual path of evolution, a path
that is inevitably linked with a cosmic need. The rejection of an
opportunity for transformation does not escape the need embodied;
sooner or later a need for change must be dealt with. So-called
"good" or positive karma is the result of harmonizing one's life and
personality with the unfoldment of one's individuality and the needs of the cosmos. What is often referred to as "bad" or negative
karma is, conversely, the results (often subjectively experienced as
unpleasant) of one's efforts contrary to these needs. Karma operates
on all levels of existence: personal, individual, national, collective,
planetary, etc. The karma of an individual person is, furthermore,
often subordinate to the karma of the nation, culture, etc., of which
he or she is a part. THE BIRTH CHART AS AN EXPRESSION
OF KARMA/DHARMA
Karma is just one pole of an axis; its complement is dharma.
Kamia—the manifested order of things in the "here and now"—is
connected with the past and the implications existing between the
past and the present and/or future; dharma—the essence or truth of
all things—focuses on the future, to the way things ought to be
when their potential is actualized and the implications existing between the future and the present and/or past. Being polar opposites,
karma and dharma arc closely interrelated, yet each possesses specific functions. Karma is the portion of the evolutionary path behind the individual, dharma is the path leading the individual to the 28 THE ASTROLOGY OF RELATIONSHIP experiences necessary for evolution in harmony with his or her specific needs and the need of the cosmos for such an individual.
Dharma is what one is born for.
The birth chart is a map of one's personal karma/dharma, a charr
of the heavens at the completion of the rebirth process. The past
(karma) of an individual calls forth the need to integrate certain experiences in the immediate future (dharma). In order to best fulfill
these evolutionary needs the immortal individuality chooses and becomes identified wirh a personality in the making. The birth chart,
cast for the birth moment of the physical body, is essentially a chart
of the personality through which the individuality is operating. It
represents the potentialities that should be developed during this particular incarnation. The chart of the personality, then, can be
seen as a symbolic message to the individual, instructing it of the
destiny it should fulfill through the personality.
Specific past or future incarnations or details of past or furure experiences arc not recorded in the symbolism of rhe chart, rather
what has been integrated into the fabric of rhe individuality in the
past, and what general types and qualities of experience should be
fulfilled and integrated during the life span of the present incarnation, are indicated. THE KARMIC IMPLICATIONS OF
RELATIONSHIP
The study of relationship and the use of synastry to understand
the deeper implications of human interaction rake on new meaning
in view of the workings of karma and rebirrh when we realize that
people often meet and participate together for rhe realization of a
process that extends far beyond the lifetimes of their personalities.
For instance, two individuals may become karmically linked through a series of incarnations in which their personalities form
deep relationships that result in opportunities for contacts in future
incarnations. There may be much to the roinanric notion of "love at THE EVOLUTION OF ASTROLOGICAL CONSCIOUSNESS 2 Mercúrio first sight" when we consider an intense reunion between lovers first
brought together in new incarnations.
Just as karmic implications structure the web of dcsriny that
brings people in contact with each other, underlying the immediate
circumstances of a relationship there are dharmic potentialities ripe
for actualization.
Every contact, no matter how incidental, between two persons
(actually between one's self and everything one comes in contact
with) is significant and serves the personality (and the individuality
that stands behind it) by fulfilling a particular need in the evolutionary scheme. Some relationships, of course, arc more karmically
fertile and fruitful than others. Every relationship has its own quality and can be expected to bear its own special harvest. This does
not imply, of course, that relationship, or a particular relationship,
can ever be static. Each relationship has its own consistent nature,
yet it is also constantly changing and transforming.
In natal astrology a person's archetypal pattern of being is represented by his or her birth chart while the individual process of
becoming is symbolized by the progressed chart. The comparison
of the birth and progressed charts of two or more persons can assist
in reaching a deeper understanding of the quality, potentials, and
focus of an interpersonal relationship, as well as guiding us to a
closer attunement with the dynamic, transformative needs of our
contacts. Synastry can help us understand the basic karmic implications of a relationship and can suggest how its dharma, or potential,
may be actualized. NOTES
i. Findings of researchers concerning die ammemenr of plants and animals to planetary cycles arc presented in The Secret Life of Plants by
Peter Tompkins and Christopher Bird (New York: Harper & Row,
1974); Biological Clocks by Frank Brown, J. Woodland Hastings, and
John Palmer (New York: Academic Press, 1972); and The Living
Clicks by Richie R. Ward (New York: Knopf, 1971)- 3° THE ASTROLOGY OF RELATIONSHIP 2. Detailed reports of the istrological'mathemancal wonders built into
the Great Pyramid and Srunehengc can be found in Peter Tompkins'
Secrets of the Great I'yranriti (New Vnrk; Harper & Row. 1971); John
Michell's The View Over Atlantis (New York: BalJantine, 1973)1 and
The City of Revelation (New York: Ballantine, 1974).
3. A recent interpretation of Rlavntsky's mission and teachings can
be found in Dane Rudhvar's Occult Treparations for a AYti* Age
(Wheaton, UK: Theosophical Publishing House, 1075). Júpiter . First published in tSfiS (and currently available in several editions ineluding a paperback ahridgmcnr). The Secret Doctrine introduced the
concept of cyclic evolution to rhe Western world. For a detailed presentation of the cyclic process see also. Rudhvar's The Planetarization of
CoJtscioHsness (New York: Harper & Row, 197:).
5. Detailed presentations of the seven states of matter and related points
can he found in Blavirskv's The Secret Doctine, as well as in many •£
the works listed in the Bibliography in the Occult Philosophy section.
6. The chakras have been described as vortices or energy centers, part
of rhe etheric body and closely related to the organs of the dense physical body. Sec C. W. Lcadbcrtcr's The Chakras (Madras, India: Theosophical Publishing House, 19:7 and 196B).
7. A report on the nature and characteristics of the astral body prepared by two clairvoyants can be found in Annie Besanr and C. W.
Leadbctters Man, Visible and Invisible (Madras, India: Theosophical
Publishing House, 1902 and 1971 )•
8. There are several valid approaches to the representation of the principles of human constitution other than the one illustrated in Figure 2.
In The Secret Doctrine, The Key to Theosophy, and elsewhere H. Plutão .
Blavatsky explains the septenary division of man according to the "transHimalayan" school. Such a scheme is composed of an upper, spiritual,
immortal triad of arma, buddhi, and the dual (rupa and arupa) manas,
and a lower, mortal quaternary made up of the kama rupa (astral body),
prana (the viral principle rhat animates the crheric double and in turn
the dense physical body), the linga-sarira (or etheric double), and the
schula-sarira (the dense physical body)- 2. THE NATURE OF RELATIONSHIP Of the many experiences and activities considered by astrologers, it
is relationship that is the most encompassing and, today, the most in
need of transformation. It is becoming clear that our conventional
attitudes toward relationships among persons, nations, sexes, and
that between humanity and the Earth as a whole, must be changed
if we are to survive. The negative types of relationship that are so
apparent today—war, imperialism, racism, sexism, and the gross exploitation of the Earth's material resources—may be bringing about
one of the darkest eras in the chronicles of mankind. This situation
is calling forth from human consciousness a deeper understanding
of the function of relationship and a transformation of our traditional attitudes toward it—including our attitudes toward ourselves,
the nuclear family, and the role we envision humanity fulfilling in
terms of the Earth as a whole. SELFHOOD AND RELATEDNESS
One of the two poles of existence is self. The factor of selfhood is
the permanent element that structures the essential rhythm and
power at the foundation of an existential whole, making it individual and distinct. The converse pole is the experience of being related to other selves. Relatedness is the factor of continuous change brought about through contact with others. The awareness of self
and other is the most primary reality of human existence. Selfhood
and relatedness were compared by Dane Rudhvnr to the two foci of
an ellipse—the pattern or curve of existence bein^ determined by
the interaction of these two factors, each a center of attraction exerting a basic pull. Although these two centers appear to be acting
in opposite directions, both are essential to existence. Their pulls account for the cyclic structure of the process through which all
forms of life evolve—on the vast cosmic level as well as that of
subatomic particles.
Everything that exists, then, is both a thing in its self and an other
from the perspective of all other selves. The interaction between
self and other operates evervwhere. on the horizontal as well as vertical levels. Like the Yin and Yang of ancient Chinese philosophy
(sec Figure 3), the two polar opposites are always in motion, always
■■
F
interacting, and are responsible for producing the manifest universe.
The Tao—the universal principle of oneness and harmony—un- derlies their apparent duality. Figure 3
THE TRANSFORMATIVE FUNCTION OF RELATIONSHIP
'The constant interplay between self and other, between Yin and
Yang, is not without meaning. Its purpose is to bring the universe
and all rhat exists within ir closer to a stare of perfection. The experience of relationship brings about deep transformations in the THE NATURE OF RELATIONSHIP 33 psyche of a person. If something were bom and lived in a vacuum,
separated from and unrelated to everything, it would remain totally
unchanged, in a state of inertia. Selfhood incorporates inertia along
with potential; it is only through relationship that the potential aspect of selfhood can be actualized. Through relatedness a person
can discover who he or she truly is and is not. The realm of relatedness is the way of transformation and evolution.
Discrimination is, of course, an important factor:
transformative relatedness naturally stresses quality The path of
and under- standing in relationship rather than quantity. The realm of relationship has always been a source of great confusion, probably because of our inevitable tendency to analyze, manipulate, and exploit
our relationships—processes that generate even greater confusion. A
true understanding of relatedness lies outside the scope of strict
dualism. If we wish to grasp the significance of relationship, or of a
particular relationship existing between two fields of experience and
activity, a holistic approach is called for, one that views relationship
as a synthesis of life fields. A chemist interested in the nature of
water studies the synthesis or combination of two atoms of hydrogen with one atom of oxygen (see Figure Júpiter ). Analyzing these atoms
of hydrogen and oxygen separately will not reveal much about the
nature of water, though it will tell the chemist something about the
nature or selfhood of the elements involved. In order to study the nature of water, he must bring the elements together. When a synthesis
of two elements takes place—be they atoms, human beings, or galaxies—a third factor emerges; something new is created that partakes
of the nature of the two constituent elements, vet is something more.
The exact nature of such a synthesis is unpredictable—except when
the operation is rigidly repeated under identical and therefore artificial conditions. 0
Figure Júpiter THE ASTROLOGY OF RELATIONSHIP H TWO TYPES OF RELATIONSHIP
There arc essentially two types of relationships; vertical rela- tionships that link individual fields in a hierarchical fashion, and
horizont.il relationships existing between individuals on the same
level.
The interactions between the macrocosm and the microcosm are
expressions of vertical relatedness. A person is an individual entity, a
specific field of activity, at the same time he is a part of his family,
community, culture, etc. His network of relationships with these
larger wholes is structured in a vertical fashion: The individual person is also a part of a group of individuals. In The Pljnef arization of
Consciousness, Rudhyar refers to this type of contact as a "matricial relationship." It begins physiologically in the prenatal state
when the fetus is growing through the assimilation of the mother's
substances. Matricial relationships continue to operate long after birth, developing on the levels of the mind, feelings, and psyche. A
network of relationships evolves connecting a person's needs from
his family, culture, and society, and their expectations of him.
While vertical or matricial relationships compose a network of
contacts between macrocosms and microcosms, horizontal or as- sociative contacts occur more consciously and deliberately on a pcrson-tn-person level, most intensely in the relationship existing between lovers.
At certain points, horizontal and vertical relationships intersect.
To a child, for instance, parents are initially experienced more as
archetypal figures of motherhood and fatherhood more than as individuals. But as he matures, the matricial, hierarchical relationship
he has been having with his parents should transform to an associative relationship. The child then sees his parents more as individuals
than archetypes and eventually is able to transcend their authority.
As wc leant from the principle of Yin and Yang, there is a constant state of llux and flow between one's vertical and horizontal relationships. If harmony prevails, evolution and actualization arc realized on both individual and collective levels. If the matricial aspect
of relationship is overemphasized, the individual's self-development THE NATURE OF RKl-ATUlNSMI Plutão 35 is in danger of becoming poisoned by an overdose of family or cultural substances. Conversely, when associative or horizontal contacts
arc roo predominant, rhe family, culture, and Socicfv ma^/ be violated by an individual who has little regard for rhe well being of his
community. Dane Rudhyar summarizes these principles in his work,
Directives for New Life:
The whole of society is based on relationship. The whole Earth
is an immensely complex and integrated field of mutually interacting relationships. Human evolution is a series of changes
in the basic character of interpersonal and inccrgrmip rela- tionships. I p. 71J THE MALE-FEMALE POLARITY
The most essential differentiation between individuals acknowledged by humanity as a whole is that of sex. Every human being is
biologically defined as being either male or female (including the
few true hermaphrodites, although they possess more or less developed organs of both sexes). The strict division of the sexes in terms
of physiology, psychology, and function, however, that is promoted
by our Western eulrnrc is somewhat exaggerated. It is more likely
rhar up until a few million years ago (a short span of time in relation to the vast cosmic
plore),
1 today. there was cycles of evolution not the division that occultists ex- of the sexes that we know Reproduction was achieved by means of a sort of fission. Ir was only at the most material and condensed state of human evolution (or perhaps involution is more precise here) that the distinct
male/female division of humanity occurred. As humanity evolves
further, according to some occultists, a synthesis or union of the
sexes will once again be in order.
C. G. Jung commented on this artificial distinction in his book,
Two Essays on Analytical Psychology:
No man is so entirely masculine that he has nothing feminine in
him. The fact is, rather, that very masculine men have- carefully guarded and hidden—;i very soft emotional life, often 36 THE ASTROLOGY OF RELATIONSHIP
i.
incorrectly descrilictl as "feminine." A man counts it a vimic to
repress his feminine traits as much as possible, just as a woman,
at least until recently, considered it unbecoming to be "mannish." The repression of the feminine traits and inclinations naturally causes these conrrascxual demands to accumulate
in the unconscious. No less narural [v. the imago of woman (the
soul-image) becomes a receptacle for these demands, which is
why a man, in his love-choice, is strongly tempted to win the
woman who best corresponds to his own unconscious femininirv— a woman, in short, who can unhesitatingly receive
the projection of his soul. [p. 1891
Deeply influenced by both ancient European and Asiatic occultism, particularly nlchcmv, Jung formulated the concept of anima/nninnis. His observations and the tradition of occultists are
reflected in recent findings of biologists, demonstrating that everv
man has recessive female genes and female hormones circulating in
his body as well as rudimentary female sex organs—and. of course,
the converse is true of women—signiticanrlv expanding contem■- ry
porary concepts of femininity and masculinity. ARCHETYPES OF THE FEMININE
Jung defines an archetype as nn unconscious idea, image, or pnrtern of behavior that is universal—present in rhe psyches of all individual human beings. Among the innumerable archetypes nf rhe collective unconscious arc those rhat serve as symbols of human sexuality in general as well as the specifically feminine and masculine
aspects of human sexuality.
In our judco-Chrisrian culture women have occupied the lowest
place on the totem pole of humanity. Images of virgin mothers, witches copulating with the devil, virgin brides of Christ, and the
like introduced in this tradition arc not real archetypes of the feminine, but complexes emerging from a repression of natural sex drives and ■,! sense of fear-ridden guilt concerning most anything
with sexual or sensual overtones. To discover truer archctvpcs of
the feminine, we have to search outside of the [udco-Cbristian THE NATURE OF RELATIONSHIP 37 tradition, to explore the mythasoi ancient Egypt, India, China, and
Greece. These cultures represented the feminine aspect, of nature
as receptive, yielding, enclosing, form-giving, and reflective. It is a
symbol for human feelings, emotions, instincts, and intuitions.
A fourfold typology of the feminine is presented by Toni Wolff
in "Structural Forms in the Feminine Psyche."8 The
summarized below four types, (with some revisions), arc operative in every woman's psyche (and in every man's anima). One or two of these
archetypes is usually more predominant in one's psyche than the
others, having whar Jung would call a "superior function." while
the others operate along more subtle and unconscious lines (sec Figure 5). fnoube?
o^jecDiZ
r\ vj
to Lua Co 3
c* •o m
o
n
£
C o
N
li* Plutão *
p o
o
C Figure 5
The Mother symbolizes the functions of protection, nourishment,
homemaking, and child renring. In negative manifestations the Mother represents posscssiveness, ovcrprntcctivcncss, and interference. A woman predominantly of this type relates to a man through THE ASTROLOGY OF RELATIONSHIP 38 his social function as the family breadwinner rather than as an individual. She expects her children to adopt her social values and fulfill her demands/visions of how they should conduct their lives,
rather than allowing them to experience life as self-determining individuals. She focuses her attention on a person, preparing him for a
collective role. Demctcr in Greek mythology and the Great Mother
w»
of Indian literature arc symbolized here: nourishing and protecting
or depersonalizing and devouring. In astrological symbology the moon represents the Mother.
The Daughter or Sister represents the sister, daughter, and lover
aspect of the feminine—appearing in mythos as the love goddess:
Harbor ro rhe Egyptians, Aphrodite to the Greeks, and Venus to
the Romans. She is opposite to the Mother in that she is oriented toward personal rclarionships and the unfoldment of herself and others as individuals. Ultimate love and personal interaction are the
goals she strives to realize, avoiding confinement within a family or
social structure. Her freedom to explore relationship and individual
development is primary, superseding family and archetype is social responsi- bilities.
The Amazon oriented toward objective, cultural affairs and values, where individuality is fulfilled through a social
(non-personal) responsibility, rather than through a mothering or
interpersonal relationship. The Amazon woman relates to a man more as a partner or competitor than as a submissive wife or lover.
In a negative manifestation she can be orercfficicnt and insensitive
to relationship and emotional needs. In Greek mythos she is seen as
Athene and Artcmus. In astrological symbolism she is represented
bv the planet Mercury.
The Medium or Wise TI ovt.vi symbolizes the deeply subjective,
intuitive, non-personal aspect of nature. She is open to the subtle
and intangible elements of life. In negative manifestations she represents the loss of identity and discrimination, while in positive manifestations she symbolizes the function of objectifying and bringing
into individual significance unconscious and unseen worlds. The Greek Pythoness is .1 possible representative of the Medium. She is
svmbolizcd in astrology by the planet Neptune. THE NATURE OF RELATIONSHIP 39 ARCHETYPES OF THE MASCULINE
The mnsculinc side of the human psyche complements and balances the feminine. It should be clear that both the feminine and
masculine expressions of self arc of equal value—though differing in
function. They transcend distinctions of good/bad, strong/weak, and the like. The very existence of rhc feminine aspect demands the
existence of a masculine to define it, and vice versa. Like the Yin
and Yang of the Tai-Chi, feminine and masculine arc simply two
poles of the same axis.
The masculine aspect deals with action, thought, initiative, and
self-exertion. While the feminine is ingoing and receptive, rhe masculine is outgoing, aggressive, and penetrating. All women, of course, have some masculine qualities included in their personalities.
VVc arc dealing here not with actual persons or even with the particular biological sexes, but with archetypal patterns of expression
that arc common, in varying degrees, ro all humanity.
In his (Harper & book on Jungian psychology, The Syw/xilic Quest Row, 19^ Mercúrio ), Edward C. Whitmont applies a fourfold scheme to the masculine paralleling that of Toni Wolff. What follows is an outline of Whitmont's four expressions of the masculine
with sonic adjustments of my own (see Figure 6).
The Father symbolizes srrucrurc and order, being rhc ideal leader,
king, protector, and lawgiver—the upholder of social conventions
and values. A man predominantly of this rypc sees women and children as wards or subjects more than individuals. In his negative manifestation the Father can be harsh and dogmatic. Moses and his
anthropomorphic God arc representatives of the Father archetype.
In astrological symbolism he is represented by the planer Saturn.
The Son or Urother represents the companion, brother, son, and
lover expression of masculine energy. In a sense he is the opposite of
the Father as well as being the complement of the lover aspect of
the feminine. He is more concerned with individunl/personal ex- pression and fulfillment than with social/collective demands. Dy- namic, outward directed energy is at an apex here. Like the Daugh- THE ASTROLOGY OF RELATIONSHIP Júpiter ° ter, the Son directs a good deal of this energy toward initiating
relationships and seeking his own identity rather than in attempts at
establishing his own social authority and permanence. In Greek mythos the Son is represented by some of the aspects of Dionysus,
Ares, and Eros. The planet Mars represents him in astrological symbology. peKSO/^/
oftjecr/uj
T
o .S
§ CP Lua o
& tu u Sol - 0 73
na
57
XC Lua £
(A £ Figure 6 TTie //era archctypifics the collcctivc/non-pcrsonal aspect of the
masculine. While the Son is oriented toward relationship and selffulfillinenr. the Hero seeks outward achievements and social recognition. He is more concerned with establishing himself in a social or
political context through great accomplishments than he is with discovering his personal identity and engaging in transformative interpersonal contacts. He typically sees women as partners in his success or obsraclcs in his path. Some expressions of Apollo and Hercules in Greek literature illustrate the Hero type. In astrology
he is represented by the planet Jupiter. THE NATURE OF RELATIONSHIP Júpiter ' The Wise Man or Philosopher typifies the individual who is more
attracted to the realm of ideas and metaphysics than to those of
family, passion, or ambition. He is a seeker of wisdom, a pcrccivcr,
a scholar, a teacher, and a sage rather than a ruler, lover, or administrator. The Wise Man is represented by the prophets of all traditions and by the planet Pluto.
ARCHETYPES OF UNION
The apparent duality of the masculine and feminine aspects of
humanity is not irreconcilable. On the physical level masculine and
feminine energies arc synthesized in sexual union. Union need not
be confined to the physical level, however; an integrated person can
achieve an individual synthesis of this polarity personally, psychologically, and spiritually. The most familiar symbol of the union of
masculine and feminine energies on the sexual as well as psychospiritual level is that of two interlaced triangles (see Figure 7). This
symbol signifies the harmonious blending of two contrasting approaches to life and understanding.
Another archetype of the union of masculine and feminine expressions is provided by Hermaphrodirus. Hcrmaphroditus was the
son of Hermes and Aphrodite. His birth was concealed by his
mother (he was an illegitimate god!), who entrusted the nymphs of
Mount Ida with his rearing. Until he was fifteen years of age the
youth enjoyed a half-wild forest life. One day the nymph Salmacis Figure 7 THE ASTROLOGY OF RELATIONSHIP 42 saw Hermaphroditus bathing in a lake she ruled and was immediately enamored with his grace and beauty. She asked him to be her
lover; he turned her down. Putting verbal formalities aside, the nymph then embraced him and lavished him with kisses, only to be
resisted again. Salmacis, disappointed, begged all the gods to assure
that nothing from that moment on would ever separate her from
him. Their two bodies were united as one and in this form thev
were both man and woman. Whence the term hermaphrodite- describing those extremely rare instances in which a person possesses
both male and female sex organs.
As an archetype the hermaphrodite plays an important role in the
alchemical process called "the chemical marriaijc." As we noted, the
alchemists of the Middle Ages operated under the front of transmuting base metals into gold and silver—an activity understandable
3nd profitable to the materialistic mentality of their patron sovereigns. Their esoteric work, however, was to transmure their own
base narures into states as pure as gold (symbolic of the sun and
masculine energies) and silver (symbolic of the moon and feminine
energies). This chemical marriage is a symbol of the perfect union
of the feminine and masculine components of one's psyche and is
often represented by the hermetic androgyne or the hermaphrodite.
In an article titled "An Alchemical Allegory" published in Maineya
5, Charles Ponce writes:
The hermaphrodite, in general, must be recognized as a symbolic expression of rwo different cvpcs of psychic orientation or consciousness . . . The figure of the hermaphrodite has
been traditionally employed in the language of symbolism to
demarcate the beginning and end of a process, [p. :aj ASPECTS OF SEXUALITY
Of all the many organic functions of the human body it is sex
that has most aroused curiosity, desires, fear, inspiration, and other
innumerable human feelings. In spite of this fascination, we know
really very little about sex. Wc know that sex differentiates male THE NATURE OF RELATIONSHIP
from female according to reproductive
more subtle distinctions are 43 functions designated and male that other and female, physiologically and psychologically. Sex also refers to the actual
union between male and female—in the sex act, as well as in the
urges, instincts, and intrigues associated with sexual union. Through
the research of Alfred KinscVi and more recently Masters, Johnson,
and others, we have on hand a vast amount of statistical material
concerning sex—the average frequency of intercourse, the average
age of first sex act, the average number of orgasms one can expect
to experience in a lifetime—the longest, the shortest, the most, and
the least of anything connected with sex has been recorded by these
and other diligent researchers. Handbooks descrihing various sexual
techniques have become best sellers. Yet in spite of all our academic
and technical information about sex, greatly needed and long overdue, we can communicate very little regarding the experiential and
psycho-spiritual aspects of sex in its various manifestations. A person could read every one of the hundreds of volumes on sex, yet he
or she might still be unable to comprehend the transformative experience of sexual love.
Much of the confusion and lopsided knowledge about sex may be
rooted in an incomplete understanding of the various purposes of
sex. In a prospectus for a book titled "What Is Sex For?" planned
many years ago but never completed or published, Dane Rudhyar
outlined three basic attitudes toward sex.
In the "hiological-vitalistic" approach sex is an essentially nonpersonal, biological function, subservienr to unconscious instincts and drives. Its sole purpose is reproduction. Sex operates in this
form on all scales of existence.
In the "psychological-personal" approach to human sexuality, more prevalent in recent times due to the widespread availability of
birth control, sex has nothing to do with reproduction or the urge
to procreate. This use of sex is often conditioned by complexes and
compulsions for personal gratification and the urge to release of
psycho-mental tensions—often followed possessiveness-jealousy syndrome. by the all too familiar In its higher manifestations, sex- can be a means of harmonizing and transforming the consciousness
of the lovers. 44 THE ASTROLOGY OF RELATIONSHIP
The "scnsate-nesthetical" approach to sex stresses the recreational aspect of sexual activity and has a capacity to fulfill "the very real
need for refining man's and woman's capacity for keen sensation
and nerve-response. It refers to sex as a glorified 'play.'"
In addition, I would suggest two more categories: The "electromagnetic" approach, emphasizing sex as an exchange of vital human
energies and magnetism. This type of sex stresses repolarization and
healing. The "transpcrsonal-spiritual" approach stresses the union of
lovers as a microcosm of cosmic reality and as a means of spiritual
evolution. The true forms of tantric sex are of this type. THE CIRCLE OF SEX
In his book The Circle of Sex, the late astrologer-sexologist Gavin
Arthur developed a revolutionary scheme of sexual orientation. Since the book is out of print, I would like to present Arthur's concept at length here as a conclusion to this section on relatedness and
sexuality.
The significance of Arthur's scheme lies in the fact that it is cyclic
rather than linear. Alan Watts writes in the introduction that his
work with the zodiac gave Gavin the notion
that there may be \z sexual types rather than two. Not just
mommas and poppas, and outside these a disorderly mess of
perverts and neurotics, but a rational spectrum of sexual variations arranged in the form of a clock, which Gavin has called
the Circle of Sex, and which was worked out with the sympathetic advice of such great sexologists as Havelock Ellis, Magnus Hirshfield and Alfred Kinscy. [ p. S ]
Arthur's circle illustrates his principles, the twelve sections depicting twelve types of sexual orientation and temperament (see Figure
8). As is true of all natural cycles, the boundaries between one section and the next are blurred—each blends into the next. Just as in a
rainbow, the colors of the spectrum gradually flow from one to the
next, and in the circle of sex an infinite number of possibilities is
represented. To pcisonali/c his twelve general sexual types, which THE NATURE OF RELATIONSHIP 45 should be regarded as archetypes found in varying degrees in everyone, Arthur has given them somewhat dubious names in an attempt
to describe their nature. Arthur's circle of sex is simply one of many
possible ways of presenting the various aspects of sexuality. My
purpose in including the following outline of The Circle of Sex
is to present the reader with a cyclic view of sexuality that in spite
of its limitations may open new vistas to his or her understanding of
this important facet of human psychology. c-. Sol V)6C6Roge/;/c & 5*£CVC
cA ve
aT Lua DcSRBy- O
o0 a n
<1. 12, <2> o u» o o o u
o
U)
rt cn
Kj O
Eo o sO O OX o s>
O
9i
o V
pi Si <3
o CP
C\
6 eft Sol tu
a Lua o o
s.
C6
o
rs\
o 5
C JOM) US Júpiter A \A *
IQ
&e/
Wc O
X) Figure 8 G
c &
0!
vP
c
o
<r THE ASTROLOGY OF RELATIONSHIP
The central axis of the circle of sex is the vertical diameter,
typifying the conventional, heterosexual, monogamous relationship
between the male and female poles. Arthur explains that one could
imagine the circle of sex "as the equator of a sphere. #n this equator
lie the 'hottest'—the most passionate—examples of each category.
But toward the poles the categories merge into a common sexlcssness, in which it is impossible to distinguish the categories
clearly." [p-J2!
Darby, named in the ballad The Happy Old Couple, at the top or
twelfth phase, symbolizes the man who is oriented toward a conventional life. His purpose is to find and marry his ideal mate, Joan,
to buy a home in the suburbs, raise a family, and live happily ever
after. Darby is the ideal husband and father according to our current social conventions.
Jocrn, at phase six, typifies the ideal wife and mother who loves
her family above all else, for whom no sacrifice is too great. Her
husband is her lord and ideal, and she hasn't the faintest sexual attraction to anyone else.
Perpendicular to this strongly conventional and heterosexual axis,
wc find the sexual orientation most removed from our present social
conventions.
Sappho, in the ninth position, may look and act like a conventional woman, but she is almost totally attached to the woman's
world. Although men may find her attractive, they are usually too
crass for her taste. Sappho prefers the companionship and love of
women, though there is always a place in her heart for the right
type of man who can understand rather than harm her sensitivities.
Dorian, at three, named after Greek soldiers who practiced male
homoscxualitv. is the polar opposite and male equivalent of Sappho.
He may appeal" to be a most masculine type of man, but he is put
olf by women, worried about their alleged habit of devouring men.
Dorian feels that only a man can really understand and fulfill his
needs, even though he has women friends and occasionally a female
lover. Arthur believes that Dorian and Sappho "are on their way to
becoming the opposite sex," and that Dorian understands woman
better than the Darby rvpc because he wishes to emulate her.
While Sappho-Dorian are what Arthur calls "three-quarters THE NATURE OF RELATIONSHIP 47 homogenic," if we follow the progression of the circle of sex in a
clockwise direction, we come to the exclusively homogenic axis
joining the tenth and fourth.
The Dyke, ten, is an obvious and exclusive female homosexual
type and like her male equivalent, the Quean,* is most incongruous
to our culture. Often dressing and acting as a man (although transvestites of either sex do not necessarily prefer homosexual relationships), the Dyke presents a masculine quality and is totally infatuated with the female sex. She is so devoted to women that she is
repulsed by the thought of sex with a man, as much as a Darby is
turned off by homosexual love.
The Quean, four, is the archetypal male homosexual who is not
sexually attracted to women. Society makes life more difficult for
him because of his unconventional life style than for those of any
other sexual-psychological orientation. While the Quean's love relationships are exclusively with men, he often finds women interesting
on the mental and philosophical level.
The cusp of the eleventh phase-fifth phase axis is a critical point
in the circle of sex, comparable to the equinoctial axis of the zodiac.
It is the physiological border between male and female.
Don Juan, phase eleven, has been described as the Dyke who has
acquired a penis. He is the woman's man, so much attracted to
women and their essence that he disdains most social contact with
conventional men, or at least regards men in general as insensitive.
The Don Juan type often appears effeminate and prefers the surroundings of the boudoir to those of the den. The polygamous life
is his style, and he is more interested in giving his women orgasms
than in sexual conquest as a means of demonstrating his masculinity.
■
Lady C., at phase five, named after Lady Chnttcrlv and Catherine
the Great, is the man's woman who enjoys hanging out with men
and accompanying them on their adventures. Like the Don Juan
type she may be mistaken for a homosexual. But also like the Don
Juan, she is dedicated to heterosexual sex and •fren has something of
a dislike for her own sex.
Continuing in a clockwise direction we come to the central axis
depicted by Darby and Joan, who, as we saw earlier, represent the
• Quean is defined in the dictionary as "a woman of bad behavior." THE ASTROLOGY OF RELATIONSHIP 48 pafer-Wflferfrw/'/Mj—Icginirmc, monogamous, hererosexuality and the foundation of the traditional nuclear family.
The phase one-phase seven axis represents an orientation that is
three-quarters hctcrogcnic.
The Pioneer, at phase one, represents the type of man who enjoys
working and functioning in the world outside of his home. Such a
man has a large capacity for friendship with other men and enjoys
the company of "the boys," though usually homosexual rela- tionships are not usually what he's after. He tends to sec women as
cssenriallv inferior to men, to a large extent as submissive sex objects
and servants.
The Clubwoman, in the seventh section, is not primarily a homemaker. She enjoys outside social interests. This rype of woman, possessing a mind of her own and cultural interests, if unable to find
the type of companionship she needs from men, will seek friendship
with other women.
The cusp of the phase two and phase eight sectors arc points of
maximal femininity and masculinity.
The Caesar, in phase two, is named after Julius Caesar, who was
said to be every man's wife and every woman's husband. In spite of
the fact that phase rwo is the most yang area in the circle of sex, the
Caesar type is ambisexual. Although he usually comes on like a
tough guv, he often represses his biscxualirv and compensates bv
demonstrating his heterosexual prowess as a means of proving his
outstanding masculinity. The Caesar type feels uncomfortable outside of his man's world—be it the factory, the ship, the battlefield,
or the corner bar.
The Career Woman, eight, is typified by the feminine, glamorous
woman who is arrracred to men but forms deeper emotional attachments with women. This type is usually heterosexual and polygamous in practice.
The twelve sexual 'psychological types represented in the circle
of sex arc archetypes of general sexual orientations. The area of
human relationship and sexuality is a more complex field than is
generally recognized: an infinite number of variations exists, changing from moment to moment. Once this is better understood per- THE NATURE OF RELATIONSHIP 49 haps we will be able to dispel the all-too-common belief that only
conventional sexuality and relationships arc "normal," while any deviation from the norm is perverted and illicit. Blanche M. Baker
puts it aptly in her prologue to The Circle of Sex:
It is regrettable that all too many people think of sex in terms
of absolute dichotomy: men are male and women are female.
Yet it takes very little observation to perceive that every person
is a mixture of maleness and femaleness. . . . Nature does not
deal strictly with black and white, for in between them spread
all the colors of the rainbow, [p. 5 J NOTES
1. Rudolf Sreiner's Cosmic Memory (current edition: Rudolf Steincr
Publications, 1971) discusses sccult teachings on the division of the
sexes. See also The Secret Doctrine.
2. For a thorough study of the nature of physical sex, sec Sex Energy
by Robert S. de Ropp (New York: Dell, 1969).
3. Toni WolfTs paper was privately in Zurich, 1966. Source: Edward
Whicmont's The Symbolic Quest (New York: Harper & Row, 1969), Part Two THE ASTROLOGICAL SYMBOLS
OF RELATIONSHIP 3. SYNASTRY AND SYMBOLISM THE OF RELATIONSHIP The fundamental idea behind astrology is that the cyclic motions of
the planets (the sun and moon included) correspond—though not
necessarily in a causal fashion—to the life experiences of human beings and, on a larger scale, to all life within the Earth's biosphere.
These motions are viewed from a geocentric (geo: earth, centric:
centered) perspective, since human beings live on the Earth. The
positions of the planets are plotted against the backgrounds of a
variety of frames of reference. ASTROLOGY IS MORE THAN "SUN SIGNS"
The most widely recognized astrological frame of reference, against which every celestial object can be viewed, is the ecliptic of
the zodiac> or the zodiac of signs. The ecliptic is the apparent path
of the sun around the Earth, a phenomenon actually produced by
the Earth's yearly orbit around rhe sun. The ecliptic is a cycle of
360 degrees. It begins and ends at one of the two opposing points
where the celestial equator (a projection of the terrestrial equator
into space) intersects it—the vernal point (or o0 Aries) where the
sun is situated on the first day of spring in the northern hcini- THE ASTROLOGY OF KELATIOXSHIP 54 sphere.1 The ecliptic is divided into twelve equal sections of thirty
degrees each, beginning at the vernal point and producing the twelve signs of the zodiac.
Because the sun is the most obvious object in the skv and because
every thirty days (one-twelfth of a year) it enters a new sign, the
zodiacal sign occupied by the sun on the dav of one's birth is the
most accessible of the many factors rhat compose a birth chart If a
person knows rhe day of his or her birth, it is easy to find out the
corresponding "sun sitpT'—without having to consult an astrologer
or a cost I v reference table. Almost all astrological readings published in newspapers and magazines are based on sun sign astrology.
The "horoscope" columns (horoscope is more correctly used to
mean a complete birth chart composed of all the positions of the
planers in terms of several frames of reference) featured in most daily newspapers, for instance, simply divide all of humanity into
twelve general categories according to the twelve sun signs and attempt to give advice, character analysis, and predictions from this
information alone. The same is essentially true of the many books
currently available popularizing astrological Techniques for compatibility arid sexual analysis. Thcv give very generalized and often sensational characterizations of individuals" and relationships based exclusively on sun signs. "The Scorpio male,*' for instance, was
described as "potent and sex mad" and "the Virgo female" as being
"interested in incest" in one recent publication of this type. (As if
there's never been a man born berween October __ and November
21 who had a moderate interest in sex or a woman born between August 21 and September __ who wasn't preoccupied by intrigues wirh her relatives!)
The use of strictly sun sign astrology in any form is inisrcprcscntative of the real purpose and practice of astrology. An individual human being is composed of a finely patterned complex of
functions and potentialities that needs to be viewed from an inregrated and holistic perspective if it is to be perceived in a true lighr.
Attempting to understand a parrcrn of selfhood and relatedness from the sun sign approach is like being concerned only with the
health of your heart, totally disregarding the other organs and systems of your body that work together and are intricately related in
the health of your whole person. SYNASTRY AND THE SYMBOLISM OF RELATIONSHIP 55 WHAT IS SYNASTRY FOR?
Each of us is an individual with distinct potentials and experiences. Yet no man is an island, and we are constantly in contact
with our environment as well as each having, as an individual, a
unique role to play within a universal scheme of evolution. As we
explained in the preceding chapter, there arc two poles of existence:
selfhood and relatedness. Each of us is an individual linked with and
related to his culture, which is, in turn, a part of humanity, which is
a part of the planetary organism, which is a part of our solar system, and so on. In a similar manner, the various atoms, molecules,
cells, tissues, and organs that compose our physical bodies are related in a hierarchical fashion. The macrocosm-microcosm relationship can be seen everywhere on all levels of existence. At the
same time, each of us is also drawn to relationships that are not
hierarchical, such as relationships with friends, partners, colleagues,
and lovers.
Natal astrology—the astrology of the individual—is meant to serve as a guide for assisting individual persons in achieving a clear
understanding of who and what they are, understanding their birth
potential and how it can be fulfilled, as well as their function in a
larger frame of reference: the function that they are meant to fulfill
in a social, collective, global, and even cosmic sense. No one, however, can actualize such purposes in a vacuum. Actualization and
transformation can take place only through cosmo-philosophical treatise called The Planet relationship. In a arization of Con- sciousness, Dane Rudhyar observes:
Every change is the result of some kind of relationship being
altered. Every transformation in the consciousness of a human
being can be traced to some relationship which triggered the
need and the desire for transformation. Within anv
of cx* evele
*
istence, self is the permanent factor, the changeless rhythm and
essential character of the field of existence; but it is through rc- TUP. ASTROLOGY OF RELATIONSHIP
Inr'piMship that changes nccur. over and above this fundamental
rhythm. It is through rhe energy released by assrjciari%-c relationship that the human person is able to grow and to actualize
the inherent potentiality of conscious fulfillment in selfhood.
[ V- 95 I
The purpose of synastric techniques in astrology is to assist individuals in understanding the potential and quality of their rela- tionships. It is to explore how two or more persons (or entities) can
combine their forces in such a wag that both arc enabled to grow
and better actualize their birth potcnciais, as well as to encourage
them to participate (both as individuals and as a collectivity) in a
broader, transpersonal function.
Sgnastry cannot tell us everything about a relationship, no more
than natal astrology can tell us every life event and personal characteristic in derail about a person. No astrological technique, no matter how thorough, can accurately reveal the past, present, or future
events of a person's life. Likewise, svnnstrr cannot tell us who will
make an ideal mate, what a relationship with someone will be like,
where there is a probability of homosexual relationships, or who is a
terrific lover! Astrology, at least from a humanistic perspective,
ih. m
deals with potentialities and suggests the processes and experiences
through which the potential can become the actual.
Synastric techniques can rcvcnl the potentialities of a relationship
existing between two or more individuals and the kind of mutual
experience that can promote both individual and collective unfoldment. Through these techniques one can achieve an insight into
areas where difficulties might emerge, and see how thev can be dealt
with and harmonized if they do. Areas of a relationship where particularly strong consolidations of energy and experience might be
formed can also be observed bv svnastric means. THE LANGL*AGE OF SYNASTRY
Since astrology reduces all functional and experiential activities
into a few csscnri.il svmbols, in its most inclusive applications it can
be used to explore the complex webs of relationship between any- SYNASTRY AND THF SYMBOLISM OF RELATIONSHIP 57 thing and everything else. Astrology is a system of universal symbolism; its techniques apply holistic perception zm the dynamic relationships existing between and within all organic wholes for the
purpose of revealing a universal or a particular truth.
Symbols can be seen as archetypes that have significance on any
number of levels. Natal astrology generally deciphers these symbols
in terms of the life experiences and unfoldment of individuals as distinct entities—essentially
astrolv on the level of selfhood. Svnastric
-r
ogy relies on and overlaps natal techniques to a large extent,
deciphering the same symbols on a different level, the level of relatedness.
As a symbol of selfhood, Atars, for instance, can be deciphered as
actional energy and the capacity of an individual to move outward
from his own center, to go out into the world and make an impression on it. On the level of relationship, Mars stands for, among other things, the capacity of an individual (or a couple or a group
or individuals) to initiate collective experiences and act together with others for the achievement of an outer purpose. The polar opposite of Mars is Venus, the planet symbolizing, on the level of
selfhood, the urge toward inner communion, the sense of appreciation, aesthetics, and values. In terms of relatedness, Venus stands
for the capacity of individuals to appreciate and be receptive to one
another and to participate in mutual experiences that express their
personal, inner values, ideals, and aesthetics in a harmonious manner. THE BIRTH CHART AS A "SEED PATTERN" In synastry the chart of one person is compared with the chart of
another person, or with the chart of a country, an enterprise, an occasion, or some other entity. Anything that has come into being
has a beginning, and therefore irs birth chart can be calculated. Although synastry is primarily used for the consideration of interpersonal relationships, our relationships with cities, man-made objects,
businesses, animals, ideas, and even problems or crises can be studied
with synastric techniques. THE ASTROLOGY OF RELATIONSHIP 58 The foundation of synastry lies in the understanding of birth
charts from the individual as well as the combined perspective. If
the astrologer does not understand two persons as individuals, he
will nor be able to understand their relationship. In the same way, a
person who is not in harmony with his or her own self will encounter difficulties in maintaining harmonious relationships with others.
The first step in chart comparisons, then, is to come to a clear understanding of what a birth chart essentially represents as a symbol
of selfhood and ro achieve a working familiarity with all the elements that compose it.
A birth chart is a graphic representation of the positions of the
planets (including the sun and the moon) viewed from the particular place and time of one's emergence into independent existence. It
represenrs the archetypal pattern of selfhood, describing this pattern
in terms of both essential being and the process of becoming. A
birth chart can be seen as the answer to the need of a particular
time—the need of the universe for a particular kind of individual as
well as the need of rhe incarnating entity for a particular quality of
being, best suited ro further the evolutionary process. No chart is,
then, superior or inferior to any other, hut is "best" for the accomplishment of a specific purpose. In The Astrological Houses (Doubleday, 1972), Dane Rudhyar aptly describes the significance of the
birth chart as a
formula structurally defining a man's "fmulamental nanire." It
is a complex cosmic symbol—a word or logos revealing what
the person is potentially. It is the individual person's "celestial
name," mul also a set of instructions on how a person can best
actualize what at his birth was only pure potential—"seed potcntialirv," The birth chart is a viandah, a means to achieve an
«
all-inclusive integration of the personality. Ip. 20] THE COMPONENTS OF THE BIRTH CHART
A chart should be initially viewed as a whole, as a gcstalt, then
studied in terms of its individual parts (described below), and then
perceived once more as a whole composed of those interacting
processes and parts. The parts include the following: SYNASTRY AND THE SYMBOLISM OF RELATIONSHIP 59 I. The cross of the horizon-meridian composed of two lines that
divide the space surrounding the time and place of birth into four
quadrants. Because the terrestrial equator and the ecliptic intersect
one another rather than being parallel, an astrological chart is seldom composed of four equal quadrants when projected upon the
background of the zodiac. That is, two opposite quadrants usually
span more zodiacal degrees than the other two—even though they
represent equal amounts of space surrounding the birth.2
The horizon (see Figure Mercúrio ) is the horizontal line extending from
the eastern horizon (the ajcewrfawr—symbolic of individuality and
the self) to the western horizon (the nferceHtfawt—representing relatedness and the other) at the time and place of birth. When this axis
is extended into space it can be correlated to two opposing degrees
of the zodiac. The meridian is a vertical axis that is drawn perpendicular to the horizon. It connects the two points of solar culmination: the Al.C (Medium Coeli), the symbolic noon point; and the
l.C (Imum Coeli), the midnight point. The meridian represents a
line of individual growth (l.C.) and power or purpose (M.C.). cn.c.
V\p^C Op
O
<3
G
3
o O
ad
ASC. e
>>
'jO o
a
O nomzoi) I.C.
Figure Mercúrio 6esc. 6u THE ASTROLOGY OF RELATIONSHIP
The four poles of the horizon-meridian axes are often called the "angles" of the chart. These four cardinal points define the chart's
basic structure. Determining the zodiacal degrees of the angles is the
initial step in casting an astrological chart.3
Because the Earrh rotates a complete turn on its axis even.* day,
the zodiacal degree rising (on the ascendant) changes rather rapidly
—every degree of the zodiac appears on the horizon once every day,
for approximately four minutes.
2. The circle of twelve houses, numbered in a counterclockwise direction beginning with the ascendant (see Figure in). The twelve
houses arc derived through a threefold division of the space between the four angles. There are several methods of house division
—based on slightly different procedures and resulting in somewhat
different intermediary house cusps (cusps are the lines that mark the
end of one house and the beginning of anorhcri. All house-division
systems start with the same angles: the ascendant. I.C., descendant,
and M.C. which are, respective)v. the first, fourth, seventh, and tenth house cusps. The Porphyry system of house division, that simply divides the number of zodiacal degrees within each quadrant
into thirds, is used in the charts that appear in this book.
The angles and rhe houses arc the astrological symbols for rhe
most individualized aspects of a person. This is because the framework of the houses is derived from rhe most rapid I v changing of all
cycles usually employed in astrology, the doilv rotation of the Earth. The horizon-meridian represents the axes, or cross, of individual selfhood and describes the person as a unique being. Signifying his or her basic orientation m self and ro the world. The
twelve houses derived from the horizon-meridian refer ro twelve
fundamental fields of experience.
L The sirto degrees n( the ecliptic of the lodi.ic, the apparent path of rhe sun around the Earth, and its twelve signs of thirty degrees each. The si^ns of the zodiac refer to twelve qualities of human tcmpcrmciu and cncrgv utilization—having more of a collective (less individual) significance than the circle of the houses insomuch as the signs arc derived from the longer, more collective cycle
of the vearlv revolution of the Farrh around the sun. SYNASTRY AND THE SYMBOLISM OF RELATIONSHIP 61 CO.C. 10
11
12
2VSC. ibesc. Júpiter IC.
Figure io
Every planet—or any celestial object, for that matter, from manmade satellites to galaxies—has a longitudinal position between o0oo'
to 359,359' ahead of the beginning of the ecliptic (the vernal
equinox). When the sun and Mars are conjunct at ten degrees Aries, if one extends a line of longitude from the center of the
Earth through the sun straight to the limits of our solar system, then
the center of the planet Mars will make contact with this line on a
"vertical" plane—though the two bodies might not be on the same
latitude, or "horizontal" plane. Since the zodiacal degree is ten Aries,
wc know that this conjunction occurs at a point in the zodiac exactly
ten degrees past the point the sun occupied on the vernal equinox. Júpiter . The planets placed within the houses in terms of their zodiacal
positions. The planets arc the basic variables of astrology and are
viewed in the framework provided by the zodiac and the houses.
They signify ten basic functions or processes found in all forms of
organic life.
5. The relationships existing between all the planets and between
the planets and the angles. There are numerous of these subtle rcla- THE ASTROLOGY OF RELATIONSHIP 63 tionships in each chart. The most commonly recognized are the
planetary aspects and phases—the angular relationships between pairs of planets. Others of a more abstract nature (and therefore not
widely used) include the dozens of planetary midpoints (axes of zodiacal space exactly midway between two planets), and the planetary parts (derived bv adding or subtracting the distance between
two planets to or from an angle, house cusp, or other point), of
which there arc several hundred possible combinations.
The aspect between rwo planers indicates the type and quality of
relationship through which the two planetary functions can best act
as a unit. The planetary pair's midpoint a?cis signifies the area of experience (house) and type of energy (sign) within which the relationship is most intense and clearly focused. Its planetary parts represent the experiences and energies through which the functions so
synthesized can achieve the greatest c.isc of operation.
In most instances only the planetary aspects need be closely studied. Midpoints, parts, and phase angles can be extremely valuable when a closer look at a chart, or a planetary pair, is desired.
In the following pages wc will explore the essential namrc of the
astrological frames of reference, as well as their significance in terms of synastry. First we will discuss the function of the planets,
then the planetary aspects and their phases, the angles and the twelve houses, and the zodiac of signs.
The planets are symbols for ten essential functions that compose,
in varying degrees, all forms of organic life. A planet's function is
always essentially the same. 1c operates in terms of an individual
(whether an individual person, rclarinnship. narion. etc.) according
to its house position, its sign, and its; relationships with all the other
planets in the chart. The house signifies the field of experience through which the planetary function can best express itself. The
sign occupied In* the planet symbolizes the rvpc of energy besr
suited to project the planet through the experience. The planet's
relation to all other bodies within the same chart indicates how it
can best participate in a well-balanced development of the whole
individual. SYNASTRY AND THE SYMROLISM OF RELATIONSHIP <53 NOTES
1. Thorough descriptions and interpretations of the ecliptic and other
astrological frames of reference are included in the following chapters.
2. The question of house division is one of the most complicated and
controversial areas of astrology. A detailed account can be found in
Dona Marie Lorenz* The Houses (Topanga, California: Eomcga Press,
«974)3. A Handbook for the Huvhrnistic Astrologer (Garden City: Anchor
Press/Doubleday, 1974) includes very thorough instructions for casting
an astrological chart as well as a review of the various tools the process
requires.
A number of firms now offer computer calculated astrological charts,
providing an alternative to those who are interested in astrology but are
reluctant to do the necessary calculations tlieniselvcs. Júpiter . THE PLANETS Astrology is the study of the relationship that has been observed to
exist between the cyclic motions of celestial bodies (particularly the
sun, moon, and planets) and life on Earth. As wc will sec in the following chapters, there arc many ways to approach the consideration
of this relationship; astrologers use different frames of reference in
investigating the infinitely complex symbolic language of the universe. The positions of the planets, for instance, can be considered
in the structure of either the tropical zodiac (of signs) or the
sidereal zodiac (of the constellations), and there is a choice of at
least nine methods for dividing the birth chart into houses. All astrologers do agree, however, that planetary motions and cycles are
at the foundation of any system of astrology. CYCLES AND THEIR PHASES
The investigation of the cyclic motions of the celestial bodies can
be simplified as well as expanded by using the concept of phase. A
phase is the span of space and/or time between significant points
in the internal structure of any whole cycle. Once a given segment
of space or time can be described as a cycle, it can be divided by
various numbers into successive phases. Planetary aspects mark the J THE ASTROLOGY OF RELATIONSHIP
beginnings and ends of some of these phases, being experienced as
recognizable turning points in an unfolding cycle, directing or redirecting the flow of one's experiences along the path of fulfillment.
The most apparent of a cycle's turning points are those derived
by the divisions of two and four, experienced on the collective
level, for example, in the cycle of day-night (based on the diurnal
rotation of the Earth) and in the cycle of the four seasons, the environmental changes that accompany the comings and goings of the
equinoxes and solstices (a result of the yearly revolution of the Earth around the sun).
Three hundred-sixty is, of course, the number associated with
any complete cycle/circle, derived from the relationship between
the day and the year. The fact that the archetypal pattern of vlo
doesn't quite match the actual evele of 365.davs per vear is an interesting point. In An Astrological Mandala Dane Rudhyar says; Saturno '
It is true that the year contains more than 360 days, which
means that the earth rotates more than 360 times around its
polar axis during a complete revolution around its orbir; but an
intriguing feature common to all celestial periods is that they
can never be measured in whole numbers and no planetary
evele is an exact multiple of another . . . The 360-degree zodiac is a fomntht of archetypal relationships; but our human experience presents to our consciousness a slightly larger se- quence of days and nights. The ^iSo-denree cycle refers to the
?nea?nng of experience; the d.n-night sequence to the facts of
experience, [p. id I The word "phase" has been used in astrology most frequently ro
describe the regular successive appearances of rhe moon—a result of
the constantly changing relationship between the sun and the moon
from the viewpoint of the Earth. Here wc have a very distinct and visible fourfold structure; the new moon (the invisible phase,
when the unilluminated side of the moon is facing the Earth); the
first-quarter moon (with its west side illuminated and irs cast side left in the dark); the fully illuminated full moon; and
quarter moon (opposite to the first-quarter moon). the third- THE PLANETS 67 Modern astrology, like the medieval and classical forms of astrology it is directly founded upon, has pretty much neglected, at least
in practice if not in theory, the fact that almost every astrological
frame of reference is fundamentally a cycle composed of phases.
Astrologers who practice according to the traditional form tend to
see the components of any astrological frame of reference (the cycle of the houses, the ecliptic of the zodiac, planetary aspecrs,
etc.) as separate, isolated entities rather than as interdependenr and
interacting parts of a whole system. The meaning and nature of the
zodiacal sign Virgo, for instance, is actually derived from the fact
that it is the sixth sign (or phase) in a series of twelve, that it follows the fifth or self-expressive, creative sign Leo, and therefore
symbolizes adjustments in consciousness needed by the self-expressive individual in order that he or she may engage in harmonious
relations with others (symbolized bv Libra, the seventh sign of the
zodiac, whose beginning coincides with the fall equinox).
Traditional or classical astrologies arc based on lateral thinking (even if they're actually dealing with cycles); humanistic or phaseoriented astrologies are founded upon a holistic, cyclic under- standing of the ordered pattern of the growth and unfoldment of
life. Life, on all levels, emerges and unfolds in a cyclic, spirallic
manner for the achievement of a series of purposes. Through the
study of astrology, a person can come to a clearer understanding of
the meaning of life and discover how to go about understanding and
fulfilling his or her spiritual potential at any given moment.
Of particular importance to the development of the ideas wc intend to put forth in this and the following chapter is Marc Jones's
study course on "Pythagorean Astrology" (dealing with the significance of numbers as the basis for the meaning of planetary aspects)
and Rudhvar's The Lunation Cycle and An Astrological Mandala.
In a more recent publication, Phases of the Moon, Marilyn Busreed,
Richard Tiffany, and Dorothy Wergin take the basic ideas presented by Rudhyar in The Lunation Cycle concerning an eightfold
division of the soli-lunar relationship one step further to a system of
twenty-eight phases (about one phase for each day of the lunation
cycle). The book includes William Butler Ycats's A much interpretive information from Vision. Although The Lunation Cycle and Phases of the Moon deal only with the soli-lunar relationship and THE ASTROLOGY OF RELATIONSHIP Saturno exclusively with the eighth and twenty-eighth harmonics, this relationship can be used as a model for that between ,viy two planets,
and their cycles may be divided into more or less than ei^ht phases,
wirh distinct meanings cnrrcliiting to each set of phases, derived
from the particular number used as divisor.
All cycles, no matter how many phases they arc divided into, can
be seen archctypally according to what Rudhvar has called rhe "cyclic process." From a holistic, cyclic point of view the meaning
of any individual astrological factor is inherent in and dependent
upon first, the narure of rhe frame of reference (the process) as a
whole—the nature of the whole cycle of houses, the zodiac of signs,
the system of planets that revolve around our sun. etc,—and second,
the sequence of the factor in consideration of the whole process, its
relationship to the other individual parts of the same frame of reference. An astrological factor has meaning in that it is a pan of a
larger cyclic process.
The cyclic process outlined below can be applied to all astrological "wholes."
The beginning of the cyclic process is a moment of unity and
oneness that immediately ceases to be a manifestation of external
unity and becomes a process. This process is twofold: involutionary
and evolutionary. The involutionary hemicvclc succeeds the beginning, and here life is absorbed into form and matter: life becomes
involved (brought into an intricate of complicated form or condi•fction) in the building of organisms 3nd scrucrurcs and in the continual complcxificiuion and differentiation of individual structural patterns. This is the process of the One becoming the Many.
The middle is a point of repolarizarion. from the complexification
of patterns to the creative release of their contents. This repolarization usually involves an increase of objective awareness accompanied by some sort of crisis (and the reorientation may not always be
successfully accomplished). If the process of repolarization from the involutionary to the evolutionary hemicvele is successful, there
can be growth in understanding and consciousness. The evolu- tinnarv hemicvele embodies the process of dissemination and participation.
The end is the moment of in-^gathering of the energies and fruits
of the just completing cycle. It is a seed moment whan all that has THE PLANETS 69 been actualized during the cycle is brought into a highly condensed
form that will provide the structural pattern for the next cycle, the
next cycle beginning on a new level of experience and activity. THE FUNCTIONS OF THE PFANETS Each of the ten planets (including the sun and moon since they
too appear to "wander" in the geocentric sky) symbolically functions within a specific role in the life of any individual, be it an individual person or an individual relationship. When v/e view our solar
system as a whole we can easily understand the basic astrological
meaning and function of each planet as it is derived from irs serial
place in the whole system—that is, in terms of its position relative to
the light- and life-giving center, the sun, as well as its position relative to the Earth's orbit. The function we assign to Mercury is an
expression of the fact that Mercury is the closest planet to the sun;
Venus' meaning is derived from the fact that it is the second planet
from the sun and the first within the orbit of the Earth, etc. The
following is an attempt to describe the meanings and functions of
each of the ten planets according to this "organic" view and with
special attention given to each planet's significance in terms of relatedness and relationship. THE ASTROLOGY OF RELATIONSHIP SUN KEY'NOTE: The central source of life energy that sustains, inte- grates, and gives purpose to individual existence. Astronomical Characteristics:
The sun is the center of our solar
system as well as a star with its own special position in the galaxy. It
is Sti+.ooo miles in diameter and has a density that is only a fraction
of the Earth's.
Abstract Meanings: The symbol for the sun is rhe circle of oneness and boundless potentiality with a point at its center, bringing solar
potential to focus within individual consciousness. In vtylhos the sun is closely connected with the Father-Godhead images and, of
course, with the sun gods: Ra to the Egyptians, Surya to the Hindus, and Helios to the Greeks.
The seed essence in which all processes have their beginning and
end is symbolized by the sun as well as the energy* that vitalizes and
propels the consciousness through the myriad of forms it adapts in
the evolutionary process.
Svuastric Meanings: The central purpose of an individual ro which all contacts and experiences are ultimately related. The energy that vitalizes and sustains any particular rcalrionship so that it
can achieve its purpose. Traditionally, rhe sun is associated with the
images of mature men and the "husband." lr can also be seen as the
archetype of masculine energy operating through universal will. THE PLANETS 7' MOON KEYNOTE: The reflective principle that protects and nourishes individuals along the path of growth and actualization of solar potential. Astronomical Characteristics: The moon is the Earth's narural sat- ellite, orbiting around us at a distance of about 239,000 miles, about
92 million miles from the sun. It takes an average of 27.32 days for
the moon to complete one zodiacal (or sidereal) cycle and 29.53
days to complete a synodic cycle (from new moon to new moon).
Abstract Meanings: The arc or crescent symbol for the moon rep- resents the principle of receptivity, the vessel that absorbs or the
lens that focuses solar power, transmitting it to Earth. The moon is
intimately associated with the mother principle, and is, according to
occult philosophy, the "mother" of the earth.
The moon symbolizes the matrix from which the solar seed
emerges in organic form. It is also the seventh, synthetic principle
that mediates between or integrates the personal realm of the sun,
Mercury, and Venus with the social realm of Mars, Jupiter, and
Saturn.
Synastric Meanings: The feelings and instincts that enable us to be sensitive and emotionally receptive to others. The moon is the
adjusting principle that nourishes a relationship and enables the individuals it unifies to adapt to one another's needs. Mature women and
the "wife" are said to be connected with the moon as well as the
archetype of feminine, receptive energy as it functions on the level
of universal love. THU: ASTROLOGY OF R PJ. AT TON'S MH» 71 MERCURY
KEYNOTE: The mind engaged in pcrcc'ring and communicat- ing.
Astronomical Characteristics: The orbit of Mercury is 36 million miles fnom the sun; it takes Mercury S8 Earth days to complete one
revolution. Because Mercury occupies a position in the solar system
nearer to the sun than to Earth it can never be more than rwentyeight zodiacal degrees from the sun, geocentriealJy. Mercury is the
smallest, hottest, and fastest (in linear velocity) planet of our solar
system.
Abstract Meanings: The symbol of Mercury is a synthesis of the lunar crescent of receptivity, the circle of spiritual oneness, and the
cross of matter. From a mythological perspective this symbol can
also be seen as the caduceus of Hermes (Mercury to the Romans),
signifying the creative, electric energies of nature (kundalini).
The initial phase in the process of differentiating the one solar
power, bringing about the first stage of personalized duality, manifesting in the form of electrical, mental, and nervous energies is
represented bv Mercury.
Synastric Meanings: The mental and communicative functions that enable an individual ro he aware of his or her own inner world
as well as able to share and exchange experiences with others. The
lines of commumcation within a relationship that allow the basic interchange of ideas and energies berween two or more people. Traditionally, Mcrcurv represents younger people, brothers and sisters.
It is androgynous bv nature—svmbolizing the equal union of masculine and feminine energies. THE PLANETS 73 VENUS KEYNOTE:
dividuals The centripetal element of experience that urges in- toward achieving union with their inner self and with others. Astronomical Characteristics: Venus is the first planet inward from the Earth and has a diameter, volume, mass, gravity, and density very similar to that of the Earth. A unique feature of this planet
is that its day (247 Earth days) is longer than its year (225 Earth
days). Next to the sun and moon, Venus is the brightest object to
be seen in the geocentric sky, and is never more than forty-seven
zodiacal degrees from the sun.
Abstract Meanings: The glyph of Venus represents the circle of spirit placed over the cross of matter and is closely related to the
Egyptian Ankh. In mythos the love goddesses of all peoples express
the Venus principle.
Venus refers to the establishment of individual values and ideas
that give inner meaning to personal existence. While Mercury represents the phenomenon of electrical energy, Venus symbolizes the
phenomenon of magnetism and attraction-repulsion.
Synastric Meanings: The magnetic energies of relationship that draw individuals into contact with others. The values, ideals, and
aesthetics of an individual and his or her appreciation of self and
others. Young and/or particularly feminine women are represented
by Venus traditionally, and it serves as an archetype for the personalized love principle. THE ASTROLOGY OF RF.'-Vl loNsHfP 74 MARS KEYNOTE: The centrifugal forces of experience that urge indi- viduals toward external expression and action for the concrete realization of solar potential as guided by Venusian visions and values. Astronomical Characteristics: The first planet outward from the Earrh, having an nrhit 14; million miles from the sun. requiring 6S7
Earth days to complete. Mars has a diameter of only q.zoo miles and
is well known for its reddish hue and network of "canals." It has
two vltv small satellites of cmh* five and ten miles in diameter.
Abstract Meanings: The symbol of Mars illustrates the function of spirit projecting itself through the vehicle of matter for the attainment of a definite goal upon which a value has been placed. The
war gods of all mythos can be related to the Martian function of extern;! li/.ation.
Mars symbolizes rhe cxrcrml. objective emergence of the solar
potential (germination) and the initial development of an ego center capable of acting within and experiencing rhe social realm.
Synastric Meanings: One's capacity to externalize solar energy and initiate relationships. The active, expressive element of any rela- tionship that urges individuals to act in harmony (or conllict). Mars
is said to be representative of young and/or athletic men and is the
nrchctvpc of the personalized will or power principle. THE PIJVVKTS 75 JUPITER KEYNOTE: The preserving principle that promotes the status quo of the established order along with its gradual expansion, and the assimilation of experiences within a well-defined area of activity. Astronomical Characteristics: The largest planet in our solar sys- tem, Jupiter is 483 million miles from the sun, having a rotational
cycle of only ten Earth hours and a revolution of 11.86 Earth years.
It is about 8f ,ooo miles in diameter and has thirteen moons, four of
which orbit the planet in a retrograde fashion.
Abstract Meanings: The lunar, receptive crescent functioning for the purpose of material expansion is suggested by Jupiter's astrological glyph. The function of expanding and preserving the Martian impulses is represented by Jupiter. It also symbolizes the vision
and attainment of a larger, more inclusive philosophical and/or social horizon.
Synastric Meanings: The principles that promote the increase and preservation of any field of activity and relationship are symbolized
by Jupiter. It also represents the social, moral, philosophical, and
religious implications or pressures involved in an interpersonal relationship. Jupiter is traditionally representative of middle-aged people in powerful social, religious, or financial positions. Whereas
Mercury symbolizes the student •r chela, Jupiter represents the
teacher or guru. THE ASTROLOGY OF RELATIONSHIP SATURN KEYNOTE: The principle of limitation and definition that pro- vides a sense of security and identity, making possible focused and
structural activity. Astronomical Characteristics: S.uurn is the most distant planet in our solar system visible to the naked eye. having an orbit $S6 million miles from the sun. It has a day of about io!. Earth hours and
a year that is equal to
Uirth years. A unique feature is irs system of rimzs. about 50.000 miles wide and 10 miles deep, orbiting
the planet almost exactly on the plane of its equator.
Abstract Meanings: The symbol of Saturn is supposed ro represent the sickle nt Cronus. It is very similar to an inversion of Jupiter's
glyph, signifying the cross of matter dominating the receptive crescent. Saturn represents the archetype of parental authority and iMllccrive conventions and limitations. An individual's acquisition
of sccurirv. power, and identity within both personal and social
spheres is a Saturnian function.
Syn.tsrrh' Meanings: Saturn symbolizes the innate form, function, and structure of an individual or collective being that naturally place certain restrictions upon its activities and relationships. The
political, profcs'sionnl. and karmic implications or pressures connected wirh a relationship. Older people and the father are traditionally represented by Saturn, as well as people wirh antiquated
idc.u: and those holding positions of ultimate authority. 77 URANUS KEYNOTE: The drive to transcend conventionality .<». order to participate consciously in inrntfonnatrce processes. Astronomical Characteristics: The first of the planets known only in modem times is Uranus, discovered in 1781 by William Herschel
1 with the aid of the telescope. Uranus is 1,783 million miles from the
sun and takes 84 Earth years to complete one orbit. It has an extremely inclined polar axis, 98° to the plane of its orbit.
Abstract Meanings: The symbol for Uranus is of modem origin and could be interpreted as the unification of the principles of
duality (the two vertical arcs) bringing about an ascent of spirit.
Uranus signifies the processes of change and transformation that
eventually take us to a realm beyond the confines of Satumian ego
m
*
or social conventions, making possible an exploration of the further
reaches of human consciousness.
Synastric Meanings: The element of experience that urges us to evolve and transform our relationships beyond the scope of Saturn's
confines so that we may be able to realize a new dimension of
togetherness. The unusual, unconventional, transformative aspects
of relationship. The force that attracts individuals compulsively toward togetherness for transcendental reasons that may not be entirely evident or socially acceptable. 7^ NEPTUNE KEYNOTE: The dissolution of antiquated forms and structures and the emergence of more intiusiiw universal values and principles. Astronomical Characteristics: Neptune is about 30.000 miles in di- ameter. with an orbit :.797 million miles from the sun and a period
of 1 du.S Earth years. It was discovered in its position calcu- lated beforehand by astronomer-mathematicians who realized that ccrrain eccentricities in the orbit of Uranus must be connected with
the presence of another body beyond its orbit.
Abstract Mejnin^s: The trident of the lord of the sea was natu- rally chosen as the glyph for Neptune. It represents the receptive
trinity of human consciousness (sensual, emotinnnl. and mental) brought in touch with the material realm, yet still reaching beyond
it. Neptune is closely related to psychic experiences and the ability
to transmit and receive transcendental experiences.
The dissolution of antiquated forms that have been shattered by
Uranus is a Neptunian tunction, The psychic functions, especially
when directed toward the realization of universal oneness.
Synastric Meanings: Neptune represents the drive toward reaching a state of total unity with another. It also symbolizes the
function that leads individuals to oneness with nature through universal love. At the Neptune station, personalized love is nor what is
important, but the need to love and achieve oneness with all. THE PLANETS 79 PLUTO KEYNOTE: The final stage in the process of transformation (that began with Uranus), bringing us to the tfyreshold of a new cycle in
the unfoldment consciousness. Astronomical Characteristics: Pluto is the most remote planet in our solar system, having an orbit about 3,670 million miles from the
sun and a period of ahout 2^ Júpiter Earth years. The most unique feature of this planet is the fact that, because of its extremely eccentric
orbit, Pluto actually spends a part of its cycle within the orbit of
Neptune. It is still unknown exactly when Pluto will next penetrate
Neptune's orbit (symbolically announcing an acceleration of evolution within our solar system), but most astronomers calculate this
event to occur in 1978.
Abstract Meanings: The symbol of Pluto, also of recent origin,
can be seen as a seed of spiritual oneness contained within the crescent of receptivity over the cross of matter. Pluto not only is named
after, but also carries the meaning of the Roman god Pluto, king of
the underworld.
Rebirth through the regeneration of one's values, ideals, and pattern of being are symbolized by Pluto.
Symisfric Meanings: The capacity of any relationship to emerge anew from the ashes of the past for rhe accomplishment of a great
collective drama. The regenerative function of sex and relationship. 5. PLANETARY Twenty-five hundred years PHASES ago the AND ASPECTS philosopher-mathematician Pythagoras taught that geometry and number were keys to the
mysteries of the universe. Pythagoras discovered the arithmetic ratios underlying the diatonic scale of music, the construction of the
regular geometric solids, the Pythagorean theorem, and he or perhaps one of his followers was one of the first to declare the sun to
be the center of the solar system with the spherical planets (including the Earth) revolving around it. He also taught that even' number has a special quality and meaning—and that underlying every
existential fact there is a number or a scries of numbers.
Astrology Ls essentially an application of the concept of the central and universal importance of number. The previous chapter introduced the idea that an individual astrological house, sign, or planet has its particular meaning because it is part of a whole cycle,
occupying a specific position in the sequence of all the parts that
comprise that cycle. Our example was the sign Virgo, which symbolizes the phase of reorientation in the entire zodiacal cycle of
twelve signs (or phases): It is the sixth sign, falling just after the
fifth, self-expressive, creative sign of Leo and immediately before the seventh sign of Libra, which begins at the halfway point of the
zodiac at the transition from the subjective to the objective realms
of consciousness. Likewise, the planet Venus symbolizes the func- THE ASTROLOGY OF IlKl-VriOVSmF
ti<»n of inward cvaluarion and magnetism because it is the first planet
inward from the Earth.
The significance of number can be found everywhere in astro Iogv. In an article titled '*Xumcric.il Kevs to Astrology" (How- scope, April Urano /jj), Rudhyar wrote:
Number is the soul of Astrolotrv. for it Is the numerical sequence of the characteristic phases of such periodic motions
(i.e., of planetary cycles) which is the basis of all astrological
symbolism . . . Our universe is an ordered universe—a universe
of processes whose m:mv phases can be numbered. The number
of each phase tells us what the phase basically signifies—this,
with reference to the process as a whole, [p. Netuno ]
While the Pythagoreans held that every number, from one to
infinity, has its own particular significance, they demonstrated the
numbers from one to ten to be the most primary and essential. The
foundation of astro logical interpretation and symbolism lies within
the meaning and application of these numbers. One. the monad, is the origin of nil things, symbolizing unity and
essential oneness. It is related ro the sun and the conjunction aspect. PLANETARY PHASES AND ASPECTS \ 83 / TtrOjthe dyad, the first of the even numbers, signifies matter and
the process of the involution or dcsccnr of spirit into matter. The
dyad divides all things into two contrasting realms, a prerequisite
for consciousness: subject-object, internal-external, sclf-orlicrt crc. It
represents the processes of cxrernalizarion, division, and analysis.
The planet Mercury and the opposition aspect are connected with
the number two. Three, the triad, is the first odd number (the monad combines
both odd and even in a State of unity). It signifies spiritual evolution, or the ascent of spirit from matter. Three symholi/.cs the principles of synthesis following thesis and antithesis, as well as relationship, vision, and equilibrium. The triad corresponds to the planet
Venus and the trine aspect. TIM*. ASrRfil,fK;v 01" lll;l,>TI<lSSlllI' A \ Four, the rcrnui. symbolizes concrcrc ni;inifcsr;ulnn. the niiucrinl
u'orlil, and "solid power," lr represents the process of the emergence of tangible forms and organic life. The moon ^.md the Earth)
and the square aspect arc related to the tetrad. i - Five, rhe pcnnul, is rhe symbol of self-expression and creative activity. It is almost universally recognized .is the .irchctypc of humanity. The pentad can be connected with Mars and the quintile
(7: degree) aspecr. '
»
\>
v \
« —
v
\ \
^—<,
N\
* Six. lite heN'.id, represents the principle of lunnonv mul productivity. Jupiter and the .sexrile aspect can be seen as expressions of the
number six. I'LANKTAUY I'll ASKS AND ASI'I.CIS 85 //'
V
o
//\ / Seven, rhe hcprml, is considered by almost all occult traditions as
the most sacred of all numltcrs—the number of the cosmic evolutionary processes. It combines the qualities of three (rhe dialectic
process active in all relationships) and four (concrete form and organic life). The number seven represenrs Saturn and rhe scprile (51
degree and 26 minute) aspect. / o Eight, the ogdmul, symbolizes the power of willful iiulividn.ilism
and tU'inmiic activity. Uranus and the octile aspects (45 degree and
155 degrees) are related to the ogdoad. 86 Till-: ASTROLOGY OF RELATIONSHIP Nine, the cnnc.nl. is, to the Pythagoreans, the ocean of fluid rhat
surrounded all the lesser numbers and is itself contained liv the decad. It symbolizes the final stages of the realization of an archetype
and the threshold to a new realm of creative, cyclic activity. Nine
can be seen as representing Neptune and the novile (40 degree)
aspect Ten. the dccad. represents the completion, or perfection, of the
cyclic process that began with the monad, as well as being the starting point (monad) for a new cycle of activity on a higher level.
Pluto and the decile (36 degree) aspect can be connected with the
number ten. s 7 !,",'\NF,TAKV I'M ASMS ANH AStT.ClS v/
v \
\
The number twelve occupies a significant place in all symbolical
systems (including the Hvtlwgorcnn) and is particularly funda- mental in astrology. Twelve, the dmlcciul, is ihc nnnilfcr of the zodiacal signs and the houses. It is the result of the multiplication of
three, the dialectic process—in astrology the three modes of activity
and consciousness (cardinal, fixed, mul murahle)—bv four, the symbol of organic life and manifestation—represented by the four astrological elements: fire, earth, air, and water. The number twelve,
then, is a synthesis of rhe trinity of consciousness or spirit with the
cross of matter. It has a very meaningful role in rhe study of all
forms of conscious, organic existence. AN OUTLINE OF ASPECTUAL PRACTICES
All organic cycles of activity (the houses, the zodiac, the lunation
cycle, etc.) arc archcrypicallv composed of ^fio degrees. IJy dividing the 360 degrees by any one of many possible numbers, a cycle
can be seen as a whole and, simultaneously, as a whole composed of
interacting: parrs. The zodiac, for instance, is a ^60-dcgrce cycle
divided into twelve phases, or signs, of 30 degrees each, lu the article cited above, Rudhyar explains that astrology is
a study of the meaning of cyclic series of facts (that is, closed
processes of trtUisjf)rmt/ion).Byt "closed processes." 1 mean
here processes which have a beginning and an end and ss 'mi; amnrui uaiioNSHip
nimiortms—Imt m/wtv-.i/'/c—inrcrmciIinry phases. Such processes
are also inherently purposeful. Tlicv occur to satisfy a "nccil."
whether it be a cosmic, a biologic or a human need. [p. S]
The relationship between any two planets is constantly changing, starting at conjunction, as the faster-moving planet moves awny
from rhe slower, traveling around its orbit and "catching up wirh"
the other at the next conjunction. The cycle, from conjunction to
conjunction, can be divided by i. :, Júpiter . (1. and S to arrive at what are called in modern astrology the "major" aspects t ;(io divided bv
i c«juals the conjunction; 360 divided by : equals tSo. the opposi- tion; divided bv 3 equals 1:0. the trine: t^o divided by Júpiter equals 90, the square, etc.). The "minor" or "abstract" aspects arc a result
of the divisions of
certain quality by 5. 7, Mercúrio and 1;. Each aspect represenrs a of relationship existing berween two planets, symbolizing a particular sphere of individual consciousness.
The first aspects used by early astrologers were those emerging
from a sense of time and the lluv and flow of energies relative to
time. The duality of dav-night and the quadrature (fnur-partcd- iu'ss) of the cycle of the seasons arc our direct experiences of a cycle divided hv rwo and another by four. A line bisected bv a perpendicular axis becomes a cross. The cross is an archetypal image
found in all symbolical languages (in astrolngv: the axes of the equinoxes and solstices, the cross of the Imrizon-mcridian. and the
glvph for the planet Earth). A further division bv two results in
eight, an image of central importance in many oriental philosophies
and appearing in rhe eight major phases of the moon as well as in
die eightfold zodiacs ami house structures that predate the modern
twelvefold frame of reference.
AS human intelligence began to develop more finely and was
munew bat freed from the demands of the mundane activities of the
nuterial world, the twelvefold structure was introduced. It tran- scends, dualistic. in manv wavs. the limitations of the strictly polarized eightfold form. Probably w hen man's organic, biological
(unctions were seen to operate in terms of the vibration of four,
while his consciousness evolved in terms of three irhesis. antithesis,
and synthesis; or subjecr, object, and the relationship between the
two), 1 he twelvefold phase evele was developed as an appropriate PLANETARY PHASES ANI> ASPECTS
framework. Thirty (sfio ilivitlcil by 8y 12 equals .30) became a basic unit in astrological symbology.
From archaic rimes until the end of the sixteenth century astrologers used rhirrv almost exclusively as rhe basic unir in their recognition of aspects. The Ptolemaic aspects (conjunction, sextile, square,
trine, and opposition), widely used from ar least the firsr century
A.I>. ro present rimes, are based on this Tradition. They arc rhe additive aspects produced by the successive addition of 30 plus 30 plus
30, etc.—only rhe semi-sextile (30 degrees) ami rhe quincunx (150
degrees) arc usually excluded, probably because they arc considered
"too weak" to be of importance.
Johann Kepler (jfyi-irtpi) felt that human consciousness was
more evolved (at least among a few) and more attuned with a geometric order than could be described bv the Ptolemaic aspects alone. To expand the arithmetic view, he inrroduced the divisive
(or space-oriented) series of aspects, differing from the traditional
additive aspects insomuch as rhey are geometric, rhar is, the resulr of
rhe division of 300 by 1, 2, 3, Júpiter , 5, n, 7, and 8 (Kepler did nor pro- ceed beyond eight, wirh the exception of 1;, though finer divisions
are certainly valid). Kepler's new approach inrroduced three additional aspects to astrologers: the octile (45 degrees, having n supplement of 135 degrees), the quintile (72 degrees and the bi-quinrile of
144 degrees), and rhe seprile aspect (51 degrees and 2ft minutes that
can be multiplied by rwo ami three, producing the Iii-scprilc and 1 he
tri-scprile). Until fairly recently Kepler's contribution has been pretty much neglected, and many astrologers still deal largely with
the Ptolemaic or major aspects.
As is the case with most areas of astrological study, or anv snulv
for rhar matter, rhere are grear differences of opinion about the
practical importance of rhe aspects, as well as rhe degree or allowance of inexactitude (orb) ro be used for various aspects. There are
a few schools of rhoughr rhar de-emphasize the role of aspects or
employ only aspecrs of rwo ami multiples of two (the coM)imcrionnpposirion. the semi-square or octile, rhe square, and rhe scsqui(pculrare or rri-ocrilc) because these aspects arc considered rhe only
ones directly related to events. 90 TMK ASTROLOGY OF HI-lATIONFUl Plutão THE CYCLE OF PLANETARY ASPECTS
The significance of aspects (and the phases that exist between them) is an essential and initial study of phase interpretation.
The conjunction (o degrees) derives its meaning from the monad
because it occurs when two planets occupy the same degree of the
zodiac (although an orb of inexactitude of plus or minus about eight degrees is usually allowed in natal charts and about 3 degrees
in svnastric). It is based on the division by one, or no division at all.
symbolically pointing to an essential unity operative between the
two planetary bodies, as well as being the beginning of a new cycle
of relationship.
The opposition (180 degrees) is the only aspect (when exact) in
which the angular distance between the two planets is the snmc
whether the phase arc is calculated in a clockwise or a coun- terclockwise direction. This aspect is connected with the basis of individual consciousness and identity. It is the fundamental aspect of
duality, derived from the number two. It symbolizes the level of
consciousness in which a basic distinction takes place between the
inner and outer realms, and an equilibrium between subject and
object, self and other, resulting in awareness, sensation, and sensitivitv.
The static condition of the opposition docs not remain unchanged.
The two gives rise to the three, the opposition to the trine. While
rhe conjunction and opposition (as well as all aspects evolving from
successive divisions bv rwo) arc related to rhe sense of time, the trine (and all aspects based on odd numbers) is related to Space and
the principle of active intelligence.
The trine unites the duality nt the opposition and gives to its factual type of consciousness the quality of intuitibn. and a vision of
the purpose of existence. A relationship with another for the purpose of mutual transformation is an expression of this dviumic. The
trine, being based on the division of a cycle by an odd number, is PLANETARY PHASES AND ASPECTS Mercúrio ' also connected with the evolution of the spiritual self—dealing more
with intelligence and ps_ycho-spiritual unfoldment than with natural, biological, and instinctual processes.
The vision and understanding of the trine, however, give rise to
action, "purpose must carry the sword of decision," the three gives
birth to the four. The square aspect (90 degrees) therefore symbolizes the mobilization of energies for the concrete actualization of the
vision, ideal, and purpose of the trine. The trine is seen as the idea;
the square represents a focused plan of action, the "architectural"
aspect of growth and fnlfillmcnr.
What follows the vision of the trine and the plans of the square is
the ability to tTtwe—the qnintilc (72 degree aspect). The quintile
and the number five represent the human ability to manipulate substance in a creative and precise manner for the purpose symbolized
by the trine and according to the design of the square. As we ci anill
too easily see today, there arc positive as well as negative uses of
man's creative power. On one hand, we have the spiritual, creative
power flowing through the individual or group for spiritual evolution—on individual, collective, and global scales—represented by a
pcntaclc pointing up. In contrast is the presently widespread selfish
and destructive use of technology and production for the fnrtherment of personal or group power, regardless of the consequences
for others and for the planet as a living organism. The inverted,
downward-pointing pcntaclc (also rhe emblem of black magic) is symbolic
of rhis counter-evolutionary use of creativity.
—
*
In order to lie rruly constructive and creative in a spiritual manner, the quintile level of consciousness must be integrated wirh an
undemanding and vision of the results of irs creative expressions
and the way in which rhev can best fulfill an evolutionary need. In
a series of articles written bv Rudhyar about thirty years ago, titled
"The Study of the Creative Process through the Less Familiar Aspeers," he points out rhat
at the level of the quintile there is no real working relationship
between creator and the public, leader and rhe led . . . Hut as
the level of the sextile is reached by a sobered and more mature
consciousness that has known crcativcncss for the sheer joy of THE ASTROLOGY OF RELATIONSHIP
creativity and found the experience wanting and perhaps tragic, the principle of cooperative crearivcness begins to operate: crearivcncss integrated with understanding of the need and
with consciousness of divine or universal purpose. Since the symbol of the sextile (^o degrees) derives from two interlaced triangles, wc can see that it is also rclaced to an ability for
solving problems posed by two contrasting types of understanding
—and thus it represents the function of effective organization and
management of one's energies.
The number seven produces the first irrational number when divided inro jflo—the septile aspect of •;! degrees 25 minutes and
42-(- seconds—pointing to a new dimension of super-rational consciousness. The septile introduces the unpredictable, irrational element of experience, symbolizing the ability to respond to the call
of one's destiny and to use unfit or left-over materials (more than
six, but less than seven radii are required to make a circumference)
for the purpose of fulfilling a definite goal, often of a karmic nature.
Next is rhe level of eight or the octile aspects (45 degrees and 13 5
degrees). If the square, from which the octile is derived, represents
ideas and visions brought into a clear focus, then the octile symbolizes the dissemination of such ideas using the realm of one through
seven as a foundation. The octile represenrs the dramatic and intense release of dynamic energy.
The aspects based on divisions of by numbers greater than eight arc connected with particularly abstract levels of human consciousness and functional activities. The novile aspect (40 degrees),
based on the number nine, has been said to represent the identification of self wirh rhe purpose and function of global and universal
schemes. The novile can also be seen as the symbol of initiationemergence into a rotaIIv new realm.
The decile, or scmi-quintile, of 3^ degrees, can be symbolized by
two interlacing pentades (one pointed upward, the other, downward). It represents a point of conflict (or decision) between the
positive and negative use of creative power—between a new creative impulse and old Techniques and values. PLANETARY PI1ASF5 AND ASPECTS
The semi-sextile (30 degrees) 93 and its supplement, the quincunx (150 degrees), result from the division of a cycle by twelve. The
semi-sextile refers to the initial emergence of centers of individual
consciousness. The quincunx (being the synthesis of twelve and five) refers to the principles of spontaneity and effective technique
—as well as being a symbol of personal reorientation and self- improvement. Waxing and Waning Hemispheres. In the cyclic process, every new cycle begins with the conjunction—the release of a new set of
potentialities; culminates at the middle of the cycle—with the fulfillment of purpose on an organic, functional level, or rhe realization of failure; and ends, only to begin again on a new level, at the
next conjunction. This process is a dynamic, spirallic cycle; Each
new conjunction between two planets takes place at a slightly
different point in space because both bodies arc in constant motion.
The structure may be repeated, but rhe experiences encountered
and their reception arc different for each cycle.
*
When we arc dealing with an astrological chart we arc working
with a complex of relationships frozen in time—but still of a cyclic,
dynamic nature. The conventional way of looking at aspects is to
see them as "snapshots," but we should not forget that rhev arc, in
fact, moments of a continuous, endless process of cyclic change. All
relationships arc in constant motion. To view aspects from a phase
orientation is to recognize this fact—a fact that implies an essential
difference between waxing (from the conjunction to the opposi- tion) and waning (from the opposition to the following conjunc- tion) hcmicyclcs of development. The nature of the aspect is constant regardless of tvhether it is waxing or waning, but its manifestation is modified according to its hemicvclc.
W
I'
The function of any aspect in the waxing hemicyele (with a
phase arc between o degrees and 180 degrees) will be directed toward the development of potentials through the release of energies
(generated by the planets involved) released along the path of impulsive and instinctual action. This is the arc of involution, differentiation and specialization.
The function of any aspect in the waning hemicyele (with a 94 THE ASTROLOGY OF RLl-ATKiNSni Plutão I
phase arc of 180 degrees ro o degrees) should be directed toward
the development and deepening of consciousness to the point where
it can grasp the purpose of life Cat least on certain levels) and disseminate it to others. This is the arc of mental activities and the expansion of consciousness. Aspectual Orbs. Two planets do not have to be exactly the angular distance of an aspect apart to be considered in aspect. The
number of degrees is the phase arc between two planets plus or
minus the aspect value is referred to as an orb. For instance, a phase arc of eighty-eight degrees is a waxing square with a twodegree orb. Opinions among astrologers vary concerning the orb
size they allow for the various aspects. An orb of about six to eight
degrees is generally allowed for the major aspects (the conjunction, opposition, trine, and square) in natal charts. When working
with svnastric charts it is best to use narrower orbs, generally no
more than three or four degrees, and preferably no more than two
or three degrees. In addition to their value as parameters for determining aspects, orbs also have an underlying qualitative significance. Applying and Separating Aspects. An applying aspect is one with a phase arc less than the exact aspect. As time progresses, the faster
moving planet (the applying planet and the main releaser of the function of the planetary pair) will progress to a position making
the aspect exact. An applying aspect is not yet mature, has not yet
reached its apex* of exactitude. A separating aspect is one in which
the phase arc is greater than the aspect's arc. That is, the aspect has
already ailminntcd. and the faster moving planet is proceeding along a course rhar will lead it completely out of the orb of the
aspect.
An applying aspect Ls one in which the planets' functions arc
directed toward the gradual increase and eventual release of activity. while a separating aspect represents the dispersion of the intensity generated and released in the applying stage.
In comparing rwo charts, if one's natal planet is forming an applying aspect with another's natal planet, within the field of activity PLANETARY PI I ASKS AND ASPECTS
symbolized by the two planets there should 95
be a building of momentum and a drive toward fulfillment and release. In the instance of a separating aspect, a fulfillment in the particular function
symbolized by the planets involved has already been realized. It is
now up to the individuals to integrate its meaning into rhe fabric of
their individualities and the relationship itself anil move forward ro
the next phase of unfoldment. This next phase can be seen as the
next aspect in the development of the cyclic relationship between
the two planets.
The closeness of the orb indicates the intensity of the contact.
The most exact aspect between the natal planets of two persons can
svmholi/.c the most immediate and intense area of interaction between the two individuals, the facet of the relationship that may be
most in need of integration. THE MEANING OF THE ASPECTS
The aspects symbolize basic types of intcrfunctional relationships
defined by the planets that compose them. When interpreting planetary aspects it is important to consider not only the nature of the
planets involved but also their positions in the zodiac of signs and
the cycle of houses. These two frames of reference will be discussed
further in the following chapters; they refer essentially to types of
energy and fields of experience. The following is an attempt to
briefly outline the significance of each aspect, with special focus on
its meanings in synastry. $6 THE ASTROLOGY OK RKI-VTIONSHIP CONJUNCTION
Phase Arc: 0 0 Numerical Value: KEYNOTE: I The moment of unity setting rhe tone that will res- onate throughout an entire cycle of relationship. Traditional Meanings:
strength. Togcchcrncss. unity, Symbolic Implications: The monad; rhe intcnsitication, one primordial, and eternal source. The point and the origin of all numbers.
Abstract Meanings: The release of a seed potential from which a new cycle of relationship will unfold. The synthesis and unity of
two or more individual centers.
Synastric Meanings: The initial contact between two or more per- sons and rhe essential quality of that which rheir relationship potentially fulfills. A functional unity between two persons in the departments of life symbolized by the planers. 'The energies rhat draw
individuals into intimate contact.
Types of Relationship: Total union. Contacts that resonate in the innermost recesses of the psyche. A conjunction berween a planet in
one natal chart and that of another represenrs the areas of life in
which the individuals will be able to identify with one another. PLANETARY PHASES AND ASPECTS 97 OPPOSITION
Phase Arc: 180° Numerical Value: 2 KEYNOTE: The line of distinction that maintains equilibrium be- tween self and others. Traditional Meanings:
( Tension, conflict, pulling apart, and separa- tion.
Symbolic Implications: Duality. The two: above-below, light- dark, in-out, self-other, male-female. The line.
Abstract Meanings: The sepamtion of subject and object and the subjective and objective modes of human consciousness. In cyclic
terms, the integration of the subjective hemisphere with the objective, the confrontations, and new awareness such a process involves.
The apex of'any cycle of relationship.
Synastric Meanings: Intcrfunctional activity for the realization of one's inner self through contacts with others. The state of balance
between self and other that precedes contact or interaction. Duality,
the maximum separation of centers. Unity through diversity.
Types of Relationship: The opposition symbolizes the type of in- teractivity that may appear to be rooted in conflict on the surface,
yet there is a complementary nature with an underlying sense of
unity, and the opportunity for illumination. Planets in a synastric
chart linked by opposition indicate the spheres of activity where the
two individuals are most likely to have radically different views. 98 THE ASTROLOGY OK RELATIONSHIP TRINE
Phase Arc: 0 I :o and 240° Numerical Value: 5 KEYNOTE: harmonious The blending of seemingly opposed functions through a mutual purpose or vision. Traditional Meanings: E;ise. harmony, flow, and co-opcration. SytnholicImplications: The trinity, the evolution of spirit, and the three modes of consciousness. The triad of will, love, and wisdom—
the three aspects of the one in spirit.
Abstract Meaninps: The transcendence of duality through under.
s.
standing. The expansion of one's field of relationship and activity. waxing: The expansion of the concrete mind: growth in terms of
practical knowledge, waning: The expansion of the abstract mind;
growth in terms of universal understanding.
Synastric Meanings: The harmonious, co-operative interweaving of rwo or more individual life patterns. An understanding of others and their needs.
Types of Relationship: Harmonious, co-operative associations in which energies flow between centers without conflict, perhaps in a
not altogether conscious manner. PLANETARY PHASES AND ASPECTS 99 SQUARE OR QUARTILE
Phase Arc: 90° and 2 70° Numerical Value: KEYNOTE: Júpiter The need to make definite plans for the actualization of an envisioned goal. Traditional Meanings: Difficulty, affliction, conflict, and stress. Symbolic Jvtplications: The four corners of the universe, the four seasons, and the four elements. The cross of matter through which
the one is manifested.
Abstract Meanings: The process of externalizing relationship and the pursuit of giving to it concrete form. Creative tension. The
need to meet confrontations directly, waxing: Crises in action, encountered in answer to the need for the establishment of a firm base
for extemalization. waning: Crises in consciousness, encountered in
the development of new forms of relationships.
Synastric Meanings: The square symbolizes an interplanetary rela- tionship in which there lies much constructive potential, probably
realized through some conflict or stress.
Types of Relationship:
lating and exciting, Contacts that tend to be alternately stimuthen tense and stressful Once the surface conflicts implied by a square aspect is harmonized or integrated, a
very constructive and purposeful relationship may emerge. IOO THE ASTROLOGY OF Rr.t_\TION5inP A
n7
o
!> QUINTILE
Phase Arc: 3 7-' nnd ;SS Numerical Value: KEYNOTE: ^ The capacity for creative vnv.lpulittioit of energies ami substances for the actual manifestation of visions and plans. Traditional Meanings: The cjuinrilc is rarely used by traditional as- trologers. It is usually considered an indication of artistic talent.
Symbolic bnpHcations: The live senses, tiie five limbs (two arms, two legs, and the head}, the four fingers and the thumb.
Abstract Meanings: The individual, creative clcmenr active within any life experience. The ability to express one's inner self through
artistry. Technology as a means of carrying out a definite plan of
action in the creation of a product, waxing: The use of knowledge
and skill for the realization of a subjective or personal vision. WANING; Channeling one's understanding and creative abilities toward
the realization of an objective or social/collective need.
Synastric Meanings: The quintile (as well as the bi-quintile aspect with an angular value of 144" or ; id3) indicates the area of activity
where two individuals should be able to interact on the level of creative expression.
Types of Rciulonship: Creative, artistic associations or those that bring individual and creative factors into focus. PLANETARY PHASES AND ASPECTS lOl SEXTILE
Phase Arc: 0 60° and ^uo Numerical Value: KEYNOTE: 6 Creativity synthesized with a sensitive understanding of the needs and results of one's creations for one's self and others. Traditional Meanings: Harmony, good, ease, a weak trine. Symbolic It/iplications: The six directions of motion: up, down, forward, backward, left, right. Two interlaced triangles representing the union of two triads of self.
Abstract Meanings: The harmonious interlinking of two inde- pendent, yet complementary, fields of activity. The practical application of creativity, skills, and techniques. WAXING: The instinctual,
spontaneous development of knowledge and skills. WANING: The purposeful application of techniques and understanding.
Synastric Meanings: Indicates the departments of life (symbolized by the planets involved) where two individuals can work together
in a harmonious and productive fashion.
Types of Relationship: The sextile signifies an association in which individuals can combine their interests, skills, and understanding in a
mutually gratifying manner for the ultimate purpose of furthering
the evolution of humanity. V V A A SEPTILE
Phase Arc: 51 ^(j'and 34' Numerical Value: 7 KEYNOTE: The connections that link ordinary life experiences with transcendental needs.
Traditional Meanings: Rarely cmplnvcd by traditional astrologers; generally described as an indication of fate.
Symbolic Meanings: The cosmos. The seven visible planets and the seven days of the week. The seven cosmic rays.
Abstract Meanings: The unexpected, irrational, and transcendental elements of life. The karmic. collective, and cosmic implications of
any field of activity. Destiny or the chain of experiences and relationships that leads one to his or her individual unfoldment. WAXING: An instinctual and spontaneous receptivity to the call of
one's destiny. WANING: The use of intuition and understanding as a
means of envisioning and achieving the fulfillment of one's destiny.
Synastric Meanings: A septile (as well as a bi-scptilc of 1 0 c or v 257 bK and a tri-scprilc of i54 j;' or :05 \f3') aspect between two
planets in a svnastric chart indicates that the departments of life
symbolized by the planets' functions may tend to become the stage
for unusual and unexpected experiences, possibly of a spiritual or
transfonmrive signi ficance,
T\pes of Relationship^ Unions in which individuals arc inystcn- onslv, cmnpulsivclv. or karmically drawn together. OCTILE
Phase Arc: 0 45° and 315 Numerical Value: KEYNOTE: 8 The apex of interfitnctionalactivity culminating in a dramatic and intense release of dynamic energies. Traditional Meanings: Difficulty, affliction, a weak square. Symbolic Implications: The apex of electromagnetic fields. Two interlaced squares.
Abstract Meanings: Intense interaction. The urge toward dynamic self-expression and the promotion of one's ideas, waxing: An awareness of dynamic interactivity, waning: The release of self through
creative interchange.
Synastric Meanings: The intense interchange of personal energies. The planets linked by an octile (or tri-octilc of 1350 or 225°) denote the field of relationship that should allow for a maximum release of individual expression and bi-polar activity.
Types of Relationship: Powerful connections with others that could manifest cither in an exciting and constructive or conflicting
and difficult way. THE ASTROLOGY OF RELATIONSHIP NO VILE
Phase Arc: 40 6 and 3:o'i
Numerical Value:
KEYNOTE: Mercúrio The closing phase of a tenfold cycle of relationship that brings one to the threshold of.i new realm of consciousness and
relatedness. Symbolic Implications: The triads of mineral, planr, and animal kingdoms. The three facets of each of the aspects of the trinity.
The forty days and nights of preparation for initiation. DECILE
Phase Arc: and 3: Júpiter ° Numerical Value:
KEYNOTE: 1o The integration of j new creative impulse and set of potentials, retaining the most suitable forms, techniques, and values
of the past. Symbolic Implications: The Tccr.icrys. The four universal beings manifesting as the numbers one, two. three, and four. PLANETARY PHASES AND ASPECTS 105 DUODEC1LE OR SEMI-SEXTILE
Phase Arc: 30° and 3 30° Numerical Value: KEYNOTE: 12 The emergence of a focal center of self-awareness. Traditional Meanings: Slightly good, not of much influence. Symbolic Implications: The twelve solar archetypes. The twelve gates of the holy city. The twelve tribes of Israel.
Abstract Meanings: The most intimate linking of functional cen- ters. waxing: The beginning of an individualized center of consciousness. WANING: The final phase of a cyclic process where individual consciousness commences its return to a state of universalization.
Synastric Meanings: The duodecilc aspect in a synastric chart in- dicates the area of a relationship in which the two individuals will
feel naturally intimate.
The quincunx or quinduodecilc (also known as the inconjunct)
aspect of 150° or 2ro0 is the supplement of the duodecile. It falls
halfway between the harmonious trine and rhe tense opposition, signifying a phase in the development of a cycle where adjustment and
reorientation should occur. A quincunx in a synastric chart indicates
a strong sense of attraction-repulsion in the departments of life indicated by the planets forming the aspect.
Types of Relationship: A semi-sextile or quincunx aspect between two planets denotes a functional relationship that may alternate between intimacy and alienati«n. Io6 THE ASTROLOGY OF RELATIONSHIP THE USE OF PHASE ARCS
In a more thorough representation of planetary motion, not only
all the angular values recogni7:cd by Ptolemy and Kepler, but every'
phase arc existing between any rwo planetary bodies (or between
angles and planets) has a particular significance, whether or not an
aspect is formed. Some of these relationships may be much more
subtle than others, possibly working along the lines of a superphvsicnl evolution, but operating on some level of consciousness, nevertheless.
Arriving ar rhe meanings for any of these relationships is not
dilliculr—particularlv if one keeps in mind the two things that are
at the foundation of phase intcrprccarion;
(1) the phase arc (or the distance between two bodies calculated
in a manner described at the end of this chapter) has a specific numerical value that can be deciphered in a number of ways, and
(2) the nature and function of the planetary relationship involved
(represented by a synthesis of the two planets' functions, as well as
by their positions in terms of house, sign, etc.) expresses itself according ro rhe position of their phase arc within the context of their
whole cycle.
*
Wc discuss ways in which to decipher the meanings of various
planetary pairs in Chapter 6. The phase arc of any rwo planets Can
be interpreted either through the aspects presented above or in terms of the Sabian symbols, discussed in Chapter 7. MOW TO CALCULATE PHASE ARCS
A natal phase arc is (except in the case of relationships berween
the sun, .Mercury, and Venus) the distance between rwo planets measured from the slower-moving planet to the faster in a connrcrclockwise direction. For these calculations the moon is the fastest
moving planer, followed by .Mercury. Venus, sun, Mars, Jupiter,
Saturn. Uranus, Neptune, and Pluto. There arc forty-five com- binations of planets. Phase arcs can be calculated by converting the
zodiacal longitudes to their value in terms of a cycle of 3^0 degrees, PLANETARY PHASES A NO ASPECJ5
then subtracting the slower-moving planet's position from that of
the faster.
For example: S:igitrarius)Mars
0 — r i r) o5'
i5oc,3<j' { Cancer) Jupiter Mars-Jupiter phase arc If the position of the faster moving planet is less than the slower,
then 360 degrees should be added to its value.
For example: : i o' +360° 00' (20° i o' Aries) Venus
Adjustment 3 80°1 o'
—2 55<l(,5'
i25''05' The method (1
Sagittarius) Saturn
Snturn-V^cnus phase arc of calculating planers of two persons differs: synastric phase arcs between the The distance is always taken from the older person's natal planets to the younger's in a counterclockwise direction.
The phase arcs between the sun, Mercury, and Venus arc distinct
from the others because these three bodies lie inside the orbit of rhe
Earth. They arc never more than a fraction of the zodiac aparr
from one another and therefore do nor form geocentric oppositions
that would mark the obvious transition from the waxing to the waning hcmicyclc. The phase arcs of these three combinations can be
understood as waxing and waning, however, if wc analyze the retrograde periods of Mercury and Venus.
Mercury and Venus spend half their cycles between the sun and
Earth and the remaining rime beyond the sun (see Figure it). When one of these planets forms a conjunction with the sun while
it is moving retrograde fand passing between the Earth and ihc
sun), it is referred to as an inferior conjunction. A superior conjunction is formed when the planet is moving in a direct fashion and
therefore beyond the sun from a geocentric perspective. A phase
arc between the sun and the planers Mercury and Venus is waxing
when (1) the planet (Mercury or Venus) is moving in a direct motion, is ahead of the sun in the zodiac, and is moving away from the
sun after the superior conjunction—this is rhe superior/rcaxiug phase, or (2) when the planet is retrograde and, behind the sun in the superior
cormuccion o inferior
conjunct: ion eat
Kiiiurc 11 zodiac, is mining away from it after the inferior conjiincrion—clhs
is the infer/or/TnT-vi/^phase. A waning phase arc between the planets Mercury or Venus and rhe sun occurs when (i) the planet
is moving in a direct morion, behind the sun in the zodiac, and moving toward superior conjunction—this is the superior/waning phase,
or (2) the planet is moving in a retrograde motion, ahead of the
sun, and, because of its retrograde motion, moving toward the inferior conjunction wirh the sun—this is the inferior/waning phase.
In the instance of the phase arc between Mercury and Venus, the
procedure is the same as above except that the position of Mercury
is used instead of the sun's. 6. The most particularized THE HOUSES frame of reference against which the planets can be viewed is the horizon-meridian and the twelve houses
derived from the quadrants produced by these axes. The horizon
and meridian divide the space surrounding the birth of an individual
(or any event) into four segments equal in space. The horizon is
composed of two poles or angles, the ascendant that expresses the
degree of the zodiac at the eastern horizon at a particular time and
place, and the descendant that relates the opposite zodiacal degree
with the western horizon. Because the Earth rotates on its axis once
every twenty-four hours, a different zodiacal degree rises (as its opt Netuno posite sets) on the horizon about every four minutes (24 hours
divided by 360 degrees equals four minutes). (See Figure Mercúrio in Chapter 3.) Perpendicular in space to the horizon is the meridian,
though it is not always ninety zodiacal degrees from the horizon,
with the M.C or Medium Coeli at its upper pole representing the
point of solar culmination (the symbolic noon point) and the I.C.
or Imum Coeli at its lower pole,' the midnight point. The horizon
represents a line of awareness that separates the subjective (lower
hemisphere) and objective (upper hemisphere) modes of con- sciousness. The meridian signifies the line of organic growth (I.C.)
and social power (M.C).
The ascendant of an astrological chart symbolizes the qualities
that make an individual (an individual person or an individual situation or relationship) unique. It is the selfhood pole of awareness and
represents the type of experiences that can lead one to a more inti- I IO THE ASTROLOGY OF RELATIONSHIP mate understanding of his or her particular potentialities and their
fulfillment. The ascendant symbolizes what an individual essentially
is.
The descendant is always the zodiacal degree directly opposite
(180 degrees from) the ascendant and svmlioliz.es the individual's approach or orientation toward others. It is the relatedness pole of
the line of awareness and represents where an individual's destiny
should lead liim, where a relationship should take its individual participants.
The I.C, popularly known as rhe ''nadir," symbolizes the experiences that can best assist one in establishing a center of personal integration and roors for upward growrh. How n relationship can be
best grounded and how best approached by rhe individuals who
compose it arc represented by the I.C. as well.
The M.C, often incorrectly referred to as the "midheaven", signifies an individual's place and function on a cnllective. spiritual
level, or his or her relation to the universe. It signifies the ultimate
why of an individual self or relationship: why an individual is born
or why two or more persons are drawn together in a relationship.
The areas between the angles arc known as (juadranrs. each carrying an individual significance. The firsr quadrant is the area between
the ascendant and the I.C. It signifies the initial emergence of selfconscious activity. The second quadrant, extending from the I.C. to
the descendant, symbolizes the phase of most rapid organic growth
and adaption as well as the expansion of awareness of the outer
world, but from an essentially subjective perspective. The third quadrant extends from the descendant to the M.C. It represents the
growing awareness of the outer world from an objective point of
view and the creative release of self through interpersonal rela- tionships. The fourth quadrant, from the M.C. to the ascendant,
signifies the expansion of one's social/spiritual power and responsibility. HOUSE DIVISION
The twelve houses of an astrological chart arc produced by dividing the quadrants by three. In order to perform such a division, a
choice must be made among the many valid systems of house III THE HOUSES division. That is, there is more than one way of dividing the space
(or time, in terms of one system) within each quadrant. Each of the
many systems emphasizes a certain astronomical framework. One
system, for instance, focuses on the ecliptic, another on the equator,
and so on. The four angles remain the same in all systems of division
(with the exception of the equal house system that doesn't consider
the meridian when dividing houses), but different systems assign
varying degrees to the intermediary house cusps (the second, third,
fifth, sixth, eighth, ninth, eleventh, and twelfth houses). The principles behind the various systems arc too complex to present here;
those interested are Dona Marie Lorenz referred to Tools of Astrology: Houses by (Topanga, Calif.: Eomcga Press, 1973). The Porphyry system was used for the charts in this volume, a system
F■
that simply divides the zodiacal space within each quadrant into
three segments equal in zodiacal space.
Why twelve houses? Astrology is an application of numerology;
the symbolism of astrology becomes clear viewed from a numerological perspective. The houses arc derived by a threefold division of
the quadrants. This operation involves dividing four segments, symbolic of form and concrete manifestation, by three, signifying the
three aspects of spirit or the three modes of consciousness that animate all forms of manifestation (four). The result is twelve archetypes, each expressing a particular aspect of the synthesis of the triangle of spirit with the cross of matter. In other numerological
operations twelve represents three (i-}-2 = 3) and also the sacred
number seven, symbolizing the cyclo-cosmic process (3+ Júpiter =7). QUALITIES
The threefold OF HOUSE EXPRESSION division of the quadrants, in addition to es- tablishing three houses within each quadrant, defines the area within
the quadrant where each one of the three qualities of expression is
most focused. That is, there arc twelve houses, one carrying the
significance of each of the three modes of expression in each quadrant. This again highlights the numbers three and four: The twelve
houses are divided by three qualities of expression, each quality
most active within a total of four houses. 112 THE ASTROLOGY OF RELATIONSHIP The Active or Angular Quality. Houses following the angles ("the first, fourth, seventh, and tenth) are referred to as active or angular.
The quality of expression dominant within these houses is activating, initiating, and individualizing. It sets processes and relationships
into motion, and symbolizes the areas of one's primary experiences.
These four houses arc generative.
The Reactive or Succedent Quality.
The houses following the active houses (the second, fifth, eighth, and eleventh) arc called reactive or succedent. These houses symbolize the responses to the actions first expressed by the active houses. They have creative significance, representing the expansion, focalizacion, and consolidation of the relationships and experiences initiated in the active
houses. These houses are coKcentrathe,
The Resultant or Cadent Quality.
precede the angles The resultant or cadent houses (the third, sixth, ninth, and twelfth houses). These arc universal and harmonizing, tending to fulfill or disintegrate the relationships and experiences initiated in the active houses
and focused in the reactive houses. Thev are dispersive. THE MEANING OF THE T\\*EL\"E HOUSES
The twelve houses symbolize twelve archetypal areas of individual experience and life circumstance. Like all other astrological frames of reference, the rwclve houses as a whole compose a cvclc
consisting of a beginning, a middle, and an end; the complete cycle
encompassing the entire circle of twelve houses, with each house
deriving its meaning from its sequence in the cvcle. Outlines of the
various meanings for each of the twelve houses follow. THE HOUSES FIRST HOUSE Expression: Active-angular/generative Significators: Mars and Pluto KEYNOTE: The experience of emerging from the collective un- conscious as a self-conscious individual with a unique function to
' fulfill I
Traditional Meanings: The circumstances one is born into. The personality and the body.
Abstract Meanings: The process of sclf-discovery, one's orienta- tion toward one's self. The experiences through which one can best
realize what he or she is. The most obvious characteristics projected
bv the personality.
Synastric Meanings: The direct and immediate significance of a relationship, how it could be affecting one's sense of self and identity. Experiences through which two or more persons can best participate together in mutual self discovery.
Types of Relationships: Contacts that originate on level or one's relationships with one's inner self. > a self-to-self 114 THE ASTROLOGY OF RELATIONSHIP SECOND HOUSE
Expression: Reacrive-succedent/concentrative Significator: Venus KEYNOTE: The experience of identifying one's self with sub- stance for the purpose of achieving a clearer definition of self Traditional Meanings: One's attitude toward possessions. Money and property.
Abstract Meanings: Experiences of identifying one's self with and becoming attached to substance. The refinement of the senses.
Synastric Meanings: The basic energies and resources latent within a particular relationship. How two or more individuals can cooperate on a practical level. The biological experiences of a relationship. Two persons' approaches to sharing resources and energies.
Types of Relationships: Biological contacts or relationships that deal extensively with materials and resources. TUK HOUSES THIRD 1 '5 HOUSE Expression: Rcsultiint-cadcnt/dispersive Significator: Mercury KEYNOTE: The cstablishwcvt of a network of relationships be- tween one's self and the environment.
concerning one's environment. The acquisition of knowledge Traditional Meanings: The concrete mind, publications, writings, brothers and sisters, and short-term travel.
Abstract Meanings: The mental functions, sense impressions, and the associative faculties. Consciousness focusing itself upon the relationships between one's self and his or her environment.
Synastric Meanings: The experience of relating with others through the mental sphere. The communicative, verbal possibilities
of a relationship. Experiences through which individuals can cooperate for the purpose of gathering knowledge and information.
The manner in which rwo or more individuals can best com- municate.
Types of Relationships: Relationships that arc involved wirh the communication of knowledge. Contacts with one's siblings. THE ASTROLOGY OF RELATIONSHIP FOURTH HOUSE Expression: Active-angular/generative Significator: The moon KEYNOTE: The experience of fanning j center of activity far the purpose of personal integration and inner security. Traditional Meanings: The home and the domestic scene. Physical and emotional security. The mother.
Abstract Meanings: Personal integration within a central, well- defined field of relationship. The process of integrating a part of
one's environment within one's self for the purpose of establishing a
center of outer experience.
Synastric Meanings: How a relationship influences one's personal foundations and one's sense of emotional security. How rwo or more persons can best go about sharing emotional experiences and a
common base of operarions.
Types of Rdationsbips: Relationships centered around the home. Contacts with one's mother. THE HOUSES Expression: FIFTH HOUSE
Rc.icrivc-succcdcnt/conccncrative Signi ft cut or: The sun KEYNOTE: The process of externalizing one's self, and the expe- riences of self-expression as a vital, creative individual. Traditional Meanings: Casual relationships, pleasure, children, amusement, and speculation.
Abstract Meanings: The experience of externalizing one's self through creative expression. Individual and unique creative experiences one wishes to display to the world.
Synastric Meanings: The capacity for openly expressing one's emo- tions and affections. How two or more individuals can best cooperate on the level of self-expression and creativity. Collaboration
with others on a creative project.
Types of Relationships: Casual love affairs that afford personal pleasure and spontaneous, creative expression without the responsibilities normally connected with contractual (seventh house) relationships. THE ASTROLOGY OF RELATIONSHIP I 18 SIXTH HOUSE Expression: Rcsulranr-cndcnc/ dispersive Sig/iificator: Mercury KEYNOTE: The experience of resolving personal conflicts result- ing fro?n over expressing one's self (by way of fifth house experiences) through introspection and self-reorientation. Traditional Meanings: Health, cinplnymciu, service to others, and introspection.
Abstract Meanings: Personal limitations, inertia, and conflicts. Self- judgment and analytic introspection as a means of dealing with personal inadequacies.
Synastric Meanings: The personal adjustments and reorientations necessary for one to be able to relate to others in a harmonious
manner. Experiences of dealing with the conflicts thar emerge in a
relationship on the issue of equality in personal expression and authority. How two or more individuals can work together for the
purpose of mutual self-improvement and reorientation.
Types of Relationships: Contacts ployee. Therapeutic relationships. berween employer and em- THE HOUSES SEVENTH HOUSE Expression:
Significator: Activc-angular/gcncrativc
Venus KEYNOTE: The process of objectifying possible experiences of one-to-one consciousness, interchange making that transcend the strictly subjective approach t0 relationships. Traditional Meanings: Marriage, parrncrship, contracts, and rela- tionships in general.
Abstract Meanings: One's orientation toward others and toward relationship. Contractual relationships and agreements. The transition between subjective perception and active participation within
the sphere of relationship.
Synastric Meanings: How two or more persons can best function together in a mutually co-operative fashion. The way in which one
approaches relationships. The central focus of a relationship and
where it could lead the individuals involved.
Types of Relationships: Conventional monogamous relationships are represented by the seventh house, as well as partnerships and
other legally binding relationships. 120 THE ASTROLOGY OE RELATIONSHIP EIGHTH HOUSE
Expression: Succcdenr-rencrivc/concentrative Significators: Mars and Pluto KEYNOTE: The experience of an intense exchange of vital ener- gies for the purpose of transcending individual limitations. Traditional Meanings: Sex, death, business, the occult, and other people's money.
Abstract Meanings: The expansion of one's field of relationship. The murual exchange of energies. Identification of self with a
w
greater whole, "the urge to merge" with others while still retaining
one's sense of individuality. Synastric Meanings: The experience of interacting and idcnrifyinjr closely with another in both biological and spiritual spheres. A relationship's capacity for intense interplay between individuals. The
experiences in which individuals can assist each other through personal transformations.
Types of Relationships: Business contracts and transactions. In- tensely sexual and transformative relationships that transcend social
demands and conventions. THE HOUSES NINTH 121 HOUSE Expression: Rcsultant-cadcnc/dispersive
Significator: Jupiter KEYNOTE: The experience of expanding one's social and philo- sophical horizons in order to reach a deeper understanding of the
purpose of relationship. Traditional Meanings: Religion, philosophy, and law. Journeys to foreign lands.
Abstract Meanings: The abstract mind and the power to recognize and understand mulcit'acctcd relationships. The expansion of consciousness and one's personal search for meaning.
Synastric Meanings: A relationship's ability to stimulate one's higher aspirations and expand one's world view. The experience of
co-operating with others for the further understanding of the basic
principles that underlie life.
Types of Relationships: Associations with others pursuing a com- mon metaphysical line of inquiry". Relationships that involve the expansion of one's understanding possibly by bringing one into contact with diiTcrent cultures and places. 121 TENTH HOUSE Expression: Aciivc-aiiyvi lar/trcr.crativc Significator: Saturn KEY NOTE: The experience for of the purpose of participating iiiuicy>t.i nding in the and j at filling outer world
ones collec- tive/s phi t ted I unction. Traditional Meanings: Social status, recognition, honor, and ambi- tion. The father.
Abstract Meanings: Active participation in rhe external, objective world. The place and function one holds in the ■Social sphere, and
the assumption of responsibility for its realization.
Sy nni'tric Meanings: The experience of working wirh others for a mutual social, political, or spiritual purpose, blow an rissncmioii can
broaden one's understanding of his or her career or social position.
Types of Relationships: Conr.icis between individuals working for a common social goal. One's rclntioiv.hip with one's father or father
images. THE HOUSES ELEVENTH *23 HOUSE Expression: Resulcant-succedcnt/conccncradve
Significators: KEYNOTE: Saturn and Uranus The experiences of social expression and group inte- gration and the identification of one's self with one's social function. Traditional Meanings: Hopes, wishes, and goals. Friends and social life.
Abstract Meanings: How one externalizes his or her social func- tion and how it influences his or her personal, inner life. Reform
1 and revolutions. Group integration, new ideas, and individualistic
orientations toward relationships.
Synastric Meanings: The experience of becoming thoroughly inte- grated into a group or collectivity of individuals. How two or more
persons can best integrate their personal relationship with the needs
and values of a larger group.
Types of Relationships: Associations with others on a professional and/or political level. Relationships that focus on developing new
or unconventional forms of group activity. Expression:
Significators: KEYNOTE: TWELFTH HOUSE
Rcsultnnt-c.ulcnr/dispcrsive
Jupiter and Neptune The experience of realizing that what transpires at any one moment ii a phase of ail entire cyclic process linking the
past with the future and potentiality with actUaii: Netuno . Traditional Meanings: Karma, fate, nhstaclcs. confinements, and unknown enemies.
Abstract Meanings:
Accumulated resources. The resolution of
conflicts between individual and sucictv. the equalization of individual expression and collective needs. The unconscioiK. both personal
and collective. The do>intr phase of any cycle of relationship that
carries within it the most essential experiences of the past, from
which a new cycle may grow.
Synastric Meanings: The imderlyinsj. unknown), or mysterious ele- ments of a relationship, and its karmic implications.
'Types of Relationships: Relationships that help the participants in realizing the unity underlying their life experiences. Relationships
carried on in socrer. mvsterious. or isolated circumstances. THE HOUSES HOUSE-ORIENTED POSITIONS
If two individuals both have a planet exactly in the middle of the
first house, the planets involved compose a house-oriented conjunction—even though the\* may be nowhere near one another, or even
forming another aspect, from a zodiacal orientation. The houseoriented position of a planet is calculated by dividing the number of
degrees a planet is from the cusp of a house bv the total number of
degrees in that particular house, then multiplying by thirty. This
number is then converted to its position in the 3f>o-dcgrcc cycle according to the sequence of the house the planet is in (see Chapter Mercúrio for more details).
House-oriented positions are particularly significant for svnastric
use because they enable us to use the aspects existing between the
n atal planets of two persons from the perspective of the houses.
Likewise, if two planets arc situated exactly
another from a house orientation, they 120 degrees from one would composing a house-oriented trine, and so on. be regarded as We will be using house-oriented positions and aspects extensively in Part Three. Netuno . THE SIGNS A great deal of confusion is often generated by the fact that there
are two totally independent zodiacs. Most astrologers use the zodiac
of signs, produced by the apparent orbit of the sun around the
Earth, called also "the ecliptic of the zodiac," and sometimes referred to as "the tropical zodiac." The zodiac of signs has four
important turning points marked by the equinoxes and solstices. On
the equinoxes (vernal and autumnal) the sun rises and sets directly
to the east and west. On the first day of summer (the summer solstice) and the first day of winter (the winter solstice) the sun rises
in its most extreme northeast and southeast positions, respectively.
The twelve signs of the zodiac are derived by simply dividing this
entire annual cycle by twelve, giving three signs of thirty degrees
each to each season.
The other zodiac is the zodiac of constellations or the sidereal zodiac, composed of twelve star groups that bear the same names as
the signs of the zodiac. There has been a good deal of controversy
over which of these two zodiacs is the correct one for astrological
use. During the early part of this century a small group of scientifically oriented astrologers reported that the sidereal zodiac
was the one used by the ancient Egyptians. Concluding that the ancients must be correct (and not considering the fact that they also
used the zodiac of signs) the sidereal astrologers claimed that for
the past two thousand years astrologers had been using the wrong
zodiac. According to the exponents of this school of thought, the THn ASTlml.lJGY OF UI:I_\tionshiP
two zodiacs coincided around the beginning of the Christian era,
bur the precession of the equinoxes (accounting for an increasing
distance of one degree every seventy-two years between the rwo
zodiacs) brings the difference today to almost thirty degrees. If one's sun sign is Scorpio in the tropical zodiac, a sidereal astrologer
would call it Libra according ro the constellations. The situation is
further confused by conflicting theories about the exact beginnings/
endings of the constellations and chc actual increment between the
two zodiacs.
Deeper implications of the Gonstcllnrinna 1 zodiac and irs relation
with the :d,(K)o-ycar Great Polar Cycle is a subject pursued in detail
by Rudhyar in his boo!:. Astrological Thu'uig. Because the sidereal
zodiac lacks an individual factor and therefore bears little relevance
to most human beings, the zodiac used here is the zodiac of signs. THE INTERNAL PAT TERN OF THE ZODIAC OF SIGNS
The zodiac of signs is structured around rhe four cardinal points
—rhe equinoxes and solstices. The equinoxes are rhe rwo days of rhe
year when days and nights are equal in length. The solstices are the
two davs of the vear when davs and nights are most unequal—rhe
summer solstice having the longest day of the vcar and the winter
solstice having rhe longest night.
The span between the spring tvernal) equinox and the autumnal
equinox is the time when rhe dav forces—ditTcrcntiation and perSonalizatioit—arc dominant in the earth's organic cyclic process. From the autumnal equinox until the spring equinox the night forces
—collcccivizaiinn and univcrsalizarion—arc dominant.
The rwo hemispheres created by the axis of the equinoxes can be
further divided inro four quadrants bv the solstitial axis. Here the
span between the vernal equinox and the summer solstice can be
seen as a period of intense organic growth, naturally following the
birth of a new cycle. The sun is now rapidly moving northward
and the nights grow longer. THE SIGNS 129 At the moment of the summer solstice the sun reaches irs maximum northern position, turns toward the south, and the nights naturally begin to grow shorter. Personalizing factors emerge as the rush
for growth ebbs.
The autumnal equinox marks once more an equilibrium between
da^s and nights. During the span between the autumnal equinox and
the winter solstice, the socializing and in-gathering forces of nature
are at the fore, as the nights once more become longer than the
days.
Finally, the winter solstice brings the longest night. The night
forces then begin to decline as the sun moves from the south to the
equator. The future remains in the seed, able to give birth to a new
cycle of manifestation at the vernal equinox.
The Cycle of the Elements. Every sign is described by an element that refers to the type of substance it expresses. There are four elements, each connected with a triad of signs spaced 120 degrees apart
in the zodiac.
The fire clement represents the principle of vitality, animation,
and action. It expresses itself through intense, emotional, individual
channels. Fire is the clement assigned to the sign of the vernal
equinox, Aries, as well as to Leo and Sagittarius.
The earth clement is associated with Capricorn, the sign of the
winter solstice, along with the signs Virgo and Taurus. It refers to
the practical, mundane, and collective affairs of life as well as to the
principle of stability and security.
The air clement represents the principle of adaptability and is
connected with the intellect. It is assigned to Libra, the sign of the
autumnal equinox, Gemini, and Aquarius.
The water element is associated with the si^n of the summer solstice, Cancer, as well as with Scorpio and Pisces. It refers to energies
of a sensory, emotional, and creative nature.
The Cycle of the Modes.
The signs are further described by
modes, that express how the energies of the zodiac are released. The
modes are derived by the threefold division of the zodiac, resulting
in each of the three modes being assigned to four signs, spaced 90
degrees apart. THE ASTROLOGY OF RELATIONSHIP
The cardinal or initiatory mode is the form of cncnrv' released at
the equinoxes and solstices, thus associated wirh the signs Aries.
Cancer. Libra, and Capricorn. It represents the principle of change
and momentum. Girdinal signs ^generate power.
The fixed or focal mode is assigned to Taurus. Leo. Scorpio, and
Aquarius. The fixed mode concentrates and focalizes the power
released by the cardinal signs. The fixed signs represent the principle of structure and definition, giving depth and meaning to the cardinal experience. The fifteenth degree of each of the fixed signs is
of particular importance, representing a point of maximum intensity
midway between equinox and solstice where power is found in its
nio.sr concentrated form.
The mutable or common mode distributes the power generated
by the cardinal signs nnd focused by the fixed signs. 1c symbolizes
the principle of flexibility nnd adaptability. The mutable mode is assigned to the signs Gemini, Virgo. Sauittarius. and Pisces. THE MEANING OF THE SIGNS The signs of the zodiac represent twelve basic types of human nature and energy utilization. The signs describe the way in w hich
archetypal or collective human behavior and activity arc manifested
within an individual person or relationship. Uriel meanings of the
individual signs follow, with special attention to their synastric applications. THE SIGNS I31 ARIES—the first sign.
Quality: Girdinal/firc Significators: Mai-s and Pluto KEYNOTE: The originating impulse, giving vitality and a sense of selfhood to an individualized consciousness just emerging from the
sea of the unconscious. Impulse energy. Traditional Meanings:
siveness.
Abstract Meanings: Initiative, desire, courage, will, and impul- The central self and the essential structure of one's vital being. The equalization of the day and night forces leading to a new cycle of organic life.
Synastric Meanings: Energy directed toward initiating new rela- tionships and one's use of initiative in general. How a contact
affects one's sense of self. The essential quality of a relationship.
Types of Relationships: Impulsive relationships that assist individ- uals in their process of self-discovery. ■S2 TAL'ivL'S—the second Mini,
Quality: Fixed/earth Significator: Venus KEYNOTE: Energetic self-exertion as j means of establishing Arian i7n pulses in u tiiiigi hie form. Energy its stihstjncc. Traditional Meanings: Inertia, detcrminnrion. fnrccfulnc-ss. posses- si vcness, and practicality.
Abstract .Mcnnitigs: Methodical orientations. The identification of self with substance. The focalization of Arian energies, giving them
depth and meanings,
Synastric Meanings: The immediate resources'and energies of a re- lationship. The substances one needs from an association. How two
or more persons can co-operate together in a practical fashion.
Types of Relationships: Financial contacts focus primarily on substance and materials. or relationships tint THE SIGNS «33 GK.MINI—the third sign,
u r.i Saturno Ic /ai r
Sitpri/t t\i tor: 1\ 1 c r cu ry KEYNOTE: The rh.iviu'lin^ of energies toward association with the environment for the expansion of-worldly knowledge. Mental enemy. Traditional Meanings: Changeability, duality, and restlessness. Academic and liccmrv matters.
Abstract Meanings:
Associating, The mind functioning on a subjective level. conununicaring,. and recognizing the most obvious forms of relationship. The creation mui development of systems and
techniques.
Synastric Meanings: "The mental, communicative energy involved in any rclationshij). Hnw two or more persons can act together for
rhe accumulation of knowledge and its practical application. What
one can leam from a relationship.
Types of Relationships: Associations that emphasize the mental processes. Relationships that grow largely through letters and correspondence. TilKASTROLOGY OF RELATIONSHIP '34 CANCER.—the fourth sign.
im
QiLility: Cnrtli n;iI / ware r
Significator: The moon KEYNOTE: The establishment of ii central base for the future outward projection of personal energies. Centralized energy. Traditional Meanings: Receptivity, the feelings and instincts. The home and family.
Abstract Meanings: Concrete selfhood and the establishment of a secure foundation for the expression of selfhood. The apex of organic growth. The longest day meets the shortest night (at the summer solstice) marking rhe beginning of the personalizing phase of
the organic cycle,
Synastric Meanings: The basic foundation of a relationship and one's capacity for sharing a central source of energy with others.
Emotional receptivity and the expression of feelings. Whnt one needs emotionally from a relationship.
Types of Relationships: Family contacts and cohabitation. Emo- tionally secure relationships. THE SIGNS >35 LLC)—the fifth sign.
Quality: Fixed/fire Significator: The sun KEYNOTE: The urge to dynamically and creatively express one's self through all that one does. Self-expressive energy. Traditional Meanings: Sclf-contulcncc, self-expression, creativity, flamboyance, pleasure, and the emotions.
Abstract Meanings: The drive toward dramatically externalizing one's self for the purpose of self-satisfaction and social recognition.
The individual, once secure in his identity (Cancer), seeks to broaden his sphere of activity by displaying to others who he is and
what he can do.
Synastric Meanings: Expressing one's inner, creative self through spontaneous interplay with others. Mow an association can further
one's self-confidence and creative expression. What an individual needs to express through relationship.
Types of Relationships: Contacts thar inspire confidence and crea- tivity. Romantic relationships. i$6 VIRGO—chc sixth si^n.
Quiility: Mutnl ilc/carrh
Significator:
Mercury KEYNOTE: The reorientation of one's emotional energies as .7 preparation for objective participation in the outer world. Repolarization of energy. Traditional Meanings: Fafcidlmisness. discriminariun, introspection, detail, studv, health, service, and employment.
Abstract Meanings: Discrimination and critical analysis. Personal reorientation, sclf-criticism. and the process of self-perfection. The
control and regulation of self-expression.
Synastric Meanings: A relationship's capacity to resolve inner con- flicts. The analysis of the dynamics behind a relationship. Discrimination toward others and toward contacts with others.
Types of Relationships:
tionships. Therapeutic and employer-employee rela- THE SIGNS 137 LIIJRA—the seventh sign.
Quality:
Cardinal/air
Significator:
Venus KEYNOTE: Energy utilized for the purpose of bringing individ- uals together and harmonizing their relationships. The energy of attraction-repulsion. Traditional Meanings: Idealism, beauty, and balance. Social con- sciousness and relationships in general.
Abstact
mode Meanings:
through Consciousness co-operating and functioning in associating with the objective others. The equalization of the day and night forces (autumnal equinox) leading
to social interactivity.
Synastric Meanings: The energy that brings individuals Together or drives them apart. The basic potentialities of a relationship. The
type of energy an individual can give to an association and what he
or she expects from relationships in tfcncral.
Types of Relationships: Marriage and relationships of a serious na- ture with agreed-upon terms and responsibilities. 138 SCORPIO—the eighth sign.
Quality: Fixed/water Significators: Mars and Pluto KEYNOTE: Sex energy or the power inherent whenever individ- uals come together as equals and exchange vital energies. Traditional Meanings: Sex, jealousy, death, will power, magic, and occultism. The regeneration of personal energies.
Abstract Meanings: The drive to become one with others in order to participate together as a greater whole. The. process of individuation. Creative tension.
Synastric Meanings: The urge to merge with another and the driv- ing force behind interpersonal relationships. The transformative aspect of a relationship. What an individual needs on a sexual/spiritual level.
Types of Relationships: Fcpializcd, person-to-person interchanges that pencrrate to the center of self. Tun trie sex. THE SIGNS 139 SAGITTARIUS—die ninth sign.
to
Quality:
Mutable/fire
Signifwator:
Jupiter KEYNOTE: Energy directed toward the abstract mind for the purpose of understanding the universal significance of creative relationships as they manifest in all spheres of meaning.
energy. Traditional Meanings: Religion, philosophy, Synthesizing inspiration. Sporrs, higher education, and law.
Abstract Meanings:
matters. The absrract. archetypal mind. Social/cultural Recognizing and correlating relationships within rela- tionships.
Synastric Meanings: The expansive qualities of a relationship. Mow a relationship can enrich one's understanding and personal philosophy. The social, cultural values behind an association and the ideals
one needs to have confirmed by his companions.
Types of Relationships: Associations that encourage the partici- pants to expand their social, cultural, philosophical horizons. ( 140 THE ASTROLOGY OF RELATIONSHIP 1 CAPRICORN—the tenth sijgn.
Quality: Cardinal/earth Significator: Saturn KEYNOTE: Energies utilized for the purpose of expanding and securing one's place in the outer world. Collective energy. Traditional Meanings: Social conventions, status, ambition, and pol- itics. The state and political power.
Abstract Meanings: Social integration and collective functions. The person as a social entity. The longest night meets the shortest
day (the winter solstice) as the in-gathering forces arc at their apex.
Synastric Meanings:
larger How a particular relationship fits into the social/collective cnntcxt. An association's significance in terms of one's social position and security. An individual's responsibility to a relationship.
Types of Relationships: One's relationship to his or her culture and nation and, in a larger sense, to the cosmos. THE SIGNS 141 AQUARIUS—the eleventh sign.
Quality: Fixed/air Significators: Uranus and Saturn KEYNOTE: The channeling of energy toward the social expres- sion of new values, ideals, and life styles. Socially expressed energy. Traditional Meanings: Political mnvements and revolutions. Sci- ence, music, and humanitarianism. Group values.
Abstract Meanings: Social expression and the extcrnali/atinn of one's social function. The capacity to create and express one's self
in broad cultural terms.
Synastric Meanings: The balance of individual expression with col- lective need or will. How- one can express one's self through group
situations. What an individual needs to give to a relationship or to a
larger whole.
Types of Relationships: Group or mass contact with others. Un- conventional relationships. The concept of universal brotherhood.
Societies and associations. 142 THE ASTROLOGY OF RELATIONSHIP PISCIiS—the twelfth sign.
w
Quality:M u table/water
Significators: KEYNOTE: Neptune and Jupiter Psychic energy or energy that is receptive toward the essential universality §f life. Traditional Meanings: Mysticism, fanaticism, devotion, impres- sionability, and openness. Drugs and ESP.
Abstract Meanings: Psychic sensitivity and threshold experiences. The need to repolarizc from collective to individual values. Compassion and the intuitive recognition of universal oneness.
Synastric Meanings: The psychic and universalizing elements of a relationship. A relationship's link with the past and its more mysterious or unknown aspects.
Types of Relationships: Associations that enable the individuals in understanding the universality of life. Relationships that focus on
the use of psychic energies. THE SIGNS 143 THE SAB IAN SYMBOLS
In 192^ Marc Edmund Jones recorded, with the assistance of a clairvoyant, a remarkable scries of poetic images that symbolically
describes the 360 degrees of the zodiac (or any cvclc of unfoldmcnt). Dane Rudhyar, who was largely responsible for introducing
the Sahian symbols (as Marc Jones named them) to the general astrological public, worked extensively with them for the following
half century. In his treatise on the Sabian symbols. An Astrological
Maiuialii: The Cycle of Transformations and its 360 Symbolical Phases, which includes the entire scries of 360 symbols, Rudhyar
writes:
What makes this whole production [of the Sabian symbols] almost incredible is that while it operated purely at random and
at a fantastic speed, the result was a series of symbols which,
when carefully studied, are shown to possess a definite and very
complex internal structure, fp. 26)
The Sabian symbols are guides to rhe more delicate and subtle interpretation of any astrological factor (planers, angles, planetary midpoints and parts, etc.) in terms of rheir zodiacal positions and especially from rhe house and phase orientations. For instance, the degree .symbol for thirteen Scorpio (phase an inventor perform- ing a laboratory ea/jcrw/ewt—rcllcctsthc stage of cyclic development
that occurs at the two hundred and twentv-third
segment
of any
1
r
*
cycle of 360 degrees, be ir rhe thirteenth zodiacal degree of Scorpio,
a point in the sky corresponding to the thirteenth segment of the
eighth house, or a phase arc of 223 degrees. The symbols, as Rudhyar explains,
do not deal exclusively wirh the decrees of the zodiac. Tliev
refer to the division of any cyclic life process inro 360 degrees;
for rhis reason I have stressed the phase number of rhe symbol
as much as rhe zodiacal degree ro which ir refers. The essential 144 TIICASTROLOGY OF RELATIONSHIP point to remember is that we arc dealing with a life process; we
might say a cosmic process, but in any case it is a gradual process of actualization of a set of new potentialities. [An Astro- logical Maudala, p. 30]
The Sabian symbols can be used extensively through investi- gations of birth and synastric charts to reach a deeper comprehension of the more subtle and underlying implications of selfhood
and relatedness. i
\ 8. PLANETARY COMBINATIONS In the preceding chapters of this part we explained that planetary
motions and cycles (which can be viewed against the background
of several possible frames of reference: the aspects, houses, signs,
etc.) are at the foundation of any approach to astrology, and that
since no rwo planets have identical orbits, every planet is engaged in
a constantly changing angular relationship with every other planet
—^producing the phases and aspects. Here we shall describe the
meaning and function of some of the most significant planetary
pairs, from a synastric view, and have a look at their cyclic midpoints and planetary parts.
In astrology the planets symbolize the ten essential human functions. In addition to the ten primary functions, there are forty-five
secondary functions (departments of life symbolized by forty-five possible dyadic combinations of the ten planets: sun-moon; sunMercury; sun-Venus, etc.). When comparing the planets in two
people's charts the pairs are increased to fifty-five because one's sun
can be paired with the other's sun, one's moon with the other's
moon, and so on. One can also pair the angles and the lunar nodes
with the planets, as well as investigate triadic combinations.
The role and meaning of any planetary pair (or triad) is derived
by synthesizing the functions of the factors involved. The relationship existing between the planetary pair of Mars and Venus, for
instance, symbolizes, in a natal chart, the personal function and im- THE ASTROLOGY OF RELATIONSHIP
plications of human relarcdness—how one's emotional, creative, and
sexual natures arc structured, the actional principle of Mars combined with the rcccptivc-evaluarivc principle of Venus. The phase
arc, the houses, and the signs occupied bv Mars and Venus in the
birth chart will reveal the quality (phase arc or aspect) of the planetary relationship and the experiences (houses) and energies (signs)
through which one can best fulfill
others in the personal, individual his or her relationships wirh sphere. The dyad of Mars and Venus in svnastric charts describes creative and sexual potentialities
•f the interpersonal relationship. MUTUAL PAIRS
The mutual pairs are those in which a particular planet (or other
factor) of one birth chart is compared with the same planet of another chart. Brief interpretations of each mutual pair (including the
angles and the lunar nodes) follow.
Sun to Sun: How the individuals' life purposes and temperaments integrate with one another. The manner in which rhc rwo can best
relate directly, particularly on a long-term basis. The vital function
of a relationship.
Moon to Moon: The characteristic way that the individuals can best live together in a day-to-day fashion. The blending of their
emotional temperaments and senses of receptivity. The receptive, mediating principle of relationship.
Mercury to Mercury': The approach from which two individuals can best connect with one another through the medium of verbal
CMininunicarion. The potentiality of the relationship as a mind-tomind association. The cowvmnicjtivc, associative function of relationship.
Venus to Venus: How the individuals can best blend their recep- tive senses of inner value and appreciation. The manner in which PLANETARY COMBINATIONS >47 they can best interact in terms of realizing inner truths. The appreciative, internalizing aspect of relationship.
Mars to Mars:
cessfully The way in which two individuals might most suc- combine their personal energies of expression for the achievement of a common goal. The potentiality of the association
for the release of energy. The expressive, externalizing function of
the relationship.
Jupiter to Jupiter: A combination of two individuals' drives to- ward social expansion. The relationship's potential on the level of
social participation and acceptance. The expansive, participative
function of relationship.
Saturn to Satttrn: The basic stmcture and limitations of a rela- tionship. The way that the participants can best interact within a
specific, defined field of activity. The definitive, clarifying function
of relationship.
Uranus to Uranus: The individuals' abib'ties to assist one another in going beyond social convenrions. The transformative potentialities of a relationship. The way that the individuals can best share
unusual, unconventional, or unexpected experiences. The trans- formative function of relationship.
Neptune to Neptune: How z\v individuals can best combine forces on the psychic and transcendental levels for the realization of
universal oneness. The universalizing function of relationship.
Pluto to Pluto: The regenerative potentialities of a relationship. How the individuals can renew themselves by emerging into a new
realm of consciousness. The reformuiative function of relationship.
Ascendant to Ascendant: The contact between two persons on the level of individuality. The best synthesis of their unique and special
qualities for the pursuit of a mutual reality. The individualizing aspect of relationship.
M.C. to M.C: How two individuals can assist each other in re- alizing their respective places and functions in the social and spiritual community. The social, political, and spiritual aspects of relationship. THE ASTROLOGY OF RELATIONSHIP
Lunar Node to Lunar Node: The lunar nodes represent, natally, one's individual line of karma (the south lunar node) and dharma
(the north lunar node), in synastry the relationship hccu'een nodes
is quite significant because they indicate, in addition to the karmic
implications of an association, mutual emotional and psychic sensitivity.
aspect between nodes is particularly interesting. The entire nodal cycle requires The synastric conjunction/opposition years to complete, so that if two individuals are Mercúrio .3 vears of age apart,
one's north node would be conjunct the other's south node and vice
versa, indicating mutual emotional and psychic sensitivity, and a relationship that links the past of one person with the future unfoldment of the other. In insrances where the rwo north nodes arc conjunct (implying a conjunction between the south nodes ns well),
the two individuals share similar karmic-dharmic paths. The significance of mutual pairs (as archccvpalK* described above) in a specific interpersonal relationship can be determined by
the disposition of the particular planers for other factors) in the natal charts (in terms of house, zodiacal longitude, and planetary relationships in the chart as a whole) as well as the place of the pair in
the various svnastric chaiLS described in the following chapter. The
zodiacal positions symbolize the energies brought together within
the department of life symbolized by the combination. The houses
involved reveal qualities of individual experience that may be enj
countered through the facet of the relationship symbolized bv the
planets. The aspecr or phase existing between the planets is representative of the essential quality of the inrerfunctinnnl relationship
symbolized by the planetary combination. Generally, an aspect based on duality fan opposition, square, or uctilej represents a contact that is stimulating and exciting with some contrast between the
individuals' functions that might "manifest as frustrations and conflict or, if the underlying unity and complementary natures are understood, as a most constructive interaction. On tlie other hand,
aspects based on three (the trine and the sextile) symbolize a harnmnious. flowing association char, while smoother and possibly more productive (particularly the sextile) than any of the duality PLANETARY COMBINATIONS '49 series of aspects, may be lacking their more definite, focused type of
awareness. A quincunx aspect between planets indicates a contact
that combines conflict with harmony. The quintile symbolizes a
creative interchange and the septile a destiny-directed association.
To give an example, if one person's sun is in the fifth house,
Gemini, and another's sun is in the ninth house, Scorpio, the two individuals may encounter a combined experience dealing with creative self-expression (fifth house) and the expansion of philosophical
horizons (ninth house). The basic energies that will be tapped by
the individuals in their pursuit of these experiences will combine the
communicative mental energies of Gemini with Scorpio's pene- trating, sexual energies. If the two suns' house-oriented positions arc
close t» 120 degrees apart (the fifth house to the ninth house), one's
way of experiencing creative self-expression
inspire and flow well (fifth house) should with the other's way of experiencing the expansion of his or her understanding of the scheme of the universe
(ninth house). If the phase arc between the two suns' zodiacal longitudes (Gemini to Scorpio) is near to 150 degrees (quincunx) or 155 degrees (tri-scptilc), however, the solar facet of the association
should be strongly stimulated and open to conflict, change, and the
unexpected in the way the two individuals blend their vital energies.
Because of these distinctions (between the house-oriented and zodiacal phase arcs) it could be said that while the exchange of vital
energies between the individuals may be open to a great many variations (zodiacal phase arc), the experiences that are brought about
through the exchange of such energies are most likely to be of a
harmonious nature (house-oriented trine). INTERFUNCTIONAL COMBINATIONS
In addition to the matching of the same planets in two people's
charts as discussed above, there arc dozens of possible combinations
linking two or three unlike factors. What follows is an attempt
present the most basic of these combinations from a synastric perspective. THE ASTROLOGY OF RELATIONSHIP
The Symbols of Self. The most essential factors of any astro- logical chart, from either a natal or synastric approach, are the axes
of the horizon and the meridian (the angles) and the two "lights"
(the sun and the moon). They represent the inner centers of personality; thev are the astrological symbols of self. The contacts between these factors are most significant and symbolize the foundations of interpersonal relationship.
Relationship is multifaccted-, a single interpersonal contact has implications on every level of existence and reflects within itself the
entire universe of which it is a part. When two or more individuals
come together in a relationship, anything can happen. Astrology
can help us in understanding the essential focus of the association
and what might happen, not so much in terms of events alone as in
the personal crises and transformations that underlie the events, in
fulfillment of the inner potential of the relationship. The svnastric
contacts berween the sun. moon, and angles symbolize deep aspects
of a relationship, aspects that may transcend the personality level of
human consciousness. Thev reveal rhe central characteristics and potentials of the liaison as well as the channels through which all
other peripheral experiences arc assimilated. Perhaps the most
revealing indicators of a relationship's significance for one's self
arc the phase arcs, both zodiacal and house-oriented, between one's
sun. moon, and angles and another's. A very close aspect (within an
orb of about one degree) between at least one of the sixteen combinations of the sun, moon, and angles indicates that there is a vcrv intimate contact existing between" the two individuals, a channel of
contact that can potentially accommodate almost any type of peripheral relationship. If there is not a strong contact linking one of
the pair, or if the channel is obstructed, the peripheral interpersonal
functions (each remaining planetary pair symbolizing function) such as mentaR association, sexual' activity, one
and such
so on probably will not make much of a contribution in terms of the development of the individuals' consciousness beyond the realm of
pcrsonalitv—of mundane acting, feeling, and thinking. If there is a
strong link between persons on the level of self and individuality—
svmbblized by rhe sun, moon, and angles—then whatever contact
transpires between the participants within the realm of personality is PLANETARY COMBINATIONS
more likely to consciously serve as a growth experience and a channel of individual expression.
Sun to Moon: The soli-lunar relationship is the most fundamental of all astrological cycles composed of two celestial bodies and is
often considered to be the archetypal cycle of relationship. It is
archetypal because it deals with the processes most basic in the development of life on Earth. It is clearly visible in the constantly
changing appearance of the moon: The moon's relationship with the sun, seen from the perspective of the Earth, is what is actually
changing, the moon reflecting the constantly changing relationship.
It is believed by many occultists that life on Earth has not yet
evolved to the point where organisms can directly assimilate the
light forces of the sun. The lunar principle is needed to mediate the
solar light force for Earth, transforming it into organic life forms.
In The Lunation Cycle, Rudhyar writes that the moon is the mediatrix, mother or Muse, whose function is to cater to
the needs of the evolving units constituting collectively the
substance of the cycle. She distributes solar potential (i.e., spiritual food and energy) through organic and psychological agencies which she builds to fit the need of evolving material
units, be they cells or personalities. She therefore is the servant
of both earth and sun. She releases the light of the sun and by
so doing serves the needs of earth creatures for organic and
psychic life. [p. 24-25]
In the comparison of two natal charts, the sun-moon dyad indicates how the sun person's temperament and life purpose can be
nourished by the moon person's receptivity, and how the moon person's feelings and instincts can be guided by the sun person's sense
of meaning.
Sun to Angles: Indicates how the sun person's vitality and sense of purpose can be integrated with the angle person's sense of individual selfhood.
Moon to Angles: Symbolizes how one's most unique and individ- THE ASTROLOGY OF RELATIONSHIP »52 ual qualities of selfhood can combine with another's receptivity ro
the needs of self and others.
A conjunction aspect between the sun, moon, or angles denotes
that the individuals should be able to identify with one another in
the functions symbolized by whatever factors are conjunct. A svnastric opposition, square, or octile aspect between the sun. moon,
or angles is representative of a relationship rhat could result in a
very constructive type of creative tension (if contrasting temperaments can be consolidated and not dominated bv conflict and separatism) in which the participants arc keenly stimulated hv one
another's sense of self. A trine or sextile link between factors symbolizes a harmonious understanding of one another's individuality
and life purposes.
The Symbols of Association and Participation. The planets Jupi- ter and Mercury arc connected with the activities of association and
participation with others. Mercury is the archetype of all forms of
mental communication; Jupiter signifies rhe individual as a social
cntirv openly participating with others for the attainment of a social
ideal. Jupiter is also symbolic of the preservation and increase of the
established order of things and the instruction of individuals concerning ';thc rules of the game" thev will have to follow in order
ro succeed. In this way the dyad of Jupiter-Mercury has been related to the educative process.
In svnastrv the Jupiter-Mercury pair can be representative of a
relationship's potentiality for mutual social participation and the exchange of ideas. Thar is, ic indicates how the individuals can best
learn from one another and assist one another in realizing their social, cultural ideals.
The Symbols of Expression and Appreciation. Mars and Venus re- late to the process of personalization. Two opposite modes of personal functions arc synthesized in their pairing—the intcrnalizatmn.
appreciation, and judgment signified bv Venus, and the action ami
cxccrnaliziuion nf energies following judgment represented bv
Mars. Natallv. the .Mars-Venus dvad polarizes one's emotional, creative, and sexual natures and represents one's most intimate realization of the fundamental duality underlying life. A close look at the PLANETARY COMBINATIONS >53 relationship between these two planets in a particular chart can reveal the best way for a person to fulfill his or her destiny through
personal relationships with others.
The Mars pole of this axis represents archetypal masculine or actional energy, standing for the basic urge—in everyone, regardless
of sex—to externalize, to go forth into the world and make an impression on it. On the other pole is Venus, archetypal feminine or
receptive energy, the urge to reach a state of communion with one's
self and others, as well as the capacity for intemalization of experience and for the appreciation of the relationship. As a polarized
unit, Mars-Venus describes the masculine/feminine psychological
components as an interplay of interdependent, inseparable opposites.
In a birth chart the phase of Mars-Venus, and the house and sign
positions of Mar's and Venus, symbolizes how one best use relationships with others as a means of self-acrualization.
In a synastric chart the disposition of Mars and Venus is symbolic
of the creative, emotional, and sexual potentials of a relationship. A
square, opposition, or octile aspect between one's Mars and another's
Venus denotes an intense, passionate contact that could make for an
exciting love affair as well as an inspiring creative relationship. A
trine or sextile aspect between this combination signifies a comfortable emotional contact that offers security and endurance.
The Symbols of IvdividiMl/Collective Inter penetration. The planets Jupiter and Saturn combined have to do with the interplay between an individual and the society or culture of which he or she is
a part or, on a larger scale, between humanity as a whole and the
planet Earth, of which humanity is a part, with a definite function
to fulfill in the destiny of the planet. Saturn is the archetypal structural principle, symbolic of ego and identity. The Satumian function gives definite form and focus to all things, out of which arises
individualized consciousness. Jupiter, the opposite pole of this dyad,
represents the individual as a social entity and the society within
which he operates. The phase arc of Jupiter-Saturn, along with the
houses and signs of the two planets in the natal chart, indicates ways
in which an individual can best fulfill his or her destiny as a unique
and responsive member of a greater whole.
In a synastric chart, the Jupiter-Saturn pair represents how two THE ASTROLOGY OF RELATIONSHIP »54 people can best co-operate for the purpose of giving social-cultural
relevancy to their individual existences. CYCLIC MIDPOINTS
There are two factors that can be used as further indices describing the relationship between rwo planets: the midpoints and parts.
A planetary midpoint is the point in space exactly midway between two planetary bodies.
several centuries ago. The Midpoints were actually
first astrologer known to developed
use them (though others may have preceded him) was Guido Bonati, born in
1230, the court astrologer of Emperor Fredrick Gêmeos . Bonati used midpoints largely as a means of rectifying uncertain birth times: it was
his belief that all people were bom at times when either a planet
was on one of the four angles of the chart or when a midpoint between two planets was so positioned.
.Midpoints gradually faded out of practice after Bonati's death,
but were revived by the Hamburg astrologer Albert Knieph during
the latter part of the nineteenth century. He introduced midpoints
to Alfred Witte, the founder of the Uranian svstem of astrology,
who in turn introduced them to Rcinhold Ebertin. Through Ebertin's hook The Combination of Stellar Influences (Aalcn, Germany:
Ebertin-V'erlan;
w 1940, 1972), natal planetary midpoints have be*
come widely known and are being used by astrologers all over the
world.
What has been completely overlooked concerning planetary midpoints, however, is thar they arc expressions of a cyclic phase relationship. The conventional way of calculating midpoints (or halfsums) is to divide the nearest arc of zodiacal space between two
bodies by two. There is an important shortcoming in this method:
By simply taking the nearest arc between two planets, one does nor
take into consideration whether the cycle of relationship between
the two bodies is in its waxing phase or in irs waning phase. That is,
a relationship between two planets moving from rhe conjunction (o
degree arc) to the opposition (1 So degree arc) and a relationship PLANETA R Áries COM HI NATIONS 155 that has already reached the opposition and is progressing toward
the next conjunction have different meanings, just as the first- quarter moon differs in meaning from the third-quarter moon.
When the cycle of relationship existing between two planets is in
its waxing phase—when the faster moving planet is progressing
along a path that will lead to an opposition aspect before the next
conjunction is reached—the purpose of the relationship is directed
toward the development of potentials, the building of organic structures, and the processes of involution and specialization. Here feelings and sciousness instinctual actions are is process of permeating in the dominant, since abstract physical con- organisms. During the waning phase—when the faster of the two planets is
moving away from opposition and toward conjunction—the pur- pose of the relationship is to release and expand the consciousness
that has been contained within the structures and organisms built up
during the waxing hcmicyclc. In this phase mental activities and
evolutionary forces arc dominant.
Spatial midpoints, as we have seen, arc determined by bisecting
the nearest arc berween two planets. They are the conventional
midpoints, or half-sums, calculated by dividing in half the sum of
the zodiacal longitudes of two planets. Cyclic midpoints are the result of dividing in half the space between two bodies in the direction in which their cycle is developing. Of course, in the case of a
waxing phase relationship (before opposition has occurred), the spatial and cyclic midpoints are the same; and when two planets arc
in their waning phase the cyclic midpoint is always exactly 180 degrees ahead of the spatial midpoint in zodiacal space. Figures j 2 and
13 arc meant to clarify these distinctions.
Natal cyclic midpoints can be easily calculated by dividing the
planetary pair's phase arc by two and adding the result to the position of the slower-moving body.
For example: Mars i70<\6' Taurus and Venus 20026' Virgo
122040' (phase arc)-f-2=6i 02o' 61 02o' Half of phase arc t> / +_ 47 Júpiter ^
io90o6' (1704<'Taurus) slower planet
(ig0o6'Cancer) cyclic midpoint yf 0 ^ ? v Kiirurc i :\ V I'iuurc 13 , PLANETARY COMBINATION S
In calculating synastric midpoints the 157 synastric phase arc is divided by two and added to the older person's natal planet of the
synastric pair.
For example: Sun 10°30'Gemini (older person) and
moon io03o' Leo (younger person) HOW TO 6oaoo' (phase arc)-j-2=3o0oo' 3G0oo' half of phase arc Júpiter - 70°30' (io^o' Gemini) older person's ico'jo' (1 o0 30'Cancer) cyclic midpoint USE PLANETARY MIDPOINTS The primary srructure of any planetary relationship is the cycle,
and any deep analysis of planetary relationships logically begins and
ends with a consideration of the particular cyclic phase existing between a pair of planets. Aspects, "Arabian Parts," and midpoints arc
all functions of a cycle of relationship. They are expressions of the
particular phase of the cycle. The cycle is a function, in turn, of the
evolution and actualization of the archetypal relationship symbolized by the two planets involved. Every cycle of relationship, as
wc have seen, is made up of waxing and waning hcmicycles. Every
cycle passes from conjunction to opposilian to conjunction again.
The length of time required to complete an entire cycle is determined by the orbits of the planets. The purpose to be fulfilled through the experiences connected with the unfoldment of this cyclic relationship is revealed in the synthesis of these two planets and
the house and zodiacal degree of their most recent conjunction.
Because midpoints arc functions of phase relationships, in the interpretation of an astrological charr they are best used as a step following the consideration of the phase arc existing berween rwo planers. The phase gives us an overview of the purpose and meaning
of a planetary cycle as it is operating in terms of the individual'::
personality or in terms of an interpersonal relationship. The midpoints derived from the phase arc then give a specific and detailed
view/ of the cyclic relationship. For instance, while the cycle of Mars and Venus and its position in one's birth chart symbolizes how
one can best use relationships with others in a harmonious fashion Till ASTROLOGY OF RELATIONSHIP
along the path of actualization, the midpoints of these two planets
signifies the area of experience (house) and type of energy (sign)
most available to the individual for the purpose of bringing out and
fulfilling in a functional manner his or her potentialities for relationship. In comparing two charts, the midpoint between one's Mars
and another's Venus reveals the focus of the relationship in the creative, emotional, sexual sphere.
Direct and Indirect Midpoints. From a thoroughly cvclic ap- proach we are not So much interested in a singular midpoint but in
a midpoint axis composed of two opposed midpoints: a 'direct" midpoint and an "indirect" midpoint. Both ends of such an axis are
significant, representing distinct vet inseparable functions of cyclic
relationship.
While the direct midpoint always occupies a point in zodiacal
space enclosed within the phase arc of the two planets, the indirect
midpoint always occupies a point in space that is outside the boundaries of the phase arc. Upon this foundation we can interpret the
distinctions between the meanings of the two polar opposites of the
midpoint axis.
These two ends of the midpoint axis can be seen as representing
the dichotomies past-future, cxtcrml-mtcriial. tial. The direct midpoint represents the and actual-poten- experience and circum- stances (house position) and the activity and energy (zodiacal position) within which the purpose and quality of rhe relationship (determined by rhe narure of rhe rwo planers, their phase arc, and
their house and sign positions) is most focused and operable in an
external manner. It symbolizes what potentialities represented by rhe last conjunction of the two bodies have already been actualized
in the past: the ancestral past, reincarnations, one's karma, etc. It is
representative of what the personality has most likely already developed through the synthesis of the two planets composing the cycle.
That is, the direct midpoint is a symbol for the manner in which the
archetypal potentialities of the synthesis (conjunction) of the two
planetary functions may be best," and most readily, expressed in an
external "manner.
The indirect midpoint, then, relates to the furure—to the area of
experience and the type of activity yet to be integrated into the fab- PLANETARY COMBINATIONS *59 ric of the bi-polar planetary relationship—to potentialities most ripe
for actualization. Indirect midpoints often relate to the most focused and intense point of the internalization and personalization
of the planetary relationship as well. Direct midpoints indicate the
general focus and balance of what should have already been inte_
•
grated into the individuality and/or interpersonal relationship from
past experiences and relationships fulfillment and capabilities. They are points of actual Indirect midpoints indicate the focus and pivot for that which one should strive to actualize—capabilities
and experiences yet to be acquired.
Summing Up. Midpoints reveal areas of intensity and strength in terms of external
potential manifestation (direct midpoints) and inner (indirect midpoints). The specific meaning of any mid- point axis can be derived through the consideration of the functions
of the two planets involved, their phase arc (and/or aspect), as
well as the sign and house positions of the two bodies and the midpoints themselves. A significant yet often overlooked method for
deriving the meaning of the midpoints is through the use of the
Sabian symbols described in Chapter 7.
When a third planet is situated on a midpoint, the function of
that planet should assist in the process of bringing the phase of the
cyclic relationship symbolized by the pairing of the two planets
whose midpoint is so related into clearer focus. When two separate
pairs of planets share a common midpoint axis their respective relationships should be focused or manifested through a common facet.
Midpoints can give a new dimension to die meaning of 3n astrological chart—yet it is obvious from the vast number of possible
midpoints that selectivity is necessary. An excessive concentration
on midpoints—or any other astrological factor—might distract one's
attention from other equally significant chart factors. How does
one go about achieving a relevant selection of midpoints? It depends
largely on the demands of the situation and the personal experience
and preference of the astrologer. In many cases an adequate astrological interpretation can be accomplished without the consid- eration of midpoints at all. When a strenuous analysis of die lessapparent implications of a chart is called for, midpoints can be used
to give a more thorough understanding of important develop- t r>0 THE ASTROLOGY OF RELATIONSHIP mcnts within certain departments of life that arc encountered along
the path of unfoldmcnt. PLANETARY PARTS
Some of the Arabian astrologers of the first millennium Aji. were
apparently inclined to pursue the more abstract and mathematical
relationships inherent in an astrological chart. Among their devices
are the mathematical or synthetic points, used as indices to the phase
relationship between any rwo planets of a chart ;w relation to a third
factor of the same chart, usually an angle or a house cusp.
As time went on, somewhat dubious names were assigned to
many of these parts, names that supposedly described their "influences," (e. Vênus ., the Point of Fatality, the Point of Male Children,
the Point of Private Enemies, the Point of Honorable and Illustrious
Acquaintances, etc.). Most of what is today known about these
"Arabian Parts" was recorded in The Doctrine of Nativities by John Gadsbury in the middle of the seventeenth century. Gads- biirv» however, gives little insight into their philosophical or psychological meanings and applications, though it may have been he
who assigned the above nienti«ncd names.
Most modern astrological textbooks and most modem astrologers
tend to use only the part of fortune, derived through a synthesis of
the soli-lunar phase arc with rhe ascendant. A more expansive view
of the implications inherent in selfhood and relationship can be approached bv a study of all the planetary parts. In The Astrology
of Personality Rudhyar describes planetary parts as
a kind of "group algebra" working out nearly endless correlations and permutations between original elements of the birthformula. Its complexity makes it, of course, most unwieldy; yet
there is no doubt that it represents the ultimate and most abstract type of astrological thought—that by means of which we
come most closely to life itself and its multifarious network of
relationships, [p. joi] PLANETARY COM BIN AHONS 161 Parts arc particularly significant from a phase orientation because
they integrate planetary phases with the cross of the horizon- meridian (and the houses derived from that cross), the astrological
framework most symbolic of the uniqueness of a person and his or
her orientation to life. The planetary parts arc highly individualized
indicators of the ways in which a bi-planetary relationship can best
be expressed.
While midpoints both signify focal centers through which the power generated by a planetary pair can be released in a dynamic
form, and indicate experiences and energies that need to be integrated if the purpose of the cycle is to be fulfilled, parts reveal how
a dyad can be expressed with the greatest case in terms of the four
angles. A natal part composed of a synthesis of a phase arc with the
ascendant reveals how the particular planetary pair can best assist
the person in coming to a better understanding of his or her unique
individuality. When a phase arc is applied to the descendant, it produces a part that symbolizes how the person might best use the
function of the planetary pair to deal with others and establish
fruitful relationships. The areas of experience and the energies through which a person can use a planetary pair for the purpose of
personal integration arc shown by a part composed of a synthesis of a
phase arc with the I.C; in a complementary fashion, the part produced by the application of a phase arc to the M.C. expresses the
path that should lead the individual to a fulfillment of his or her
place and purpose socially and/or spiritually.
The parts are the most varied and diversified of all astrological
factors. If we count only those parts derived from the cycles of relationship of the forty-five possible natal pairs of planers and their
application to the twelve house cusps, we arrive at a total of i ,oHo
such parts. Even if we narrow it down to only those parts involving
the four angles of the chart, we still have 360 distinct points of
significance. Each planetary pair produces eight parts through the
synthesis of its phase arc with each of the four angles when the
phase arc is added as well as subtracted from the angles (see Figure
14). The parts produced by the addition of the phase arcs to the
four points of the horizon-meridian arc called direct parts; those
produced by subtraction are called retrograde parts. Figure 14
The house a part falls into is most important because it defines the
experiences and circumstances through which the expression of the
part is most likely to develop. For instance, when a part occupies
the fifth house, the synthesis of the functions signified by the two
planets and the angle is most likely to develop through experiences
related to self-expression, children, creativity, etc.
Direct parts indicate the experiences and activities through which
•ne can best achieve an unfoldment of the potential symbolized by
the planetary relationship under consideration. This potential is revealed bv the nature of the two planets, their houscss signs, and
phase arc. The function of the faster-moving planet is emphasized
in the direct part. It is calculated in the following manner:
Jupiter 2 7^ 1'Libra, Saturn 19*7'Cancer,
Ascendant ioe5o'Scorpio
2 20° jo'
+ Mercúrio ^34'
0 31 Vênus 2^' Ascendant (io050'Scorpio)
Phase Arc
Direct Part (190: Júpiter ' Aquarius) PLANETARY COMBINATIONS 163 Retrograde parts internalize the quality of the bi-planetary relationship and give to it a deeply personal significance that might, like
the indirect midpoint, be rooted in the past. Here the slower-moving planet can be seen as dominant and serving as a focus for inward
turning energies. Retrograde parts are calculated in the following
manner:
22o05q' Ascendant (1 o05o'Scorpio)
— 98° 3 Júpiter '
12 2 016' Phase Arc
Retrograde Part (2 016' Leo) Through the use of planetary phase arcs, midpoints, and parts, an
astrologer can come to a deeper understanding of how the function
symbolized by any planetary pair should operate in terms of personality and individuality. While in most instances it is impractical to
work with all the phase arcs, midpoints, and parts of an astrological
chart, these abstract points can be of great value when there is need
to pursue the deeper implications of a psychological or spiritual
process signified by a planetary pair.
The natal parts of Mars-Venus as well as Jupiter and Saturn are
particularly uselul in synastry because they deal with sensitive areas
of one's manner of participating in relationship. THE PART OF VENUS-MARS AND THE ASCENDANT
Formula: Asccndant-j- Venus-Mars phase arc
The ascendant represents selfhood. A synthesis of Mars and Venus with the ascendant produces a part that is most intimately
connected with one's potential in terms of experiences and expressions of emotionality through relationship. Its position in terms of
natal house and sign symbolizes how one can become more in tune
with his or her own unique creative, emotional, and sexual potentialities and his or her sensitivity c« his or her self. THE ASTROLOGY OF RELATIONSHIP THE PART OF VENUS-MARS AND THE DESCENDANT
Formula: Descendant-)-Venus-Mars phase arc The descendant symbolizes relationship. This part is directly opposite the above part and points to the area of life where one's potential for personal and intimate relationships may be most readily
actualized. The house and sign of the birth chart occupied bv this
part symbolize the energy and experience through which the individual can most consciously and sensitively participate in meaningful relationships with others on an essentially personal level.
The dyad of Mars-Venus represents relationships of an essentially
personal nature, operating on a horizontal plane; the pairing of
Jupiter and Saturn is symbolical of vertical relationships, such as the
interplay existing between an individual and society. Within this
context Saturn—the archetypal structural force—represents ego identity. Saturn is the principle that gives definite form and focus to
all things, out of which arises individualized consciousness. Jupiter,
the opposite pole of this dvad, represents the individual as a social
entity and the society within which he or she must operate. The positions and parts of Jupiter-Sarum in a birth chart serve as indicators
for the ways in which one can best fulfill his or her destiny as a
unique and responsive member of a greater w hole. THE PART OF JUPITER-SATURN AND THE I.C.
Formula: I.C.-J-Jupiter-Saturn phase arc The I.C. symbolizes personal growth and integration. A synthesis
of this angle with the phase arc of Jupiter and Saturn results in a
part that points to the experiences that one may most readily use as
a foundation for the individualized perspective and inspiration ncc- PLANETARY COMBINATIONS
essary for a meaningful relationship with society or a collective
unit. This point also represents the intemalization of one's experiences with society and how one can best Mfill their potential in a
manner beneficial to both one's self and one's society. THE PART OF JUPITER-SATURN AND THE M.C.
Formula: M.C.-f-Jupicer-Sacurn phase arc This point occupies the degree of the zodiac opposite the above
part. It is derived from the M.C, and is therefore connected with
one's social and spiritual functions. The house and sign occupied by
this part reveal the area of experience and the type of energy
through which one may most readily realize his or her place and
function in society (and on a larger scale, his or her relationship to
the universe) as a unqiuc individual. It points to the ways in which
one may discover and Mfill his or her spiritual identity through the
synthesis of individual purpose and a social, cultural, or planetary
need. I Part Three i SYNASTRY: A GUIDE 10
UNDERSTANDING RELATIONSHIP Mercúrio . THE TECHNIQUES OF SYNASTRY This chapter introduces the philosophical and practical implications
of various synastric techniques: zodiacal contact charts, house contact charts, house transposition charts, composites, and progressions
and transits. The use and interpretation of synastric charrs is illustrated in Chapter 10. Guides to the construction of the various charts (all of which are derived from conventional birth charts) are
included here as well as some suggested procedures for organizing
and tabulating their significant features. BIRTH CHARTS
The first step in the synastric procedure is the construction and
interpretation of the birth charts of the individuals involved in the
relationship under consideration. 1 have discussed the details of casting and interpreting birth charts at length in A Handbook for the
Humanistic Astrologer. We touched on the significance of birth
charts in Part One; here we will show how the vital symbolic information contained within them can be effectively organized and THE ASTROLOGY OF RELATIONSHIP 170 tahuhucil to aid the interpretative process and how various svnastric
charts derived from natal factors can be constructed. ZODIACAL CONTACTS
The zodiac is an astrological frame of reference composed of
twelve si^ns that symbolize twelve archetypal qualities of collective
human nature and energy utilization. The astrological zodiac is what astronomers refer to as the ecliptic of the zodiac, a phenomenon produced by the apparent annual path of the sun as it is observed from the Earth. As we explained in Part Two, this zodiac of
siqns. or the ecliptic, is often confused with the zodiac of constellations which is an entirely different frame of reference not extensively used by most astrologers.
All objects in the geocentric sky have a position somewhere along
the zodiac, a zodiacal longitude between o and 3^0 degrees. The distance between two planets in terms of zodiacal longitude determines
their aspect or phase arc. For example, when one planet is positioned at o0 Aries and another is at u' Gemini, they arc forming a
sextile aspect, a phase arc of sixty degrees.
The most commonly used technique of svnastrv is the study of
the zodiacal aspects or contacts between the natal planets and angles
of two (or more) persons. If the zodiacal position of Mars in one
person's chart is ninety degrees (a square aspect) from the zodiacal
position of another's natal Venus, for instance, there should be a
powerful, possibly confroncativc but potentially constructive, en- ergy circulating and vitalizing their relationship. Since the con- figuration involves the planets Mars and Venus, it could help the
individuals reach a better understanding of their personal values,
emotions, feelings, or sexuality.
Zodiacal contacts between the charts of rwo persons can tell us
something about the type of relationship existing between the two
individuals in terms of the general nature, temperament, and energy THE TECHNIQUES OF SYNASTRY
symbolized by the two planets involved. It can reveal something
about the energy flow between the two persons, suggest the way
their temperaments might blend, indicate whether there is a potential for strong attraction or repulsion, or reveal areas of particular
harmony or conflict between the particular functions symbolized
by the planets. In the instance of a Mars-Venus square wc could expect a strong physical, emotional, sexual attraction or repulsion.
There is a limitation, however, in dealing strictly with zodiacal
references: They reveal very little about ways in which the energies
represented by zodiacal contacts can best be released, through what
experiences they can best operate and establish themselves; how, in
short, the individuals can best use the dynamic energies generated
by their relationship. In order to reach some basic understanding of
these processes, wc need to study the two charts in reference to the
circle of houses. A method for doing this is presented in the following section of this chapter.
In spite of this limitation, a consideration of the zodiacal contacts
existing between birth charts is an appropriate way to begin practical synastric studies. It is the zodiacal energies that arc usually most
apparent in personalities. People most often form relationships with
one another not necessarily because they have established a ground
of common or complementary experience, but because they arc attracted to one another's general quality of energy, temperament, vibrations, and appearance, and the way their energies blend and flow
with one another. Interpersonal contacts, then, arc usually made initially on the zodiacal level through an attraction or repulsion of
energies. Afterward the partners may begin to channel their energies toward sharing the achievement of mutual purposes and experiences (symbolized by the houses).
The zodiacal aspects existing between the natal planets and angles
of two or more birth charts can be organized and made apparent by
drawing up a zodiacal contact chart. In such a chart the zodiac is
the fixed frame of reference with the persons' natal planets and angles placed within its structure—making it possible to see both sets
of natal factors relative to the same zodiacal background, on one
piece of paper (sec chart on page 201). Zodiacal contact charts are
discussed extensively in the following chapter, along with the other
synastric charts presented below. THE ASTROLOGY OF RELATIONSHIP HOW TO CONSTRUCT A ZODIACAL CONTACT CHART
The zodiacal contact chart is nn easily constructed aid in the
comparison of two or more birth charts. It is simply a chart divided
r
inro twelve sections, one for each siL
w n. with the individuals' natal
factors arranged around it, in concentric circles, according to rheir zodiacal positions. 1 have found ir convenient to always use the inner circle for the older person. The chart on page :oi illustrates.
To determine aspects and phase arcs between the individual sets
of natal factors, one simply calculates the distance between the positions on one concentric circle and the factors of the other person,
situated on the next circle. For instance, Freud's natal sun is 16°: i'
Taurus (46°:i'), Jung's natal sun is 30i9' Leo (1:3^19'); the arc
berween the two is 7b058' (1:3° 19'—46°:i'=7d05S').
It is helpful to tabulate the various phase arcs existing between
the two sets of natal factors for casr reference. The conventional
way to measure these arcs is to simply calculate the distance between two planets in terms of their nearest arc. This procedure,
however, overlooks the cyclic character of planetary morions. The
most apparent remedy for this inadequacy is, when calculating the
arcs between two sets of natal factors, ro use the disrance from the
older person's factors ro rhe voungcr's. taken in a counterclockwise
direction. Ry doing this we recognize the narural dynamic flow of
planetary cycles and can achieve a clearer understanding of plancrarv aspects operating through a particular planetary contact, especially in terms of the waxing and waning hcmicvclcs.
*
*
For instance, turning to the Freud-Jung zodiacal contact chart,
notice that Freud's natal Saturn is -7Q33' Gemini
Jung's natal Saturn occupies c ; Júpiter i3' Aquarius (87°33') while (3:40i3'). Since Freud was born several years before jung. to find the cyclic arc between their Saturns \vc would want to calculate rhe disrance berween s7c53' and 3: Júpiter ° 13" which is :3^04o' (314° 13'—H7<533'= :3604i>'). This is a waning/applying trine wirh a 30:n' orb. In the
rime between the births of Freud and Jung the planet Saturn completed just under two-thirds of its twcnrv-cighr-vcar cycle.
The moon transits the Zodiac much faster than Saturn (completing one zodiacal cycle every -'.xz d.iv.s). The cyclic arc berween THE TECHNIQUES OF SYNASTRY
Freud's moon (i4044' Gemini) Taurus) is and Jung's 173 natal moon (i5028' Wc see then that the two moons form a waning separating semi-sextile. During the interval between the two births
the moon transited the '/.odiac 123 times and was just about to complete its 124th round. HOUSE CONTACTS AND HOUSE TRANSPOSITION
The circle of twelve houses is the most individualized astrological
frame of reference. It symbolizes the most particular qualities of experience, selfhood, and relatedness, while the zodiac represents qualities of a more collective and general nature. The planet Jupiter,
for instance, occupies a certain degree of the zodiac, say the tenth
degree of Aries, for a week or so before it moves into the following
degree. Everyone born during that one-week period has Jupiter in
the same zodiacal position in their natal charts. Jupiter (or an^
planet), on the other hand, moves through the entire cycle of
twelve houses (360 degrees) every twenty-four hours since the houses reflect the daily rotation of the earth on its axis.
In a natal chart the houses represent twelve archetypal areas of
individual experience: the experience of emerging into the realm of
conscious being (first house), the experience of substantiating the
self (second house), the experience of interacting with the environment (third house), and so on. As a frame of reference in synastry,
the houses refer to twelve types of mutual experience; the experience of recognizing or initiating a relationship, the experience of
giving substance and form to the relationship, the experience of collective interaction with the environment, and so on.
Many astrologers tend to give more attention to the zodiacal positions of the planets than to their places in the houses. Humanistic astrologers, however, are more concerned wirh individual potentialities and development than with collective pressures, external events,
and the like. Events and social factors arc, of course, important, but 174 the astrology of rflatjonsthp from a humanistic, transpersonal perspective, their true significance
is in terms of the person who is experiencing rhem. It is mainlv for
this reason that the humanistic astrologer studies the houses extensively. HOUSE CONTACT CHARTS The house contact chart, one of two house-oriented synastric techniques 1 would like to introduce here, provides valuable insight
into the meaning of a relationship on the level of mutual experience,
as \v ell as suggesting how each individual may experience the relationship itself. Such a chart emphasizes the houses, using them as its
fixed structure. It clearly illustrates the individuals' planetary gesralrs and rheir combination, in addition to making apparent planetary aspects berween natal positions within rhe context of the circle
of houses. If, for instance, my moon is exactly in the middle of my
w
w
■
ninth house and another person's sun is exactly in the middle of his
or her third house, the two bodies arc exactly opposite in terms of
the circle of houses, regardless of their zodiacal location.
The house contact chart contains identical natal positions to the
zodiacal contact chart, but the orientation of the individual natal
patterns within differ between the two. In the zodiacal contact chart, the planers, etc.. of both individuals arc oriented according to
their positions in terms of the first degree of the zodiac (o* Aries)
—regardless of their house positions. Convcrsclv, in the house contact chart, both sets of natal factors arc oriented in terms of their
relation to the individuals' natal ascendants, regardless of zodiacal
placement.
A comparison of the house contact chart with the zodiacal contact chart can uncover further threads in the web of the relationship; It one's natal Mars, for instance, is 19 degrees Leo and another's Venus is in the nineteenth segment of rhe fifth house, both
planetary functions are ar rhe same phase of development—the Martian function on the level of energy. and rhe Venusian along the
lines of experience. One's way of using externnli/ing. mobilizing
energies is similar ro the other's manner of achieving the experience
of inner harmony and appreciation. THE TECHNIQUES OF SYNASTRY 175 HOUSE TRANSPOSITION CHARTS
A second house-oriented synastric technique involves the construction and interpretation of house transposition charts. The house contact chart can be seen as a map describing mutual and
complementary fields of c.vpcricncc. The house transposition chart
is constructed by placing the natal planets of one person into the
house structure of another's birth chart. It complements the symbolism of the house contact chart by revealing how one person experiences and best reponds to another. If my natal moon falls into
the fifth house of another's chart, for instance, his or her urge toward the experience of creative self-expression (fifth house) should
be stimulated through being exposed to my particular manner of expression, to my way of handling the demands of daily living and
adapting to a particular situation (moon). The type of energy integrated in the experience depends largely on the zodiacal sign involved of the planet under consideration. HOW TO CONSTRUCT THE HOUSE CONTACT CHART
The house contact chart is based on the same concept as the zodiacal contact chart, only it is structured by the houses rather than
the zodiac. That is, the relative house positions of two or more sets
•f natal planets, regardless of their zodiacal positions, arc superimposed upon each other, as illustrated on page 204. This chart makes
apparent the arcs or phases existing between planets from a houseoriented perspective. For instance, even though the zodiacal arc between Freud's and Jung's natal suns is almost 46 degrees, from a
house orientation they occupy nearly the same part of the seventh
house. That is, they form a house-oriented conjunction indicating
that the two should fulfill their individual purposes through very
much the same type of experiences, although the modes of energy
used in the effort may be distinctly different. The house arcs existing between the two sets of natal planets can be tabulated in much
thesameway as the phase arcs in the zodiacal contact chart.
There is a limitation in the house contact chart: Accurately timed THE ASTROLOGY OF RET-ATIONSHIP
or rectified birth charts are essential. Because about one decree passes over the ascendant every four minutes, an error of more than
a few minutes will produce manv discrepancies. For this reason it is
not advisable to construct a house contact chart unless both birth
times arc known to be accurate within eight or twelve minutes.
Since different houses within the same chart usually contain varying number of zodiacal degrees, it is necessary to convert to p. standard measure of thirty units per house to achieve correspondence.
One house may span 26 degrees of the zodiac while another encloses
34 degrees; when comparing the house positions with another's chart, we may find 40 degrees in one house and only :o zodiacal degrees in another. In order to conveniently calculate cross references,
it is necessary to relate the proportions to a standard measure. Since
the standard measure in astrology is 360 degrees divided into twelve
sections of 30 degrees, ic would seem logical to adopt a measure of
30 units for this purpose.
The following formula can be used to implement such conversions.
1. Calculate the number of Zodiacal degrees and minutes in each
house.
2. Calculate rhe number of zodiacal degrees and minutes berween
each planet and the cusp at the house it occupies. For example,
there are 26 degrees in Freud's sixth house (iAries to
: Taurus). The planet Venus, at td'jo' Aries, is 14 S0 io' from rhe sixth house cusp.
3. Calculate the house-oriented position by the formula:
degrees from cusp to planet
!
L
•
\ ;o.
degrees in house
J
i
J-Vio'
^0;
In our example:——=—
\?o-=—^;Xto=i<S.;
1
:6•
j .fH>
Venus is located in the 16th of ,;o units in the sixth house.
The House Degree Conversion Table on the following pages can
be used as an alternative to calculating by this formula. To use it
find the column at the head that is nearest to the number of degrees
in the particular house. Read down that column ro the number that THE TECHNIQUES OF SYNASTRY *11 is nearest to the zodiacal arc between the cusp and the planet's position. Once this number is located, read across to the extreme left
column on the same horizontal line. This is the house position of the
planet reproportioned to a scale of 0-30 units regardless of the number of zodiacal degrees in the house. Freud's sixth house contains 26
degrees and his Venus is 14° 10' from the sixth house cusp. It is located in the 16th, of 30 units of the sixth house. Greater accuracy
can be achieved by interpolating.
It is easy and perhaps more accurate to reproportion house positions with an electronic calculator. If you are using a calculator,
you will need to convert all minutes of arc to decimals. The conversion table below serves this purpose. DECIMAL EQUIVALENTS OF MINUTES
1-.02
2-.03
3-.05 Júpiter -.07
.5-.08
6-.10 21-.35
22- .37
23- .38 414243- .68
.70
.72 24-.40
25- .42 44- .73 45464748- .75
.77
.78
.80 7.12 26-.43
27- .45 8-.13 28- .47 Mercúrio .15
10-.17 29- .48
30- .50 49- .82 50- .83 11-.18 31-.52 12- .20 32-.53
33-.55
34-.57 5152- .85
.87 5354- .88
.90 13-.22
14-.23
15-.25
16.27
17-.28
18- .30
19-.32
20-.33 35-.58
36- .60
37- .62
38- .63
39- .65
40- .67 55- .92
56- .93
57- .95
58- .97
59- .98
60-1,00 HOUSE DEGREE CONVERSION' TABLE 20 21 22 23 24 0 0:0 0:0 0:0 0:0 0:0 1 0:40 0:42 0:44 0:46 0:48 2 1:20 1:24 1:28 1:32 1:36 3 2:00 2:06 2:12 2:18 2:24 Júpiter 2:40 2:48 2:56 3:04 3:12 5 3:20 3:30 3:40 3:50 Júpiter :00 6 Júpiter :00 Júpiter :12 Júpiter :24 Júpiter :36 Júpiter :43 7 Júpiter :40 Júpiter :54 5:03 5:22 5:36 8 5:20 5:36 5:52 6:08 6:24 Mercúrio 6:00 6:18 6:36 6:54 7:12 10 6:40 7:00 7:20 7:40 8:00 11 7:20 7:42 8:04 8:26 8:48 12 8:00 8:24 8:48 Mercúrio :12 Mercúrio :36 13 8:40 Mercúrio :06 Mercúrio :32 Mercúrio :58 10:24 14 Mercúrio :20 Mercúrio :48 10:16 10:44 11:12 15 10:00 10:30 11:00 11:30 12:00 16 10:40 11:12 11:44 12:16 12:48 17 11:20 11:54 12:28 13:02 13:36 18 12:00 12:36 13:12 13:48 12:24 19 12:40 13:18 13:56 14:34 15:12 20 13:20 14:00 14:40 15:20 16:00 21 14:00 14:42 15:24 16:06 16:48 22 14:40 15:24 16:08 16:52 17:36 23 15:20 16:06 16:52 17:38 18:24 24 16:00 16:43 17:36 18:24 19:12 25 16:40 17:30 18:20 19:10 20:00 26 17:20 18:12 19:04 19:56 20:48 27 18:00 18:54 19:48 20:42 21:36 28 18:40 19:36 20:32 21:28 21:24 29 19:20 20:18 21:16 22:14 23:12 60 63 66 69 72 HOUSE DEGREE CONVERSION TABLE 25 26 27 28 29 30 0 0:0 0:0 0:0 0:0 0:0 0:0 1 0:50 0:52 0:54 0:56 0:58 1:0 2 1:40 1:44 1:48 1:52 1:56 2:0 3 2:30 2:36 2:42 2:48 2:54 3:0 Júpiter 3:20 3:23 3:36 3:44 3:52 Júpiter :0 5 Júpiter :10 Júpiter :20 Júpiter :30 Júpiter :40 Júpiter :50 5:0 6 5:00 5:12 5:24 5:36 5:48 6:0 7 5:50 6:04 6:18 6:32 6:46 7:0 8 6:40 6:56 7:12 7:28 7:44 8:0 Mercúrio 7:30 7:48 8:06 8:24 8:42 Mercúrio :0 10 8:20 8:40 Mercúrio :00 Mercúrio :20 Mercúrio :40 10:0 11 Mercúrio :10 Mercúrio :32 Mercúrio :54 10:16 10:38 11:0 12 10:00 10:24 10:48 11:12 11:36 12:0 13 10:50 11:16 11:42 12:08 12:34 13:0 14 11:40 12:08 12:36 13:04 13:32 14:0 15 12:30 13:00 13:30 14:00 14:30 15:0 16 13:20 13:52 14:24 14:56 15:28 16:0 17 14:10 14:44 15:18 15:52 16:26 17:0 18 15:00 15:36 16:12 16:48 17:24 18:0 19 15:50 16:28 17:06 17:44 18:22 19:0 20 16:40 17:20 18:00 18:40 19:20 20:0 21 17:30 18:12 18:54 19:36 20:18 21:0 22 18:20 19:04 19:48 20:32 21:16 22:0 23 19:10 19:56 20:42 21:28 22:14 23:0 24 20:00 20:48 21:36 22:24 23:12 24:0 25 20:50 21:40 22:30 23:20 24:10 25:0 26 21:40 22:32 23:24 24:16 25:08 26:0 27 22:30 23:24 24:13 25:12 26:06 27:0 28 23:20 24:16 25:12 26:08 27:04 28:0 29 24:10 25:08 26:06 27:04 28:02 29:0 75 78 81 84 87 90 THE ASTROLOGY OF RIlLATlO-NSHIP COMPOSITE CHARTS A composite chart is a chart composed of the mutual zodiacal
midpoints of two or more birth charts. For instance, if my natal sun
is thirteen degrees Scorpio and another's natal sun is thirteen degrees Capricorn, our composite sun is thirteen Sagittarius (exactly
midway between thirteen Scorpio and thirteen Capricorn). While
conventional composite charts are based on zodiacal midpoints alone, a thorough analysis may include the construction of a composite chart based on house-oriented midpoints as well.
Composite charts can reveal how the energies (zodiacal com- posites) and experiences (house-oriented composites) of the individuals can be best balanced, synthesized, and mutually rele: acd or
channeled. A composite chart can be understood as a chart of the
relationship, revealing its quality and focal areas more or less independently of the personal perspectives of the individuals involved.
It is a map describing the various qualities, potent ialitics, temperament, etc. of the relationship itself. Compared with the birth charts
of the individuals involved, an understanding may be reached of
how each can best approach this relationship. HOW TO CONSTRUCT COMPOSITE CHARTS
A composite chart is a synthesis of elements and is purely
symbulic—the planets so positioned may never actually appear that
way in reality. To calculate a composite chart we simply find the
zodiacal midpoint between a planet in one person's chart and the
same planet in the chart of another. For instance, Freud's natal sun
is i60:i' Taurus while Jung's is ;0iS' Leo. Their composite sun is
then :405o' Gemini (see chart on page 209).
Conventionally, astrologers have simply calculated the midpoint
between the two bodies in the direction of their nearest arc. It is
more in keeping with the cyclic orientation of humanistic astrology. THE TECHNIQUES OF SYNASTR Áries 183 however, to calculate composite planets with a consciousness of
phase. To accomplish this, we should divide the arc between the
two planets in the direction of their natural motion—from the position of the older person's planets to the younger's in terms of the
planets' paths through the zodiac from Aries to Pisces. Not every
planet is different in a composite chart calculated by this method in
comparison to one calculated according to the conventional nearest
arc method. Differences occur only when the phase arc between the
r\v« planets exceeds 180 degrees. In such instances the cyclic composite planet will occupy a position directly opposite that calculated
by the nearest arc method. Midpoints arc actually the poles of an
*
axis.
The following procedure may be used to calculate composite
planets according to both methods.
The nearest arc method always adds the zodiacal longitudes of
the two natal bodies and divides the result by two.
74*44'
0 + 45 28'
r 20° 12' Gemini) Freud's moon
0 (i5 28' Taurus) Jung's moon
-F2=6o0o6' Gemini) composite moon The cyclic or phase arc method follows the same procedure as
above, except the longitude of the younger person's planet must always be greater than the older's—if it is not, 360 should be added
before the division.
74044/ (i4044') Freud's moon 45028, (i5028') Jung's moon -|-3<5o0f)o' adjustment 480° 12'
480° 12' -i-2-|-240ao6'(o0o<'Sagittarius) composite moon. The composite angles may be calculated in a similar fashion. Freud's M. Sol , for instance, is 20° Leo; Jung's is 26° Scorpio—their
composite M.C. is 8° Libra. The same may be done with the ascendant. If both individuals are living on or near the same geographic
latitude, it may be best to calculate only the composite M.C. and THE ASTROLOGY OF RELATIONSHIP
refer to a table of houses for the local composite ascendant and
house cusps that correspond to the composite M.C. at that particular latitude. MULTIPLE COMPOSITES Composite charts can be drawn up for a relationship involving
more than two individuals. There arc several wavs in which to approach this. For three individuals wc might construct three composites, each focusing on a particular couple within the relationship.
Or, given three natal charts, A, B, and C. we can set up one composite between the charts of A and B and a second fusing the A-B
composite with Cs natal charr—emphasizing the A-B relationship
and revealing how C fits into this particular orientation. A third
could be constructed relating A's and Cs birth charts with a fourth
(focusing on the A-C orientation) created bv combining the A-C
composite with B's chart. The natal charts of B and C could be synthesized to give us a fifth, and that one with A's for a sixth that
gives special attention to the B-C aspect of the triadic relationship. HOUSE-ORIENTED COMPOSITES Conventional composites are constructed from zodiacal midpoints
and thus emphasize zodiacal characteristics. It is also possible to use
the house positions of the natal planets for the construction of composites rhat focus on the circle of houses and the qualities of experience the houses symbolize.
The consrruction of these charts is identical with that outlined
above for the zodiacal-oriented composites, except that house positions are used in place of zodiacal positions. Also, while zodiacal
Composites do include composite angles, house-oriented composites
do not include zodiacal references.
Here arc some examples:
166:21 (16:: 1 of the sixth) Freud's Venus + 1^ Júpiter :45 (> Júpiter :45 of the sixth) Jung's Venus 331:06 -5-2 = 165:33 (15:33 of the sixth) composite Venus. THE TECHNIQUES OF SWASIRY
212:25
51: 58 Júpiter -360:00
624:23 (2:25 of the eighth) Freud's moon
(21: 58 of the second) Jung's moon
adjustment
-i-2 = 312:12 (12:12 of the eleventh) composite moon. PROGRESSIONS AND TRANSITS
A person's pattern of being is represented by his or her birth
chart. Astrological progressions reveal one's pattern or cycle of becoming. That is, natal factors symbolize birth potentials; progressions demonstrate how those potentials can become fulfilled. By studying the positions of the planets as they progress through the
signs and houses of the natal chart, constantly changing their angular relationships with natal positions as well as orhcr chart factors, we can better understand what transformations may be called
for in order for one to evolve as an individual, fulfilling his or her
birth potential.
Astrologers use several methods to progress natal factors, each
valid, but each applying to a certain realm of existence or activity in
that they employ different frames of reference. The two methods I
have chosen to present here arc the onc-dav
method of
# to onc-vcar
V
secondary progressions and the one-degree to one-year system of
direction."
Secondary progressions focus on the gradual development of the
functions represented by the planets within the psyche of the individual. Degrcc-to-ycar directions (some astrologers may prefer what is known as "solar arc" directions to this method) emphasize
the archetypal solar factor of personality and its utilization in multifunctional activities. When using secondary progressions wc progress all the planets at their own rate of motions, equating one day
of such motion with one year of life. The planets' positions twenty
• Directions am a special type of "progressitm": All natal factors arc advanced ar the same rate in systems of direction, whereas progressions use the
actual daily motion of each planer, the various systems equating their motions
with different spans of time in an individual's growth. lK6 THE ASTROLOGY OF RELATIONSHIP days after one was born represent one's nvcnrieth vear of life. On
the other hand, dcgrcc-to-vcar directions progress all natal factors
at a rate of one degree (the solar archetype) to one year of growth,
thus placing more attention on the solar function than do the secondary progressions.
Transits are the current planetary positions, representing external
conditions that can serve as channels for the expression of natal or
progressed configurations. Thev arc quite distinct from progressions
in terms of meaning: progressions symbolize the gradual develop- ment and emergence of internal potentials while transits represent
the external, social, and collective circumstances prevailing at the
time.
From a synastric perspective, directions and transits can be compared not only with one's own natal chart, revealing the opporrunirics for growth at a particular time, but also with another's natal
chart and with various synastric charts. When, for instance, nnr progressed Venus is conjunct another's natal Venus, it could be said
—on one of many possible levels of meaning—that my function of
appreciation, internalization, and receptivity or, from a Jungian point of view, my anima, should have unfolded to the point where
♦
ir is in union with the same type of energy or experience being
focused through the other's natal Venus. In other words, in terms of
the Venusian function, there should be a mutual identification between myself and the other pcrsan. HOW TO AND TRANSITS CALCULATE PROGRESSIONS, DIRECTIONS, Secondary progressions are based on the symbolic relationship between a day of objective time and a year of subjective growth. To
calculate secondary progressions, an ephemeris is needed that extends as many days after birth as the vear of age for which one
wishes to progress rhe natal planets. One year in this system equals
twentv-four hours, one month of life equals two hours in the ephemeris, and one dav equals four minutes.
*
The progressed date and time for a person twenty-seven years
and nine months of age is found by adding an increment of 21 days THE TECHNIQUES OF SYNASTRY I 87 and 18 hours to his or her birth date and Greenwich Mean Time.
The exact progressed positions have to be interpolated to the exact
progressed GMT, unless the GMT turns out to be very close to
midnight (if one is using a midnight ephemeris) or noon (if one is
using a noon ephemeris).
Degree-year or one-degree directions relate one year of life to
one zodiacal degree. The one-degree measure is implemented by
simply adding one degree to the natal positions for each year of life,
five minutes of an arc for each month, and ten seconds of an arc for
each day. For example, if a person is thirty-four years, five months,
and four days of age, his one-degree directions arc found by adding
34 degrees 25 minutes and 40 seconds of arc to the position of each
planet.
Transits are the current day-to-day positions of the planets and
can be calculated from an ephemeris for the current year and related to the natal and progressed positions of the planets and angles.t GUIDELINES TO SYNASTRIC INTERPRETATION
Synastry can be an effective astrological tool for gaining a clearer
understanding of the nature and potentiality of relationships of both
horizontal and vertical types. That is, synastry can be used to analyze a relationship between two or more persons on a pcrson-ro-person level or to analyze a relationship existing, for instance, between
a country and a city, a city and a person who resides in it, or a corporation and its administrator.
The many synastric techniques presented in the following pages
are all applied to birth charts of individuals engaged in relationship.
Birth charts not only represent seeds of individuality, the focus of
our being, but also the foundation of relatedness: Relationship is the
linking of centers.
tA more detailed explanation of progressions and transits, as well as many
useful tables, can be found in A Handbook for the Humanistic Astrologer. 188 THE ASTROLOGY OF RELATIONSHIP This volume gives a great many different synastric techniques, all
of which arc valuable, though each represents a different aspect of
relationship, When working with these techniques it is always best
to proceed along orderly lines rather than jumping chaotically from
one line of inquiry to another. The procedure given below has been
most useful to me when working with chart comparison, though in
many instances it may not be practical or necessary to complete the
entire process.
1. A study of the birth charts on an individual basis. Regardless
of how many of the numerous synastric techniques one puts a pair
of charts through, the end results can only be as comprehensive as
one's understanding of the individuals on singular terms.
2. A comparison of the two (or more) zodiacal contact charts in
terms of aspects, elements, modes, etc.
3. A comparison of the house-oriented contact charts from the
perspective of their planetary gestalts, house-oriented aspects, etc. Júpiter . A comparison of the zodiacal contact chart with the house
contact chart.
5. The construction and interpretation of a composite chart.
6. A comparison of the progressed positions of the birth charts to
the positions of the factors composing the various synastric charts.
A consideration of the transiting planetary positions in terms of the
natal and synastric charts and their progressions.
7. A consideration of other factors that mi^ht be of significance;
such as the chart of the city where the individuals reside, their
relocational charts, the chart of the time and place of their first
meeting, etc. IO. THE PRACTICE OF SYNASTRY I have chosen to explore three relationships on the following pages
to demonstrate an application of the various synastric techniques
outlined in the preceding chapter. First, we will look at the relationship between Sigmund Freud and C. G. Jung, which demonstrates two individuals working together professionally for the purpose of expanding and transforming some traditional concepts of
human consciousness. Second, the study of the birth and synastric
charts of George Sand, the renowned French novelist and one of
the very first modern liberated women, and Frederic Chopin, with
whom she lived and worked for several years, examines a romantic
male-female union having deep creative and cultural implications.
Finally, we will look into a relationship in which two individuals—
H. Plutão . Blavatsky and her executive collaborator, Henry Olcott— worked together under most unusual conditions for the fulfillment
of what they believed to be a great spiritual-planetary task.
As one studies astrological charts or reads interpretations of charts such as those included in this chapter, it is important to keep
in mind the fact that astrological symbolism can be applied with
equal validity on a variety of levels. Just as algebraic calculations
can be applied in terms of engineering, physics, mathematics, chemistry, etc., the same astrological chart can be employed in terms of
health, personal psychology, vocation, relationship, spiritual guidance, and a great many other perspectives. Even those of us who lyo
study charts from a similar orientation or for a common purpose
have our own individual understanding of astrological symbolism.
The discussions of the following charts arc by no means exhaustive;
the search for the meaning of the symbolism of one chart, as it can
lie understood on all possible levels, is an endless process. I have attempted here to present the reader with several interesting birth and
synastric charts along with brief interpretations of their most evident characteristics as a means of demonstrating a procedure for
working along synastric lines. Extensive tabulations arc included with each chart as an aid to those wishing to probe these or other
relationships more deeply. THE PRACTICE OF SYNASTRY SIGMUND FREUD AND C. G. JUNG SIGMUND FREU»: A NATAL PERSPECTIVE
Sigmund Freud, the founder of psychoanalysis, was bom on May
6, 1S56, in Freiberg, Moravia, at 6:30 p.m. local mean time. The upper portion of the accompanying figure is the birth chart of Sigmund Freud. The grid of numbers directly below the chart is composed of the following elements.
1. The small numerals directly below the horizontally arranged
planetary symbols are the zodiacal positions of the planets expressed
in terms of degrees (0-360) and minutes (0-/10) of longitude. Freud's natal Saturn is located, for instance, at 87°33', or 27033'
Gemini.
2. The numbers that are listed in the table below the planetary
positions and above the diagonal space are the phase arcs existing
between the forty-five planetary pairs. The numbers express phase
arcs only in terms of degrees and not minutes of arc. The phase arcs
arc rounded off ro the next nearest whole degree (an arc anywhere
between ic^oi' to 110 is represented as 110). The phase arc be- tween Freud's Mercury and Jupiter, for example, is 590. Sigmuiul Freud's Cirth Chart 0
46*21'
Qifir-a
(2)211:25 T2
07*53' 50'^ J49*50' > Júpiter ^0' 3
74*44' Mercúrio $
ssv 26*10' (501
i6j 2i' 29 12 54° 223 47 519 556 57 13 17 49 252 76 54® 25 S5 41 53 235 59 551 6 203 27 299 536 1S4 96 26
11 15 ^ ica:2l 339 47 31 C?.?301? 22S 933 2^3 207 52 77 65 31 155 52+
M r~ r-»
ODr 549 535 503 97 272 7 550 120
a' 595 53 25 95 S3 74 42 100
m' 12 ICO i75;46 12 57 23 SSL 45 0ZO T> 225:45
1 ^ 2 73 24
37 552 1 94 150 309 10 326 57 98 54 61 V
5i6 67
16 309 THE PRACTICE OF SYNASTRY '93 3. The numbers directly to the right of the vertical line of planetary symbols arc the house-oriented positions of the planets. The
house-oriented position of Freud's natal Saturn is, for instance, = 23:434. The numerals in the wedge that extends to the right of the
house-oriented positions and to the left of the diagonal space are the
house-oriented phase arcs. The house-oriented phase arc berween
Freud's Mars and Uranus is ny0.
The single most outstanding feature of Freud's birth chart is its
bucket, or funnel, planetary pattern—a gcstalt where all but one
planet are condensed within a space of three or four houses, the singleton being distinctly separate from this group. Mars, retrograde at
the time of Freud's birth, plays the role of singleton, acting as a
channel for the release, or, as Freud would say, catharsis, of a singlepointed outflow of dynamism generated by the other nine planets.
The energies and experiences generated by the main group of
planets can be understood by the group's orientation in terms of the.
zodiac and houses. Neptune (the planet symbolizing the tran- scendental, universalizing element of life, and psychoanalysis) in the
fifth house of creative self-expression and in the sign it naturally
rules, Pisces, is 98 zodiacal degrees from Saturn (symbol of form,
p
structure, and definition) in the eighth house of interpersonal exchange and in the associative sign of Gemini. The midpoint axis of
these two planets serves as a focus or pivot for the energies
generated by the entire group of planets they enclose. This center
of gravity extends from Taurus to H&4i' Scorpio—lining up almost exactly on Freud's natal horizon, placing great emphasis on
his individual "line of awareness'1 (the horizoli). The relaredne^s
pole of the horizon (the descendant) is surrounded by the nine planets, naturally stimulating Freud's awareness of and "interest in
relationship, while the selfhood (ascendant) pole is somewhat remote from planetary contact. These factors reflect the central importance Freud placed on sexuality and its varied implications in the
development of his psychoanalytic theories.
The Sabian symbol for the center of gravity for the grouping of
nine planets sheds light on Freud's ability to utilize his energies for
the assistance of others. The symbol for (the ninrh degree ac- cording to the Sabian system) Taurus, in Dane Rudhyar's An As- 194 THE ASTROLOGY OF RELATIONSHIP trological Mainiala, n reads: A fully decorated Christmas tree." Rudhyar gives a keynote of "the ability to create inner happiness in
dark hours" ro this symbol, speaking directly to the aim of psychoanalytic pructicc.
The singleton in a funnel pattern represents an extremely emphasized area of rhe psyche. In Freud's natal map. Mars retrograde is
singleton in rhe eleventh house, in rhe fourth degree of Libra. Since
this singleton Mars is in the eleventh house, the area of experience
through which Freud could best channel his intense drives (particularly symbolized bv the stcllium of four planers in Taurus and rhe
Scorpio-Taurus horizon) was rhe field of association wirh others on
the level of group inccgrarinn, professional relations, and so on. Thar Mars is also retrograde (outward action and motivation operating in a fashion that is "against the grain" of natural forces) could, as do some other symbols here, represenr Freud's aggressiveness in group siruarions and the professional difficulties his uncompromising attitude generated. The situation was probably compounded by Mars being zodiacallv positioned in the sign Libra, giving Freud even more energy to" participate in the field of relationship as well as having strong convictions in his own judgments.
The Sabian symbol for the house-oriented position (321 0) of Mars gives an idea of how Freud's powerful singleton Mars could
best operate as a dynamic release on the level of experience, as well
as how he may have personally experienced this distinctive funnel
configuration in the course of his professional career, ridden with
ostracism and conflicts. It reads:
woman courageously faces .? ''A disappointed and disillusioned
seemingly empty life"; Rudhvar's keynote for this symbol emphasizes "the capacity to meet emotionally upsetting experiences in human relationships with strength
of character and personal integrity.
The soli-lunar type is a significant symbol of how the most basic
bi-polar life forces are combined within an individual's personality.
In Freud's chart the soli-lunar arc is almost twcnrv-ninc degrees;
during the new-moon phase. That is, although Freud was horn about rwo and a half days after the new moon, the next or crescent
phase did not begin until the soli-lunar arc reached 450 about three
and a half davs after the new moon. The new-moon type represents
a personality that functions primarily in an instinctual fashion, THE PRACTICE OF SYNASTRY 195 yearning for emergence. The lunation cycle is just beginning a new
1 cycle of manifestation and only a small portion of its potential has
emerged above the surface into the realm of consciousness. At the
time of Freud's birth, the sun and moon were occupying the signs
of Taurus and Gemini in the seventh and eighth houses respectively, a new-moon type functioning within the spheres of interaction with substance and the environment as well as in interpersonal
contacts. In The Lunation Cycle, Rudhyar writes that the new- moon personality
tends to be eminently subjective, impulsive and enmtional in his
responses to human relationship and social processes. This may
produce a state of confusion, a tendency to project oneself
upon others and the world at large, to live life and love as if
they were dreams, or screens upon which to cast one's image—
and often one's shadow. People and situations are met, in most
cases, without much regard to what they actually are in theitiselves; they are symbols. Ip. 50]
Another interesting configuration in Freud's chart is the T-cross
linking Jupiter and singleton Mars by opposition with Saturn squaring both at the apex of the formation. A T-cross symbolizes a critivcal situation containing much constructive, even if confrontative,
potential. This potential is further emphasized by the positions of all
1 three of these planets in succedent, or focal, houses. The planet at
I the apex of a T-cross, Saturn in this instance, acts as an agent of
1 synthesis playing a decisive role in bringing the triangle of energies
together: Through its function, the awareness of the opposition can
best be put to a constructive use if the conflicts implied by such a
structure are to be integrated in a positive fashion. Freud's Mars, Jupiter opposition implies a strong sensitivity to social (Jupiter) drives (Mars) and the delicate interplay between individual expression (fifth house) and collective integration (eleventh house). It is
1 difficult to speculate upon how successfully Freud was able to deal
with such a configuration through a Saturnian function. Surely, he
was at least partially successful. The dynamic represented by this
T-cross may have found partial expression in Freud's overwhelming
drive toward social achievement. Tilt: ASTROLOGY OF RELATIONSHIP
Potentialities may not always be actualized, or fully actualized.
Even when actualization docs take place, it mnv be manifest on various levels or in an incomplete manner. Individual temperaments and
karma must come into consideration. Freud is recognized as a great
pioneer, the founder of the psychoanalytic movement, although for
many years his work was met with extreme criticism. Fixed signs on
his natal angles represent his capacity for endurance in the face of
adversity and ostracism. But he was so uncompromising about certain aspects of his teachings that, as Jung later implied, he appeared
to value his personal authority as the originator and hicrophant of
psychoanalysis to the extent that he was unable to wholeheartedly
promote a search for truth, a search that might eventually overthrow his own established theories. It was these qualities in Freud's
personality that led to the frustration and eventual breakdown of
associations between him and most of his creative followcni, including Jung, Adlcr, Assagioli, and Reich. In astrological symbolism this
pride of authority and the "right ro be right" is an expression of the
negative side of the principle of fixiiw (represented by rhe zodiacal
signs of Taurus, Leo, Scorpio, and Aquarius, and rhe second, fifth,
eighth, and eleventh houses).
Freud's mission, in any case, Which he of course fulfilled splendidly, was to introduce in a scientific and coherent manner the idea
that below the superbly "civilized" surface of the cultured European man was a "subconscious" realm entranced in chaos. Satisfying
the exacting criteria of academicians and scientists, he demonstrated
that human beings, as well as entire cultures, arc composed of
collections of subconscious drives, compulsions, and conflicts. He
convinced prudish Victorians thar sex and sexuality were of great
imporrance to the well-being of men and women, and he revealed
the implications of repression and frustration of the libido. This was
Freud's karmic mission, his link in the chain of evolving human understanding. To fulfill rhis function he needed ro be born ar a time
and place (and within certain environmental conditions) that afforded him the determination and will power, as well as the intelligence and understanding, necessary to innovate and promote these
concepts. It was. .similarly, the mission of Jung and others ro expand
upon and make certain adjustments to the mainstream of psychoanalytic thought and practice. THE PRACTICE OF SYNASTRY '97 One further point of significance is the remarkable zodiacal phase
arc of 51 between Freud's moon and its north lunar node. This distance is only three minutes of an arc from an exact scpcilc aspect.
The contact suggests that Freud's individuality had just crossed the
threshold to a new realm of energy utilization, enabling him to probe into previously unknown and irrational realms of human existence as well as entitling him to carry the responsibility of presenting to humanity a new image of man. C. G. JUNG: A NATAL PERSPECTIVE
Carl Gustav Jung was born in Kcsswill, Switzerland, on July 26,
>875. at 7:20 Plutão .M. The pattern of his chart is striking: The planets
are distributed in a gestalt that closely approaches a five-pointed
star. Five-, six-, and seven-pointed star patterns are probably the
most challenging of all patterns to decipher, not only because of
their rarity but also because very few of our consciousnesses arc vet
attuned to the level of being they represent. A five-pointed star pattern might tentatively be interpreted as signifying an individualistic
temperament with potentially pronounced creative, synthesizing capabilities.
Jung was at the forefront of Freud's psychoanalytic movement
and was regarded as Freud's heir apparent for many years—until the
two eventually ended their association because of some ideological
differences. When their charts are compared, Freud and Jung appear to be working with similar zodiacal energies with emphasis on
the Taurus-Scorpio and Leo-Aquarius axes. Along house-oriented lines as well, both have an emphasis around the descendant, and
Mars in the eleventh house. Distinctions emerge when wc consider
Jung's soli-lunar type and the pattern made by the aspects between
his planets.
Jung is a third-quarter moon type, having a 2820ck/ phase arc between the sun and moon. This soli-lunar type symbolizes a futureoriented individual, one who strives for the understanding and application of universal principles. Rudhyar writes in
Cycle that the third-quarter type is The Lunation THE ASTROLOGY OF RELATIONSHIP
essentially characterized hv a tendency to experience crisis in
consciousness; at least what seems mainly important to these persons is the embodiment of their ideological beliefs in definite
systems of thought and/or concrete institutions, [p. 54]
The mid-Taurus moon and early Leo sun. in the third and seventh houses, add determination and individualistic qualities to Jung's
third-quarter moon type that might have been most easily chan- neled through his experiences of relating with the environment (physical, emotional, and mental) and his interchange with others.
The Sabian symbols for the zodiacal and house-oriented positions of
Jung's natal sun reveal a great complexity in his Solar purpose. The
symbol for Jung's zodiacal sun (124 or the fourth degree of Leo)
reads, "A formally brought back from j dressed elderly
hunting man stands near trophies he expedition." Rudhvar describes this symbol in An Astrological MaiidjLi as. "the masculine will to conquer his animal nature and to impress his peers with his skill in performing the ancient traditional power rituals.'' T he symbol for this
degree sheds some light on Jung's claim to be an introvert (though
astrologers have often referred to him as an outgoing Leo) while,
according to his fundamental typo logy, he classified Freud as predominantly an extrovert. Jung probably meant that he was more
concerned than was Freud wirh channeling his solar energy toward
his own internal, spiritual growth than with establishing himself as
an authority or in a position of external power. The Sabian symbol
for Jung's sun speaks of the drive toward self-perfection, and as it
also implies, Jung was not without his own brand of leonine pride.
Moving from the level of vit.il energy (zodiacal sun) to the sphere of experiential purpose (house-orienred sun), we find an interesring contrast between the two frames of reference w hen considering the Sabian symbol for Jung's house-orienred sun. The symbol for this degree (phase 1S5) is:
the foundation of an "A man revealing to his students inner knowledge upon which .» v/etc world' could be builr." This symbolic statement sums up Jung's role in
revealing to modern humanity a spiritual approach to the understanding and evolution of human consciousness.
The aspects in Jung's chart compose two major formations, as C G. Jung's Birth Chart uyij)' ^afl' 105*47' W^0' aeT'Ji' loj'H' JH'ii'
0^,5 285 3!i03' 53*30 341 345 222 280 160 349 91 70 302 298 145 202 82 271 15 352 557 *05 261 H0 329 71 51 207 264 144 353 75 54 58 298 127 229 208 240 69 171 151 190 292 271 102 82 3)8i:58 238 $139:11 # 25 l.$^ Júpiter '45 345 2 5 7 355 <^306.50 238 136 213 218 2|-1+5'H 299 197 274 280 62 p? 19.53 165 63 140 145 287 226 Júpiter (194:49 352 250 327 332 114 55 188 ||® 71:30
.Sat 112. 10 87 93 255 173 308 3 121 540 THE ASTROLOGY OF RELATIONSHIP 200 well as showing a preponderance of sextiles and quincunxes. There
is a somewhat loose T-cross in fixed signs berween Saturn and
Uranus with the moon and Pluto at its apex. Of particular interest is
the "finger of god" or "yod" formation, composed of a waxing sextile between Jupiter and Mars, with Pluto at their indirect midpoint
in a waning quincunx to .Mars and a waxing quincunx to Jupiter.
The finger-of-god configuration represents a sensitive, intuitive temperament that strives to clarify issues in a harmonious and productive fashion. THE ZODIACAL CONTACT CHART
The circular chart on the upper portion of the accompanying
figure is the Freud-Jung zodiacal contact chart. Freud's (inner section) and Jung's (outer section) natal planets are arranged within
the chart according to their zodiacal positions.
The grid below the chart displays the zodiacal phase arcs existing between the planets of Freud and Jung. Freud's sun (qfi0:!') is,
for instance, 77 degrees from Jung's sun (123° jq').
Arranging rheir planers within the structure of the zodiac wc notice thar Freud has four and Jung has rhree in the sign of Taurus,
representing a mutual ability for working with energies of a "down
to earth," practical type, and j common capacity for endurance and
determination. One of the most significant contacts between two charts is a close conjunction between Freud's natal sun the
at 16°; 1' Taurus and lung's moon at i^S' Taurus—signifvinj; that
•
w'
».
•
C
the two men were able to tap the same energy source. The fifteenth
degree of Taurus—the midpoint of the first quarter of the zodiacrepresents the point of release for the dynamic energy directed toward the formation of a self-conscious personality. It is, therefore,
a powerful svmbol of unitv for these two men who have dune so
much to advance our understanding of the human personality. The
energy combination of an active solar principle (Freud's sun) and
a receptive, intuitive lunar principle (Jung's moon) probably in- spired rhc personalities and lives of the two much more deeply than
has been commonly recognized. Indeed, Freud represents rhe masculine element of the relationship with Jung; while Jung, after leav- Frcud-Jimg Zodiacal Contact Chart 0
© Mercúrio ^*21' 74*44' X 2t>ol0 (? 2135903®' 07'35' SO'jS 349030 34"20 0 uj'ig* 77 49 66 9S 300 124 5^ 73 134 89 2) 45°^* 360 531 348 20 223 46 51S 355 56 12 ^ Kn047' 58 50 46 78 28l l0 l 7 54 llf 70 ^ 107 "^o' 62 33 5° 82 283 108 20 57 118 74 ^^61*22' 216 187 20| 256 78 262 nt 211 272 228 2f 203*44' 155 129 1^6 I78 21 205 117 154 2l 170 ^ ^ Júpiter *0' 278 230 266 299 Hl 325 237 2 7t 335 290 59 61 77 109 312 & 48 *5 H5 101 ^ »oy 547 519 555 7 210 54 306 545 44 559 ^ 53*30' a 539 356 28 23i 54 326 5 6 20 5 Júpiter Júpiter 202 THE ASTROLOGY OF RELATIONSHIP ing his formal association with Freud, expressed a more feminine,
intuitive orienrarion. According ro traditional synusrric intcrprct.itinns and reported also in Jung's astrological studies years after his
break wirh Freud,1 a conjunction between one person's sun and
other's moon symbolizes a very basic and inclusive type of mutual
understanding and harmony.
The fact that Jung's natal Uranus is almost exactly (with a sixminurc orb) sextile Freud's moon is might signify Jung's potential worth noting. This sextile for channeling his energies toward creative transformation (Uranus in Leo) and to some extent toward
challenging the rationalized concepts and practices formulated, nourished, and protected (humin in Gemini) by Freud.
Perhaps the most impressive symbol of the basic distinctions between Freud's and Jung's approaches to the theory and practice of
psychology is provided by the quincunx linking Freud's singleton
Mars and Jung's Neptune. This contact could represent an underlying sensitivity' between Freud's judgmental aggressiveness and Jung's intuitive and spiritual foundations. Commonly misunderstood
bv astrologers, the quincunx, I believe, is one of the most significant
aspects in synastry. It operates powerfully on a level of relationship
*
#
that most of us find confusing; the reorientation of the way in
which one uses his or her personal energies. It calls for a choice between a largely unconscious, compulsive use of personal energies or
their conscious, purposeful expression. When wc meet and work closely with a person who has a planer or angle forming a close
quincunx with one of our natal factors, these alternatives should be
kept in mind. Individuals arc often mysteriously drawn ro one another by a quincunx; for instance, often experiencing alternating
feelings "of love and hate, attraction and repulsion. In the instance of
Freud and Jung, the Mars-Neptune quincunx brought to the surface
of their relationship not only what they had in common (and that
was a great deal) but also'the feelings, experiences, and energies
tbcv did not share. Apparently, after a time, the repulsive energies
outweighed rhe attractive, especially from Jung's point of view. The break between Freud and Jung, of course, was inevitable; a
part, as we shall discuss in greater detail later, of the natural unfoldment of a process. Through the experiences he gained from his
close association with the master of psychoanalysis, Jung was able THE PRACTICE OF SYNASTRY 203 to focus on his own ideas more clearly and come to the decision
(quincunx) that their great differences demanded a separation of
energies (the opposition phase of any cycle of relationship), since it
was apparent, at least to Jung, that he could no longer work with
Freud in a harmonious manner (the trine phase of unfoldmcnt).
There is another quincunx, between Jung's Mars and Freud's Uranus. This quincunx, however, could be interpreted as manifesting its potentiality in a manner directed toward harmonious adjustment. Jung recognized Freud throughout as the great originator of
psychoanalysis and as a man whose innovative concepts and revolutionary ideas (Uranus) had greatly promoted Jung's own understanding of psychology. He consistently defended (Mars station- ary) Freud during the time when Freud was virtually persona non
grata in academic and professional circles. Jung's initial decision to
commit himself to Freud's work took a great deal of courage and
conviction. THE HOUSE CONTACT CHART
The Freud-Jung house contact chart is illustrated in the accompanying figure. It, and the phase grid below it, are organized in the
same manner as the zodiacal contact chart, except that it is derived
from the house-oriented positions of Freud's and Jung's natal planets rather than their zodiacal orientations.
The house contact chart of Freud and Jung reveals several interesting points. Jung's charr, wirh five planers on each side of the
meridian, tends to balance Freud's predominantly Western hemispheric chart (nine planets to the right of the meridian); Through
Freud's relationship with Jung, his (Freud's) concepts had a channel for reconciling self with other. What their relationship ultimately produced (through Jung) was an approach to the nature of
the human psyche that transcended the view of man as a collection
of drives, urges, and impulses molded by his environment. (This was Freud's view and is an expression of a Western hemispheric
preponderance.) Through Jung, however, an image of man was
eventually introduced as possessing an inherent order and purpose
on both individual and collective levels. Freud-Jung House Con met Chart 0 Mercúrio Mercúrio C?
211-15 197.51 ICO.ll 5^.3 O ^'3 557 33- 347 IS 225 49 321 355 5) 80.55 2 55 2yo 245 276 122 307 219 251 ^ 159=22 3b2 307 b22 354 200' 2 Júpiter 2q6 3^ Mercúrio 35 344 Mercúrio & 513 3-7 339 205 30 30Z 334 Júpiter ^ 349 uo os
^w 100 41 347 172 8+ 116 1S3 4S So 2 So no I«» T«■ 55 121 70 -H 60 -45 157 1S0 236 ^5 330 2 69 iS 97 209 242 309 257 3o 225 257 524 2 w #•
195 16S 6 3-H 355 27 -33 ^ 7--- Netuno > 2^6 221 235 267 :i5 ^BS:3 201 -30 231 2S2 129 J 2 '^55 ^f
155=11 215=15 191= Mercúrio 2 v.
111=25 175=16
60 Sol 267 73 THE PRACTICE OF SYNASTRY 205 The sixth house (personal conflicts and reorientation, as well as the
psychoanalytic process) is particularly significant in the charts of
both Freud and Jung. Freud has Pluto, Venus, and the north lunar
node, and Jung has Venus and Mercury in this house. There is a
close contact between Freud's north lunar node (occupying the fourteenth section of the sixth house) and Jung's Venus (at the fifthteenth section of his sixth house). This points to a potentially sensitive and evolutionary (north lunar node) mental (Mercury) rela- tionship between the two men. Since the mutual field of experience
through which this potentiality can best develop is represented bv
the sixth house, this process should involve a good deal of work and
a transformation of both personalities. A transformation apparently
did occur as their relationship grew, but in spite of their mutual respect and affection (both have Venus in nearly the same section of
the sixth house) a completely positive reorientation of the rwo personalities and an integration of their life work was too much for
them ro actualize, and in 1922 they formally ended their association
of fifreen years. This does nor mean, of course, rhar rheir relationship entirely ceased to exist—relatcdness transcends physical or direct
contact.
A look at some significant contacts occurring in the seventh house of formal relationship and partnership provides additional insight into Freud's and Jung's association. The seventh house of Freud's chart contains the sun, Uranus, and Mercury; Jung's natal
seventh house conrains rhe sun and Uranus. Another contact exists
between Freud's Uranus and Jung's sun. This points ro the potentiality of a relationship of the most dynamic, innovative, and possibly
*
disruptive type—and is another symbol of rhe potential for transfor, mation in the lives of the two individuals, affecting their concepts of
, self and relatedness in the deepest sense. Other significant factors in
the contact chart include a house-oriented opposition between Freud's Neptune and Jung's Mars and a square between Freud's
Venus and Jung's Neptune. THE. ASTROLOGY OF RELATIONSHIP 206 HOUSE TRANSPOSITION CHARTS
The house contact chart is a map describing mutual fields of experience. House transposition charts constructed by placing the natal planers of one person into the house structure of another,
complement house contact charts by helping the astrologer to come
to an understanding of how one person experiences the other.
By placing Jung's natal planers into Freud's house structure we
can get an idea of how Freud experienced Jung: V zo'Sl X\
o \S. s
^ >K c.' IJ what areas of ?7 & a
$ d
Sst)' Sfilx
m fn w
X vs N"V
0"^ Freud's Mouses—Jung's Planets THE PRACTICE OF SYNASTRY 207 Freud's experience were stimulated by him. A few of the more
significant features of this chart include Freud's second house occupied by Jung's Mars, stationary direct, in the twenty-second degree
of Sagittarius, a possible symbol of Freud's possessive attitude toward Jung's ideas and concepts. Jung's ascendant falls in Freud's
natal third house, promoting concrete mental activities. Jung might
have been responsible for bringing out some of Freud's inner feelings of personal inadequacy and insecurity; his Saturn is located in
Freud's fourth house, just past the l.C The ninth house is particularly emphasized in this chart as well, with Jung's Venus, sun, and
Uranus therein—stimulating and possibly even disrupting Freud's 26vTn*
v0
u
a -F -o =0 07 SI 28^ 25°© tP ^1ts
V
v V ?> •o jr. "6
26 o Jung's Houses—Freud's Planets 0 208 THE ASTROLOGY OF RELATIONSHIP abstract and philosophical outlook. Jung's N'cprune, moon, and Pluto surrounding Freud's descendant is representative of Freud's
experience of Jung as someone with whom he could relate closely
in both abstract and mundane activities.
In Jung's experience wc find Freud's condensed group of nine
planets in Jung's second, third, fourth, and fifth houses—svmlmU
izing experiences of having, knowing, self-integration, and self-expression. Jung's contact with Freud was a greatly stimulating influence on Jung's mental development—represented here by four of
Freud's planets (Venus, Pluto, sun, and Uranus) falling into Jung's
third house. Freud's natal Saturn falls exactly on the halfway point
(midpoint) of Jung's second quadrant, possibly symbolizing Jung's
experience of Freud as an older, more established person (Saturn)
whose creations (fifth house) Jung found compelling. Freud oc- cupied the role of a father (Saturn) to Jung; Jung expressed himself (fifth house) through the movement founded bv Freud. Freud
was, at least on some levels, Jung's model of self-expression and outward strength.
Freud's M.C. is in Jung's seventh house, suggesting that their capacity, at least initially, to function together for the achievement of
Freud's goals in a co-operative fashion might have been an expression of this configuration. Jung's eighth house, stimulated bv Freud's singleton Mars, is a possible symbol of Jung's reaction to
Freud's deep-seated problems in giving himself to others and relating to others on an equal basis. THE COMPOSITE CHART
The Freud-Jung zodiacal composite displays a distinctive seesaw
pattern (symbolizing active duality) polarized by a right opposition
from the eleventh house, Scorpio, Mars and the fifth house, Taurus,
Pluto. There is another looser opposition linking the moon, in the
twelfth house, Sagittarius, and Venus in the sixth house, Gemini.
The position of the composite Mars within the entire planetary gcsralt is further emphasized liv the fact that it is midway between
Saturn and the moon—the only other bodies composing this half of
the seesaw—as well as being situated close to the midpoint of the
fourth quadrant. Freud-Jung Composite Chart O
5)
V
Sf^o' 2^0*6' Sit'
O^sss
5)5583 916811
(J 316:30
21.199.25 156
^3 Mercúrio &
iv Lua Netuno <&
66j ' 221*22'iOi'iC
ios'tfgz'tf 11°2f' Júpiter ^55 357 342 22 160 l 74 15 344 2 555 74 41 lfi 159 35 14® 22 l 219 340 256 549 70 38 205 326 221 355 36 23 121 17 130 211 179 236 Mercúrio 91 58 114 195 162 82 49 3 557 156 343 171 15 230 22 227 212 347 159 544 529 117 Júpiter ^ 246 232 20 263 39 fp 296123 ^50 JKl92l5 554 146 551 556 125 8 105 ^9S'5 9l 243 88 73 222 105 202 <97 47 200 44 5° 17S 6l 138 54 (£) 138:37 Mercúrio 97 328
317 2 IO THK ASTROLOGY OF RELATIONSHIP The significance of the composite Mars may be explored in this
way: The moon and Saturn arc very much connected with the functions that give everything distinctive form and idencitv; the
c
w
r,'
ability to make whatever adjusimcius arc necessary because of external demands, while still maintaining an essential form and function. Since the phase arc berween Sarurn and the moon is almost
thirty-six degrees (or a scmi-quintile aspect), the Saturn-moon dyad, in terms of rhe Freud-Jung relationship, tended ro manifest in
a particularly creative, individualistic, and ingenious manner. The
planet midway between these two bodies serves in creative and
practical adaptation and identity forming, or, from a psychological
perspective, mother and father images. Mars, externally directed energy, is a dynamic and one-pointed channel for externalizing such
primordial yet latcnrlv creative functions of human consciousness,
dramatically emphasized in the sign Scorpio, opposing Pluto.
The Sabian symbol for composire Mars throws additional light on
its function within the composite moon-Saturn dyad:
performs a laboratory experiment." Rudhvar's "Ahinventor keynote for this symbol describes it as "the driving urge toward achievement which
w
is at the root of civilization."
In addition, composite Saturn elevated (situated high in the skv)
and in its natural realm (the tenth house) and moon located in the
twelfth house (representing underlying and karmic implications) correspond with the psychological distinctions between the rational,
masculine (Sarurn in rhe tenth) and the irrational, intuitive (moon
in the twelfth) modes of consciousness that play significant roles in
rhe psychologies of both Freud and Jung. The axis of the conscious/unconscious and all it implies is also stressed bV the MarsPluto opposition.
Freud's natal Mars falls close to the composite M.C, suggesting
both his desire to maintain a superior position with Jung at all times
and Jung's experience of Freud as a father figure. Jung's Mars opposite enmposite Mercury and natal Mercury on composite Jupiter
symbolize the vast potential their relationship held for Jung (and for
Freud via Jung) in terms of mental stimulation and expansion of
philosophical horizons. Jungs natal Jupiter on composite Saturn is
an apt s'vmbol for his ability to be, closely associated with Freud
without becoming completely overwhelmed by Freud's influence. THE PRACTICE OF SYNASTRY GEORGE SAND AND FREDERIC CHOPIN GEORGE SAND:
George Sand, A NATAL PERSPECTIVE the feminist novelist, was born Aurore Lucile Dupin in Paris on July i, 1804, at 10:15 Plutão .M.
Her birth chart has an open-angle planetary pattern, with overtones of a seesaw pattern. All of her planets are more or less evenly
distributed within 240 degrees, with only one house vacant within
the occupied area. The empty fifth house, however, tends to set the
planets apart into two loosely defined groups, giving the chart a
hint of duality characterizing the seesaw pattern that has all ten
planets divided into two distinct, opposing groups. The open-angle
pattern denotes a personality that is open to the diversity of life and
the transcendent clement of experience. The entire planetary gestalt
is held together by Pluto in the first house, Pisces, and Neptune in
the ninth house, Scorpio. The phase arc of these two planets is
2 53036'zodiacall\r; 240°3^)' (a very close trine) froma house orientation. The fact that all other planetary bodies fall within the span of
the Pluto-Neptune phase arc gives added significance to the transcendental implications of the open-angle pattern; the csscntializing
(Pluto) and universalizing (Neptune) functions of these two planets
permeate and structure the entire planetary makeup of the chart. George Sand's Birrh Chare 0. s
93°^' ZO'-H'
2S7 0 IOCC.15
200 Lua 0
$ 91^6 Mercúrio O1.
•r V >
20bu^ Júpiter -7 254 2^3 263 227 l6l 2LO 195 15+ 2 :o 261 2^6 206 99 292 310 305 26f 136 207 236 221 i5o 74 H 333 227 316 3^5 19S 320 213 339 NS 509 250 334 302 26 57 <S> ? ^ Mercúrio 2^1 (JT01-* 49 339 ■}|, 2:St:o 251 i5i n^ 5
—T 300 203 »«"6 275 2 Of -T^ 3-3 216 2 261 102 235 311 1 H u 34S 220 159 202 277 i5o 335 55 327 IO9 39 6i 13 5 60 21S 105 207 tyic-.zz 2S5
nn So
q5 29 Júpiter 121 254
2 41 THE PRACTICE OF SYNASTRY ^3 The midpoint axis of the significant Pluto-Neptune phase arc can
. serve as an indicator of the focus of George Sand's pattern of self
and more specifically reveal how the transcendental, rcformulativc
functions of the Pluto-Neptune pair could have been integrated
within her entire being. This axis extends, zodiacally, from the
seventeenth degree of Ginccr to the seventeenth degree of Capricorn, close to the second and fourth quadrant midpoints—cmplmi/.ing the experiences of self and social expression. The direct midpoint, denoting the conscious, externalizing pole of the axis, is in the
otherwise unoccupied fifth house of creativity and self-expression.
This suggests that Sand could consciously center and integrate herself through fifth house experiences. The mode of energy that projected her through these experiences is characterized bv tfie matcrnalistic sign of Cancer. The Sabian symbol for the" midpoint
(seventeen Cancer) expresses the vastness and complexity of her
creative, self-expressing energies: "The unfoldment of multilevel potentialities issuing from an original germ." George Sand was not
only a woman of extraordinary creative potential—manifested
through the hundred or more books that flowed from her penbut also a great inspiration to all those who knew her and read her
novels. The indirect pole of this axis, situated at seventeen Capricorn in the eleventh house of social expression and participation,
denotes the type of experiences and energy that Sand was striving to
, integrate into her pattern of being.
The direct midpoint symbolizes where Sand was coming from (her Pluto-Neptune pair being representative of her basic orientation toward multifunctional life). Conversely, the indirect midpoint
represents where her life should lead her, particularly by way of the
many transcendental, regenerative experiences rhat encouraged her
to identify with the unconventional, transformative movements of
her time—characterized bv the position of this point in her eleventh
house as well as by her strong Aquarius-Leo horizon. The Sabian
symbol for the indirect midpoint suggests Sand's need to go beyond
the role her culture usually assigned women; it reads, U A repressed woman finds psychological release in nudism." Rudhvar's keynote
remarks that this symbol portrays "the escape from bondage to so»
*
cial inhibitions and a reliance upon the wisdom of the body."
Although George Sand was married to Casmir Dudevant while THE ASTROLOGY OF RELATIONSHIP
still in her teens and had a son by him in iS:^, she soon rebelled
against the traditional role of wife and mother. In 1831, at the age
of twenty-six, she left her country home for Paris. According to the
one-degree sysrem of direction, her natal Mars progressed to a conjunction with natal Mercury, her moon progressed to a conjunction
with natal Mars, and her Jupiter reached a conjunction with natal
Neptune at that time. During the following year her first novel, Indiana, was published under the pseudonym "George Sand," which
eventually became her adopted name. A sketch of the trials of her
married life and her eventual liberation, it was an immediate success.
Many other novels followed, all explications of the main theme of
her life—the power of love to renew the soul and transcend the obstacles of social conventions and morality. Thev portrayed women's
struggle for the rights of self-expression and self-determination in a
male-dominated world. The contents of her literary works, along
with her eccentric, bold, and free-loving life style, distinguish her as
one of the initiating forces of the feminist movement.
George Sand, like Carl Jung, is a third-quarter soli-lunar type
(there is a 28715 phase arc berween sun and moon) suggesting an inclination toward the pursuit of new ideals and the potential for understanding abstract, universal life principles. The phase arc be- rween the dynamic and productive Aries, second house moon and
the self-integrating Cancer sun in rhe fourth house is that of a waning/appiying quintile with a one-degree orb. This configuration
could signify Sand's ability for creatively releasing her new ideals to
a wide public in a technically effective and innovative way that not
only provided for her immediate mundane needs (moon in the second) but also gave vital, personal meaning to her existence (Cancer
sun in the fourth house).
The sun also forms an applying/waning square with Uranus in
the eighth house. Libra, symbolic of a drive toward experiencing intense and individual, as w ell as artistic and sensitive, interpersonal
relationships as a mean of self-transformation. A dynamic separating/wanine tri-nctilc links the sun with the focal Neptune—emphasizing Sand's already intense sensual, transcendental (Neptune in
Scorpio) and philosophical (ninth house) inclinations and opening for her a channel for the wide dissemination of her ideals. Neptune
(the symbol of the universal and transcendental love that Sand so 1 THE PRACTICE OF SYNASTRY 215 often tried to personalize in her novels and in the course of her own
life) is situated in the ninth house of publication and connected with
the mental planet Mercury (in the communicative sign of Gemini,
.located near her natal I.C) by a very close applying/waning criseptile aspect. This link-up suggests that George Sand had the po1 tential to perform a very special social, cultural function through
effectively communicating, in the most direct and personal terms
(Mercury in Gemini on the I.C.), the need to reorient antiquated
ideals concerning the essential value of the romantic, individual ele('nient of life with the need for a transpersonal view of life in general (Neptune in ninth house, Scorpio).
The Sabian symbol for the position of Mercury speaks of this
'process (from its mental. Mercurial perspective): "/I large volume reveals traditional wisdom." Rudhyar's keynote for the symbol is,
"contacting the all-human planetary Mind underlying any cultural
and personal mentality." The Sabian symbol for the zodiacal position of Neptune complements Mercury's function in this process .and suggests that Sand closely identified herself with scendental transformer funccian as values. It reads:
his an inspircr and her tranof cultural "After having heard an inspired individual deliver ( sermon on the Mount,' crowds are returning home." The key- note for his symbol describes '"the need to incorporate inspiring experiences and teachings into everyday living."
The meaning I suggest for the general planetary siruarion described above is further supported and brought into a powerfully
personal and immediate focus by die fact that Neptune forms a
very tight applying opposition with Mars in the fourth hnusc, Taurus, and both are in turn connected by constructive, confrontative squares to her sixth house Venus in Leo. This configuration is
an apt symbol for Sand's artistic and philosophical prolificiry as
well as her sensitivity toward the struggles of the repressed. FREDERIC CHOPIN: A NATAL PERSPECTIVE The ren»wned pianist-composer, Frederic Chopin, was born at
Zclazowa, Wola. near Warsaw. Poland, on March 1. 1810. at 6:00 Plutão .M. His father. Nicholas Chopin, was born in France but im- THE ASTROLOGY OF RELATIONSHIP
migrated to Poland in his vouch, never returning to his native land
and becoming completely identified with the Polish culture. His family was not of rhc higher, ruling class, bur Nicholas was a rnror
engaged bv aristocratic families, and young Frederic was brought
up in refined, sophisticated surroundings. Chopin became a natural
aristocrat and was able to fit in comfortably when his extraordinary
talents had introduced him ro upper-class society while he was still a
youth.
It was not until Chopin had traveled to Paris, however, at that
time the hub of European culture and the vital center of the romantic movement, that he found creative elements with which he could
identify. In spite of the fact that he spent the rest of his life away
from Poland, however, Chopin considered himself Polish and preferred the company of Polish aristocrats. His exceptional talents as a
sensitive and innovative pianist and composer were recognized in
ifijC) by the same Parisian artistic circles in which George Sand had
established herself as a most dynamic, controversial woman. Shortly
after his arrival in Paris, Chopin was introduced to the tro userwearing, cigar-smoking Sand by her intimate friend, Franz Lizst.
During the following year, in spite of Chopin's great reluctance due
to an emotional attachment to another woman in his past and his
rather conventional Catholic views on sexual icy, they engaged in "a
poem," as Chopin liked to call their affair, that endured "for more
than eight years.
Chopin's birth chart exhibits a hemispheric phincrarv pattern, defined bv Jupiccr and rhe moon, containing all eight other pl.inerary bodies wirhin the span of a loose opposition aspecr. The hemispheric pattern presents duality in irs mosr distinct form—the
interplay berween actuality and potentiality; the apparent and the
underlying; the conscious and unconscious—bv having all planers
within one half of the circle of the chart. In terms of personal psychology it represents a person faced w ith the challenge to integrate
both poles of life within his or her personality.
The chart's center of gravity, the midpoint axis of the Jupitermoon pair, symbolizes the basic focus for this challenge of inrcgrari(>n. This axis extends from eighteen Cancer (the cyclic midpoint
of rhe Jupiter-moon pair) ro eighteen Capricorn (the indirect millpoint and the center of gravity for the occupied hemisphere), only Frederic Chopin's Birch Chart O ; 3171.59 S
?
i^i'So yo'js'yyB2i
213 221
161.19 c? Oj2V«
w ^ . ^,
«1V <2 15 355 331 311 79 no 85 3^8 232 224 190 169 298 328 504 207 3^ Mercúrio 298 67 97 75 35° 326 506 74 105 80 343 340 108 139 114 l 129 559 05 38 31 6 270 356 239 12 233 356 226 7 ^^>5:19 350 191 5* Mercúrio 325 '^"5^5 308 l68 296 305 338 74 294 62 69 10f 126 105 325 95 100 i35 158 32 \ll 94t20 79 300 67 74 109 132 6 S^*r55 349 209 337 344 1l 275 8 7 26f 355
270 THE ASTROLOGY OF RELATIONSHIP 218 one degree from the axis of gravity in Sand's chart, and joining fas
in hers) the fifth and eleventh houses. This connection signifies that
/
w
Chopin and Sand had very similar paths in terms of the experiences
and energies that inspired, motivated, and integrated their overall
natures.
The loose, applying opposition between rhe moon and Jupiter,
structuring Chopin's entire planetary gestalt, symbolizes the basic
parameters of his conscious personality. With this in mind, it is of
interest that his natal moon (representing, particularly in the second
house, adjustments and the provider of nourishment and sustenance) after conjuncting Jupiter and increase, situated (the principle of compensation in the house of human interchange) two weeks before his birth, had not formed another conjunction with
any other planet. That is, the moon had yet to pass over any of the
planets in the activated hemisphere of Chopin's chart since it last
passed by Jupiter. This paradoxical situation is in many ways characteristic of a most sensitive and complex interplay between opposite modes of consciousness that accentuates the already dualistic
hemispheric pattern. Dualism was often expressed bv Chopin in his
frequent alterations of mood and temperament. The Sabian symbols
for the two planets arc of interest. Jupiter's symbol (twenty-four
Aries) is: "Blown inward by the wind, the curtains of an open wind0\V take the shape of rf cornucopia"; with a keynote that mentions
"openness to the influx of spiritual energies." The symbol for the
moon's position speaks directly to the fact that the lunar function is
about to emerge from the depths of the unconscious to a conscious
realm of multifunctional activity: "Miners are surfacing from a deep coal minef
Chopin was born about two and a half days after the full moon,
indicating a life purpose geared toward conract with others with
fulfillment and success to come through an essential receptivity to
whatever experiences come one's way. In The Lunation Cycle
Rudhyar explains that in the full-moon type
objectivity and clear consciousness as the result of interpersonal
and social-culrural relationships arc. theoretically, the basic factors in characrer . . . Whar was mainly felt in the past is now
seen. This may mean a revelation or illumination, and normally THE PRACTICE OF SYNASTRY
some kind of fulfillment; but it can also mean, negatively, separation or divorce—perhaps even a divorce from reality, or inner
division ("man against himself). [ pp. 52-53]
¥
t Whereas George Sand's sun and moon arc linked by a waning quintile, Chopin's soli-lunar pair have just passed the waning biquintile. This would indicate the creative and artistic compatibility
between the two that afforded not only mutual inspiration but also
a capacity for Sand and Chopin to share immediate, mundane life
experiences through cohabitation (both have moon in the second
house) in a way that brought out the best of both of them. However, Chopin was not an easy man to get along with, either superficially or intimately: His conservative, emotionally sensitive and
withdrawn nature, signified by Pisces sun and the inner planets
(Mercury and Venus) in the sixth house as well as by the VirgoPisces horizon, manifested itself through almost constant inner tur.moil and difficulty in accepting others. THE ZODIACAL CONTACT CHART
The Sand-Chopin zodiacal contact chart reveals many significant
and powerful connections existing between the two in terms of the
interplay of multifunctional energies.
Perhaps the most revealing of these contacts are the tri-octilcs
that link both Sand's ascendant with Chopin's moon, and Sand's
moon with Chopin's ascendant. These configurations denote again
that Sand and Chopin found one another mutually stimulating and
encouraging in terms of day-to-day life experiences (moon) and
had the potential to use this stimulation as a means of realizing their
innermost purposes and selves (ascendant). Sand's Uranus is less
than one degree from Chopin's moon: strengthening the intensity of
the moon-ascendant tri-octiles, as well as adding to it the elements
of upheaval and the unexpected. Chopin's zodiacal Venus is very
close to Sand's ascendant, contributing an element of identification
and mutual appreciation of each other's artistic, aesthetic sensi- tivities.
The waxing/separating tri-scpciles linking Sand's Cancer sun with Sand-Chopin Zodiacal Ccmcact Chart 26»^}' 75^' 1^7^'5:°^* scc'f' i77*-jo' igi'XS' 2$y2j'3*£°j&
0353»26*
w
^ 320^2'
o Áries j2S 2i'
tfz' Netuno *
3f. zyiz' ^22^16'
f• Lua 30T
93
221 255 166 W 26l 125 156 41 100 55 139 5*6 15 56° 310 2i 268 1:5 H* 88 M2 -95 245 iS^ 229 302 250 102
m? 276 263 33° 2l6 510 2^f 337 0 3 5 2^6 ^5 22S 1-5 15$ M9
2f6 35+
5 151 136 95 3+ Mercúrio 1-57 I53 170 1^0 2 33^ 178 206 191 i?" 118 201 * Mercúrio 77 61 22 2 46 55 ✓> -v ^
— --dU 172 * Mercúrio *7 32 351 245 i?! ill 196 T1 57 l6 269 5* Mercúrio 267 200
* 295 "3 6 40 168 3 Júpiter +
75 THE PRACTICE OF SYNASTRY
Chopin's Sagittarius Saturn and Sand's late 221
Virgo Saturn with Chopin's Pisces sun, constitute a most unusual connection for the integration of one's basic center of self and purpose with the other's
personal limitations and mundane identity. This contact could also
signify karmic factors that may have brought the two together for
the fulfillment of a transpcrsonal purpose. The fact that Chopin's
Saturn is situated close to Sand's natal M.C. indicates that Sand and
Chopin were able to do much to further one another's position in
the outer world as well. Chopin's fourth house Saturn on Sand's
M.C could, in addition, reflect that through the eight years that the
two lived together, Sand was the one who largely managed and provided for nearly all their domestic and financial needs. George Sand's Mercury is, however, opposed to Chopin's Saturn.
though their Mercurys are trine—symbolic of easy, Even harmonious communication at least on the mental, verbal level—Sand and Chopin often did not agree. The Mercury-Saturn opposition could be
interpreted as Sand's inability to accept Chopin's class prejudices
and his adherence to many outmoded social conventions.
The tight cri-octile between Sand's Venus and Chopin's Mars
signifies an exciting, intense, but often conflicting and confron- tative, emotional/sexual relationship, given additional impetus by
the square between Sand's Venus and Chopin's Uranus and as well
as by Chopin's Venus forming tri-octile with Sand's Uranus. We
know very little about their emotional and sexual life together, except that they were both immediately and compulsively drawn toward one another (in Chopin's instance the attraction was so strong
that he initially tried his best to avoid Sand), a situation quite likely
to be an experience of the strong Uranus-Venus aspects.
There are, of course, many other relevant zodiacal contacts between these two charts, but it is not my intention to present a
lengthy catalogue of such configurations here. Sand and Chopin had
a most complex relationship that was in many ways paradoxical.
Whereas George Sand was one of the most revolutionary, outrageous individuals of her time, especially in her flaunting of social restraints and conventions, Chopin worshipped social order and was
himself a most aristocratic man. Sand had one of the true tran- scendental minds of her time, guided by an inner sense of morality,
regarding sex as a deeply spiritual act. Chopin was a devout Catho- THE ASTROLOGY OF RELATIONSHIP
lie, a social prude, and, at least before his liaison with Sand, had an
abhorrence for sex—attitudes that offended Sand's more liberated views. In a letter composed during the early months of their friendship, Sand writes to a mutual friend of theirs concerning Chopin's
attitude that "certain acts" might ruin everything. I have always been repelled bv this fChupin's] attitude toward
the ultimate embrace of love. It it is not as sacred, as pure, as
consecrated an act as the rest, there is no virtue in abstaining.
The word physical which people use to describe something which has no name except in the higher region, displeases and
shocks me . . . I as quoted in Frances Winwar's George Sand and Her Times; p. 3:0] These rwo creative individuals, in spite of their diiTercnces. were
able to come together, however, in a basically harmonious manner.
In a vcrv real way they assisted each other along their individual
paths of tultillmenr. in turn contributing greatly to the whole of
human in*. Perhaps it is because there were so many contradictory
and mysterious elements involved in their relationship that Chopin's
biographers usually describe George Sand as a devouring female
who ruined Chopin and was probably the cause of his carlv death.
While it is true that Sand was a vcrv strong woman (this in itself
was probably enough to set most journalists against her), such views
arc far from accurate. Chopin's work excelled during his contact
with Sand. She supported him materially (his compositions were,
during his lifetime, still too innovative to receive wide support and
he almost never gave public concerts) and took care of him physically. Chopin died of tuberculosis at the age of thirty-nine, shortly
after his break with Sand. THE HOUSE CONTACT CHART
From a house-orienred perspective, the charts of Sand and Chopin arc quite similar. Roth have all planets within the first, second, and third quadrants, and within these quadrants both have Sand-Chopin House Contact Chart 05)^
103:15 ^0:51 91:56 Sol (?
167:23 70:11 lL
M
@
22^:20 20516 HJ:20 150:50 lOHi ■0171:59 54 125 62 6 103 305 328 ^16 283 165 ©K'Jt 275 345 302 227 324 166 189 177 143 24 7°
77 35+
1 9l
58 2 JO ^3
120 93
3OO 3l7 304
324- 311 271
278 151
158 65 155 112 36 133 335 35^ 346 315 195 ^ii5'45 107 177 134 J9 I36 358 21 Mercúrio 336 216 ■■?99'i6 34l 51 5 295 30 2,52 255 243 210 90 '^68.35 310 20 357 262 359 201 224 212 178 59 ^94.20 336 46 3 287 24 226 25O 257 204 84 1 66 137 93 ia uj 317 340 328 295 175 ^161119
$>68ii5 * Júpiter -53 THE ASTROLOGY OF RELATIONSHIP
empry fifth houses, suggesting that rhe two had parallel orientations
toward life and that both were primarily focusing their energies
within the same areas of experience.
The loose sextile aspect between Sand's fourth house sun and
Chopin's sixth house sun signifies a basically relaxed and productive
person-to-person contact carrying overtones of Sand's maternal and
protective attitude (Cancer sun in the fourth) toward the fragile composer. Roth have Venus in the sixth house, within a one degree
conjoncrinn; their association held much potential for sharing inner
experiences and a mutual Inclination toward self-criticism, introversion, and answers to life sought from within. These common characteristics were given opportunity to grow and were brought into
the most intimate realms of interpersonal rclatedncss through a conjunction of the eighth house Jupitcrs that in turn form harmonious,
responsive scxtilcs to the two Vcnuscs.
A most significant contact exists between Sand's sun and Chopin's
Saturn, involving the interpenetrarion of two phases. Sand's zodiacal
sun is situated at (>c44' Cancer (and in her fourth house, double
emphasizing it in terms of personal integration and maternal instinct) while Chopin's house-oriented Saturn is located at Mercúrio :46 of
the fourth house. Thar is. in terms of a 360-dcgrec cycle of unfoldment Sand's sun and Chopin's Saturn occupy the same place (the
looch phase of 360) against the background of rwo different frames
of reference.
unfoldment Sand's sun occupies the
that deals with energy 100th phase of a cycle of
differentiation (the zodiac); Chopin's Saturn is situated in the tooth phase of the cycle of unfolding experiences (the houses). This connection symbolizes that
Sand's central solar purpose was motivated bv a mode of energy
thar was parallel ro the type of experience that defined and structured Chopin's sense of identity, and thar there was an open channel
for the exchange of these functions between the two. The Sabian
symbol for Phase mo (ioJ Cancer) sheds light on the meaning that
such a close and unusual
Chopin: contact may have held for Sand and ; '.-j large diamond in the first stages of the cutting process '; Rudhvar's keynote: "The arduous training for perfection in order
to fully manifest an ideal."
*
This symbolic image suggests that through the sun-Saturn contact Sand and Chopin were able to participate, to some extent at THE PRACTICE OF SYNASTRY 225 least, in the early phases of a great work requiring both superior artistic craftsmanship and a vision of how things should be if an ideal
were to be realized. The nature of the task that involved Sand's essential life purpose and Chopin's sense of form and definition, which
no doubt permeated their entire relationship, was probably made
most apparent through their substantial pioneering contributions to
the arts. They did much to further the evolution of human consciousness by providing individuals with more relevant and sensitive
models of expression. George Sand lived the life of a modern "liberated" woman a century and a half ago; Chopin's compositions paved the way for the musical innovations of our own era. THE HOUSE TRANSPOSITION CHARTS
When Chopin's planets are placed within Sand's house structure,
his Venus, sun, Pluto, and Mars fall into the first house—signifying
that Sand experienced him in a very direct and immediate yet (because of the diversity of the planetary functions involved) complex
manner. These four planets in Sand's first house also symbolize their
ability to recognize and understand one another as individuals. In
addition, Chopin's Venus is within a degree and a half of Sand's ascendant, symbolizing her potentiality to experience and bring out
the artistic side of his nature, as well as to come in touch with his
anima, his inner woman.
Chopin's natal Jupiter-moon opposition along with his lunar nodes are situated in Sand's second-eighth house axis, suggesting
that the two had something to learn from each other concerning the
use of resources and the exchange of human energies. The passionate and romantic nature of their liaison is symbolized by Chopin's
moon falling into Sand's eighth house, and Sand's moon transposed
into Chopin's eighth house.
George Sand's philosophical outlook and world view were no
doubt deeply stimulated by Chopin with three of his natal planets,
of diverse natures, situated in her ninth house. Here we find Uranus
the transformer, universalizing Neptune, and conventionalizing Saturn. This arrangement would seem to suggest that while Sand's cx- t Sand's I louses—Chopin's Planets pansivc, synthcsi/ing mind experienced the composer as excitmg,
not only because he was unusual and mysterious (Uranus retrograde
in die fifteenth degree at Scorpio) but also because of his religious
and sensitive (Neptune in Sagittarius) yet conservative and therefore challenging (Saturn) qualities.
When Sand's planets arc placed within Chopin's house structure,
onlv the fourth, fifth, and seventh houses are left vacant. Sand's Saturn is situated in Chopin's first house, suggesting that he experienced her both as a limitin" element and as a giver of form and
definition in terms of his personal life. Uranus and Jupiter fall into
his second house, with the moon opposite them in the eighth, sig- Chopin's Houses—Sand's Planets nifying that the relationship with Sand may have altered or transformed (Uranus) Chopin's attitude toward material living, yet it also
increased (Jupiter) the scope of his experience in this realm. Sand's
tight Neptune-Mars opposition is located in Chopin's third and ninth houses, suggesting that her openness to life and love stimulated
him on a mental level (Neptune in his third) as well as his being
impressed, and possibly feeling threatened by, her high-minded philosophy and keen sense of understanding (Mars in his ninth). The
professional success and productivity their union brought them
could be denoted by Sand's Mercury in Chopin's tenth and her sun
in his eleventh houses. Finally, the involvement of Chopin's anima 2 28 TUP. ASTROLOGY OF Ml'LATJONSIIIP in his liaison with Sand is further implied bv her natal Venus in his
twelfth Imuiic—symbolizing the potentiality Chopin had to experience Sand as a symbol of his own underlying unima. THE COMPOSITE CHART
The synthesis of Sand's and Chopin's birth charts produces a
composite chart with live planers in the fifth house: .Mars. Uranus.
Saturn, sun, and Venus, all bodies except Mars and Uranus in the
sign of Scorpio. Mercury is in the twentieth degree of Libra, just on
the fourth house side of the fifth house cusp, and Neptune is situated in the first degree of Sagittarius, only one degree into the sixth
house. This intense concentration of planets in and immediately around the fifth house (vacant in both their birth charts) symbolizes the complex and varied experiences of creativity and self- expression brought inro their relationship. The emphasis here on the
zodiacal sign Scorpio signifies that the energy enabling Sand and
Chopin to work together through fifth house experiences was of a
penetrating and emotional type thar inclined rhem ro move toward
communion with one another through their creative clTorts. in spite
of rheir dilTcrcnccs, rather than promoting an attitude of excessive
self-pride. Their association was deeply rooted in their being two
creative individuals (fifth house) energized by deeply internal and
emotional (Scorpio) sources.
The seventh house composite Jupiter in Capricorn indicates an
expansive as well as enduring quality. Composite Pluto in Pisces
very near the composite M.C. suggests thar the liaison possessed extraordinary powers of regeneration and held within ir a potential
for evolving new- forms of cultural ideals and values. The nourishing and adaptive qualities of their relationship arc represented by
the composite moon in the first house. Cancer.
The angles of the Sand-Chopin composite chart are particularly
interesting. T he local ascendant (arrived at by calculating the composite M.C. and referring to a table of houses for the corresponding
ascendant for the latitude of Paris) is ten degrees Cancer—the exact
position of Sand's natal sun as well as Chopin's house-orienred Saturn discussed a few paragraphs above. Sand-Cliopin Composirc Chart ai6^ 109'jl' igg'^o' z^L'^r 207^5' 2^T' W*'
Ol52,ia
! ®H 7 255
242 V u9 - » 3|-20i:^S ]j(ll6t10 2 l! ^ 7 ^ Mfi'Sfi' 24^' vjT'^' 344 l 7 Mercúrio 252 1 Sol ■/ 350 2 270 237 262 175 254 26l 229 127 327 352 266 344 352 3^ Mercúrio 21S 26 299 17 2-5 352 251 35- ^DO 3-7 126 79 57 54 315 6 336 254 yS> 226 255
15 230 33^ 7 249 354 l 2 Mercúrio T4 291 275 305 25- Júpiter 1 34s 13 354 ? 354 l Mercúrio 300 76 6 329 354 335 52 34^ 336 20S 233 215 291 221 215 7 246 M1 224 221 l0 3 34 259
240 THE ASTROLOGY OF RELATIONSHIP
The Sabian symbol U A large diamond in the first stages of the cutting process," which
Sand's zodiacal sun appeared and above in the contact between Chopin's honsc-nricmed Sarurn, also describes the basic "what" of the Sand-Chopin liaison. It suggests
rhat they were brought together for the purpose of training for the
perfection of a great ideal, probably intimately connected with the
essential theme of the romantic tnovcmmc.
The Sabian symbol for ten degrees Ca pri.com, "An albatross feeding from the hands of n sailor," for which Rudhyar gives the keynote, "the overcoming of fear and its rewards," suggests that
rheir relationship should promote a sense of trust and compassion
nor only wirh one another, but with all beings. THE PRACTICE OF SYNASTRY 231 HELENA Plutão . BLAVATSKY &
HENRY S. OLCOTT H. Plutão . BLAVATSKY: A NATAL PERSPECTIVE
Helena Pccrovna Von Hahn was bom August 12, 1831, at Ekatcrinoslav, Russia, at approximately 2:00 A.M. She has been described by her relatives as an exceptional person even in early childhood: "lively, highly gifted, full of humor and the most remarkable
daring . . . [with al craving for independence and freedom of action," as well as having shown evidence of psychic powers and a
deep interest in the metaphysical world from the start. Her mother,
a feminist and novelist, died when Helena was only eleven years old.
After her mother's death Helena went to live in the home of her
well-to-do grandparents, where her dramatic and forceful personality was the distress of a succession of governesses. Just before her
seventeenth birthday, Helena was married to an elderly (or at least
much older) Russian politician, Nikifor V. Blavatsky. After three months of living with him in what seems to have been a most intolerable situation and after a few unsuccessful attempts to escape,
Helena managed to leave and to convince her family that reconciliation was out of the question. THE ASTROLOGY OF RELATIONSHIP 232 Supported financially primarily .by her father, Blavarsky spent the
next approximately twenty-five years traveling extensively. As she
did not keep a journal, and in later years was somewhat reluctant to
recall the details of her early life, her biographers have pieced together a history that is numerous contradictions sometimes
in the inconsistent, various sources. and there are She apparently went directly to Egypt upon leaving Russia, and also visited Africa,,
Turkey, and Greece, then lived in various places in Europe, traveled
to Canada, Mexico, Central and South America, and to some of the
Pacific Islands. She spent some time in New York and Chicago in
1854 and traveled by covered wagon with a group of emigrants to
San Francisco in that year.
Countess Wachmcister, with whom Blavatsky worked closely during her later years, reports in her biography of Blavatsky that on
her twentieth birthday, in London, Blavatsky for the first time physically met and spoke with her spiritual teacher. Morya Gulab,
whom she immediately recognized as the guardian appearing in many of her childhood visions. Morya proposed that she help to
organize what was to become the Theosophical Society—a vehicle
for the expression of "Divine Wisdom"—a mission requiring some
years of preparation in Tibet. There is evidence that her subsequent travels were primarily for the purpose of investigating the
knowledge and traditions of ancient peoples all over the globe. After one or rwo unsuccessful attempts, she finally penetrated inro
Tibet, probably in 1S56, and spent a number of years there on that
and on subsequent visits, as well as in India, Nepal, and surrounding
areas, wirh her teacher Morva and his colleague Koot Hoomi (usually referred ro as the ".Master M." and the "Master K.H.," or the
"jMahatmas," in theosophical literature). According to as she preferred to be called after her occult apprenticeship was completed, these two Masters were members of the trans-Himalayan
branch of an occult brotherhood composed of individual adepts or
initiates of occult knowledge. These individuals have evolved beyond the known states of ordinary human consciousness; according
to the Encyclopaedia Britannica. "in such adepts as Morva the spiritual nature is supposed to have been so developed that'the [physical] hodv has become the ductile instrument of the intelligence, and theY have thus gained a control over natural forces . . /' The THE PRACTICE OF SYNASTRY 2 33 brotherhood of adepts is in possession of ancient occult wisdom, and
it is their responsibility to oversee human evolution on earth and do
whatever they can to assist it—within certain limitations—in accordance with individual and collective karmic conditions. The tidal wave of materialism, technology, and religious dogmatism that
was engulfing the entire planet in the nineteenth century was of
particular concern to Morya and Koot Hoomi, and after many decades of searching for one capable of serving as their messenger
to the Western world, they chose H. Plutão . Blavatsky.
It is unfortunate that the exact time of Blavatsky's birth is not
known. We arc told by members of her family, however, that calamity surrounded her firsr moments. She was born several weeks
prematurely and her relatives doubted that the puny infant would
live more than a few hours. In order to provide her with the benefits of Clirisdanitv, a baptism was arranged within hours of her
birth. The ceremony climaxed in a disaster: Helena's young aunt, standing in as proxy godmother, fell asleep as the Russian orthodox
priest was reciting his incantation, dropping her ceremonial candle.
Before anyone, including the priest, knew what was happening, the
priest's robes were up in flames, seriously burning their occupant.
In the midst of all the excitement, Blavatsky's exact birth time
was never accurately recorded. According to the general accounts
left by those attending the birth, however, it seems certain that the
sign of Cancer was on the eastern horizon, the birth taking place a
few hours after midnight. Various astrologers have rectified her birth charts convincingly to several Cancer ascendants: one gives twelve degrees on the ascendant, another fifteen, another nineteen,
and yet another twenty-eight degrees Cancer. The two that have
gained the most recognition among both astrologers and students of
Blavatsky are those with twelve and nineteen degrees Cancer rising.
I have chosen to use here the chart with nineteen degrees Cancer
on the ascendant Although there is not a great deal of difference
among the proposed Cancer charts, the ambiguity (resulting in the
possibility of an error of more than one or rwo degrees on the angles) docs mean that the house-oriented positions of her natal planets, as well as the house-contact charts set up between herself
and others, should be studied as general guides that very well may
be several degrees off in terms of the angles. THE ASTROLOGY OF RELATIONSHIP 234 Blavatsky's birth chart displays a distinct seesaw pattern; Her natal planets are arranged into two definite groups. One of the two
planctarv groups is situated in the personalizing lower hemisphere.
This concentration is defined by a waxing/applying septile between
the sun and moon. Its midpoint (fourteen Virgo) is close to Blavatsky's I.C, with rhe sun, Mars, Saturn, and Mercury cast of the
l.C. and Venus and the moon to the west. This massing of personal
planets in the subjective lower hemisphere is brought into contrast
by the congregation of the trans-Saturnian planets, as well as Jupiter, all retrograde and situated around the western, relationshiporiented side of the objectifying, collectivizing upper hemisphere.
■
This group is bounded by the planers Pluto and Neptune. The center of gravity for this group (two Pisces) is close to an opposition
aspect with the lower planetary group's center of gravity at fourteen Virgo.
The chart's planetary gcsralt suggests a deep interplay between
inner, personal, subject-oriented consciousness and consciousness in
irs relationship-oriented social mode. For H. Plutão .B. one of life's greatest tasks was to combine these two modes of consciousness in a
harmonious way that allowed for their mutual fulfillment. Sym- bolically speaking, she was challenged to integrate day and night.
Although the angles of Blavatsky's chart arc speculative, the zodiacal gravity center of the two planetary groups that compose the
seesaw pattern does not vary significantly with regard to the time
difference for any of the suggested Cancer ascendants.
•
_ _
The sun-moon midpoint of fourteen Virgo occupies a zodiacal
space close to Blavatsky's natal Mercury, in the third house. This
point symbolizes the basic nature of Blavatsky's subjective and personal energies, symbolizing how they could be most effectively brought into focus and constructively released. Mercury's proximity to this midpoint indicates that these personal energies flowed
naturally through the Mercurial functions; writing, conversing, and
the like.,. The Sabian symbol for fourteen Virgo gives added significance; "Ailaristocratic family tree"; Rudhvar's keynote being, "a deep reliance upon the ancestral roots of individual character." This
statement refers not only to one's physical ancestry bur also ro the
type of character that an individual has been developing during a
series of incarnations and the support such characteristics can lend H. Plutão . Blavatsky's Birth Chare Kp' Netuno ' ^ Mercúrio ° 15' t59*3C>' iSz' Netuno i5i*45' sifvf
51 21
30 yi'ib' 291^5' i^v/ 346 162 346 187 206 128 7 .37 235 37 237 257 179 357 7 205 7 20S 227 149 30 226 30 231 250 172 196 360 201 220 143 105 5 25 307 201 221 143 20 302 3)10236 62 ?7^ 30 51 ? ST'22 56 6 334 6131 342 42 10 36 24219.43 182 243 212 238 202 T? 61.9a 340 41 10 36 360 158 189 25O 219 245 209 7 210 ^189.31 216 278 246 272 237 33 237 2S <$>283=34. Ii5 1S0 148 174 158 297 139 290 283
262. THE ASTROLOGY OF RELATIONSHIP 236 the personality in times of crisis. Blavatsky was intimately involved
in a long-term project spanning many centuries dedicated to the
transformation of humanity, involving not only herself but many
others. As a result, she had "root power" to sec her through the
many personal turmoils and confrontations that she encountered in
her clforts to accomplish her transcendental goal.
The waxing/applving septile linking the sun-moon dvad signifies
that Blavatsky felt a very immediate (applying) and instinctual (waxing) need to pursue her individual path of dcstinv (septile)
through all of her personal activities (sun-moon).
The zodiacal center of gravity for the upper hemispheric group
of planets is two degrees Pisces (this is the indirect midpoint of
Pluto and Neptune), which falls around the ninth house cusp. This
point represents Blavatsky's basic orientation to others, her relationship to the outer world in general, and the dissemination of her
transcendental message. The Sabian symbol for two Pisces is: U A squirrel hiding from hunters." Rudhvar's keynote states that this
symbol refers to "the individual's need both to ensure his future
subsistence and to protect himself from aggressive social elements."
The emphasis is on sclf-protccdon, Blavatsky's mission was ex- tremely precarious. All through her public life, from 1874 until her
death in 1891, she was under almost constant attack from materi- alistic scientists, the clcrgv, the American and Anglo-Indian governments, and sometimes from her friends and co-workers. She was a
lone agent for an occult brotherhood, sent out into a culture hostile
to the knowledge it was her function to disseminate. She was accused of being a Russian spy. a cransvcstirc, rhe most devious and
masterful fraud of the nineteenth century—the everything connected with the M ah annas.- In sole creator of The Mahatmas and Their Letters, a treatise on Koot Hoomi and other adepts and their
communications with the Anglo-English journalist A. Plutão . Sinnett,
Geoffrey Barborka writes: People have, of course, questioned the existence of the Mahatmas. They argue: if the Mahatmas exist why do we not
see them? Why should thev refrain from coming into the world and showing their powers? Vet history shows what has THE PRACTICE OF SYNASTRY 237 happened to the remarkable personages who have appeared
from time to time . . . Look what happened to Apollonius of
Tyana!—He was imprisoned, so was Cagliostro. So would SaintGermain have been, if had he not vanished from the scene. See
what befell H. Plutão . Blavatsky! Even now, after almost a hundred
years, she is slandered; while calumnies arc circulated by the
news media in our day and age. I p. viij
It was H. Plutão . Blavatsky's purpose to gather around her the "seed
people" of her time and to give out a teaching that had been up to
that time most esoteric. At the same time she had to defend herself
and the theosophical movement, for which she was the focus on the
physical plane, against the attacks of those who felt threatened by
her message or by her method of presenting it. Her natal Mars and
Saturn opposing the upper planetary group's gravity center represent an inner strength, courage, and security that enabled her to hold
steadfast in the face of severe antagonism. The Sabian symbol for
this conjunction, three degrees Virgo, refers directly to the psychic
reinforcement she received through her contact with Morya and
Koot Hoomi. It reads: "Two guardian angels" with a keynote of "invisible help and protection in times of crisis."
H. Plutão .B.'s chart contains a septile formation, composing three points of a seven-pointed star, connecting sun, moon, and Neptune.
This configuration links the two bodies that define the lower planetary congregation with one of the two bodies that structure the upper group of planets. The sun-moon septile, discussed a few paragraphs above, is blended here with Neptune, symbolic of psychic
phenomenon as well as transcendental experiences, situated
Blavatsky's natal descendant. Essentially, near this sun-mnon-Ncptune pattern refers to Blavatsky's strong psychic abilities and her alliance
with the occult brotherhood.
Blavatsky was a most gifted and prolific writer; hers is no doubt
the finest attempt at explaining the inexplicable in modem language.
The situation of Mars, Saturn, Mercury, and the part of fortune in
the area of the third house, Virgo, signifies her great potential for
writing along subjects that required great detail, while retaining a
style of enthusiasm. Mercury is also the focus of a "yod" forma- THE ASTROLOGY OF RELATIONSHIP
tion: two quincunxes from Mercury to Uranus and Pluro and a sextile between the latter planets. Here the scribe function (Mercury)
*
is being made the focus of a relationship that combines with both
harmony and tension the Uranian transformative function and rhe
Plutonian function of essentializacion and reformation of values. HENRY S. OLCOTT: A NATAL PERSPECTI\X The man who became H. Plutão . Blavatsky's partner in the foundation
of the Theosophical Society,, Henry Steel Olcott. was born on August 2, 1S3;, at approximately 11:15 A.M. in East Orange, New Jersey.
From an early age, Olcott showed himself to be an achiever. He
was internationally recognized as an authority on agriculture while
still in his early twenties, having developed many new farming techniques and written two widely received books on agriculture. A
few years later he became a successful newspaper reporter. With
the outbreak of the Civil War, Olcott turned his investigative talents to running down dishonest businessmen who were making illegal fortunes in their dealings with the Army. For the great courage and impeccable morality he maintained throughout,
given the rank of Colonel by the
selected with a few others to Union Army. investigate the he was Later he was
assassination of Abraham Lincoln. After his governmental duties were fulfilled he
began practicing law and pursuing his favorite amusement since
yourh—spiritualist investigation—In his spare time.
In 1874 Henry Olcott met li. Plutão . Blavatsky at the homestead of
William and Horatio Eddy in Vermont. The Eddy brothers had
been attracting a good deal of attention by their ability to materialize phenomena, and Olcort was there on a second assignment to
investigate and report his findings for the New York Graphic. His reports, which established the validity of the phenomena to the best
that his elaborate and thorough testing procedure could discover,
were causing a world-wide stir of interest in spiritualism (copies of
the paper were selling out immcdhuclv. some being scalped for a
dollar a copy). These reports attracted Blavatsky ro the scene, and
her presence, evidently, caused even more extreme phenomenal oc- THE PRACTICE OF SYNASTRY 239 currences. Olcott, whom Blavatsky described at the time as being a
"rabid Spiritualist," was intrigued with the mysterious, powerful
woman and the two soon became close friends.
Blavatsky was not herself a spiritualist, but rather an occultist.
The support she gave to the spiritualists during the first few years
of her public life, including many newspaper articles and letters
written jointly by her and Olcott, was meant to encourage the very
few who were beginning to accept outlooks other than the purely
materialistic, although the unwillingness of most spiritualists to consider a philosophical investigation of the nature of the universe to
explain occult phenomena eventually caused a rift between Blavatsky and the spiritualist movement. By that time, however, Olcott had aligned himself with Blavatsky and was ready to leave his
family and his country in order to dedicate himself to the dissemination of the theosophical philosophy. Soon after this critical
decision Olcott, as the president-founder of the Theosophical Society, moved with Blavatsky from New York City to India in 1879,
where he toured, lectured, and managed the affairs of the Society
until his death in 1907.
Olcott coupled his theosophical activities with work directed toward the regeneration of Asiatic religion and culture. He established
schools and colleges in India and Ceylon where Buddhist and Hindu
children would not be indoctrinated into nineteenth-century Christianity and Anglo life styles. He promoted a revival of Sanskrit and
founded a large library of ancient and contemporary manuscripts
dealing with oriental philosophy and religion.
The over-all perspective of Henry Olcott's birth chart reveals a
seesaw pattern very similar to Blavatsky's—except with planets oriented so that they fit into the empty segments of Blavatsky's
chart. This suggests that Olcott's more activated areas of experience
are complementary to H. Plutão .B.'s. The lower western group of planets
in Olcott's chart spans 105 degrees from Neptune near the l.C. to
Mars in the seventh house, Taurus. The upper eastern group is contained within a bi-novile that connects the tenth house sun in Leo to
the Scoipio moon just below the ascendant. The two ends of
Blavatsky's seesaw were clearly confined within separate horizontal
hemispheres; Olcott has one planet of each group just into the other
hemisphere. Of the group centered in the lower western portion of Hcmv S. Olcott's Birth Chart 0 . d).
iy>s iii/'b'
81 0 zSy5 ^ 26 ^)6i^S 5+ V^'i6 2T 38 $^11 3 8 a. -5 8S 1 /- 115 90 130 21+ 137 152 ^f-i55'»3
l ; ^ 3 7 15 ^S7^o 79 3:6 . c?
^o'o' T=»
C
^1t
t'
35S>" icv^7 Jl6e^S'
i'u'v
w 01
* 1^1 3-7 l 74 106
*r 119 l ^ f T* 4S 255 2-6 200 116 2 5S 353 200 221 ■H5 93 134 329 176 10S 121 Júpiter - 2 37 8+ 105 29 ^5 Júpiter - 64 347 207 229 153 22 306 72 355 32S 23S 196 7+ 23S 201 176 86 44 209 106 280 225 19S 10S 66 231 2CO H3 12 2 347 117 Mercúrio Mercúrio -5
303 2S1 THE PRACTICE OF SYNASTRY 241 the chart, only Mars penetrates into the upper half; of the congregation centered in the upper eastern part of the birth chart, only the
moon is situated in the lower hemisphere. The seesaw configuration
in this position denotes a strong sense of contrast between personal
and objective modes of experience, along with the ability to understand and unify both within one's self.
Five of Olcott's natal planets arc situated in fixed zodiacal signs,
signifying a strong, determined character and a capacity for accomplishing goals through long-range plans. The placement of six planets in angular houses denotes powerful drives, initiative, and impulsiveness—it was Olcott who actually came up with the practical
idea of forming a "theosophical society."
A powerful, confrontative T-cross links the harmonious conjunction of Olcott's sun-Venus in the tenth house, Leo, with an inner
revolutionizing Uranus, retrograde, in the fourth house, Aquarius,
and the focal, mobilizing Mars in the seventh house, Taurus. I see
this configuration as a symbol of Olcott's potential for sensitive administrative abilities as well as his serving as an understanding
father-image (sun-Venus in the tenth, Leo) for a large organization
that had its roots in a revolutionary, transformative ideal, an ideal
with the potential to totally change one's concept of self and one's
relation to the universe (Uranus in the fourth house, Aquarius).
The stress and tension that was created in order to fulfill such a
function could be most effectively and constructively released by
Olcott through the channel of his Mars function. Mars, situated as it
is in the seventh house, Taurus, implies a very direct, down-to-earth
quality to Olcott's manner of fulfilling the sun-Uranus opposition.
He never professed to be a teacher but saw himself more as an executive. In their relationship, H. Plutão .B. was the spiritual, metaphysical
teacher and Olcott, the man who could stimulate others and create a
focus for the communication of Blavatsky's message. THE ASTROLOGY OF RELATIONSHIP THE CHART OF THE THEOSOPHICAL SOCIETY
Soon after Blavatsky and Olcott met at the Eddv homestead, they
began corresponding with large numbers of persons and receiving
numerous visitors every evening, attracted bv their many letters and
articles to the press "on behalf of truth in Modem Spiritualism . . .
to unveil what is, and to expose what is not." On September 7, ii-75i
an Egyptologist delivered a lecture to a group of people at H. Plutão .B.'s
apartment in New York. During the discussion that followed his
presentation, Olcott passed a note to H. Plutão .B. bv way of William
Quan Judge, a young lawyer who, along with Olcott, had been
>«
studying occult philosophy intensely under the guidance of H. Plutão .B.,
suggesting rhat an organization be formed "for this kind of study."
'The first meeting in rhe public hall secured for rhe purpose, at
which Olcott delivered his inaugural address, occurred at S Plutão .M.,
November 17, 1R75. The Society was formed to serve the following
objects: (1) The formation of a nucleus of a universal brotherhood of humanity without distinction of race, creed, sex. caste, or color;
(2) The study of ancient and modem religions, philosophies, and
sciences, and the demonstration of the importance of such study; and
(3) The investigation of the unexplained laws of nature and the
psychical powers Intent in man.
There are several possible times for which a chart of the Theosophical Society could be erected; its official birth as an independent,
collective entity, however, has been traditionally considered to be
rhe November 17 inaugural meeting. It is one of the most remarkable charts' of the past century.
The map has a must distinct fourfold pattern—with all ten planets divided into four distinct groups. Every planet, with the exception of Venus at the tenth degree of Sagittarius, is located in a
fixed zodiacal sign (and all four fixed signs are represented)—a most
unusual and significant configuration. In addition, eight of the ten
planets are placed in succedent houses and are very close to the zodiacal midpoints of the quadrnms—areas of release for the dynamic
energy built up in the quadrants.
The fourfold pattern, the fixed and succedent preponderances, 26*22 ^ /O
&
6" t? PV
T> ^r Ht
t -\N
o x \< 16 a V5
5) ^1° ¥ tn 0 vS*
<5
<? •C6.
^ Netuno ^ ^^_2602Z'tl7 Theosophical Society's Birth Chart and the great abundance of squares and oppositions all point to a
most dctinite set of purposes (and cross purposes) and ideals. The
over-all pattern of the chart implies that the Theosophical Society
has a definite mission to fulfill and has a great deal of vital energy
available for doing so, and that it will survive, at least in terms of
form and organizational structure, the almost continual strife and
conflicts that have been perpetrated within it over rhe past hundred
years. Every "major" aspect in the Theosophical Society's chart, with the exception of a loose waning/separating trine between the
sun and moon, is either a conjunction, a square, or an opposition.
There arc, in addium, a few quintile and septile aspects. TlIF. ASTROLOGY OP RELATIONSHIP 244 The sun is in the cwcntv-fifth decree of Scorpio and in the fifth
house, suggesting rhat the integrating principle behind the Society is
one of bringing individuals together as a group (Scorpio) while still
respecting their individuality and personal opinions and convictions
(fifth house). It implies that the group has come together for the
purpose of exploring the deeper implications of group activity, srudyi utf the ancient and heretofore secret teachings of all nges. and
exploring the hidden potentialities of humanity (Scorpio-sun and eighth house .Mercury and Sarurn in the sign Aquarius).
The Theosophical Society was founded just as the moon entered
the powerful and individualistic sign of Leo—it is about fourteen
degrees above the ascendant, in the first house. "The emphasis on the
fifth sign, along with the fifth house placement of the sun, Venus,
Mercury, and Jupiter, reflects the high value the Society has always
placed on the individual's right to think and to express himself or
herself as he or she chooses. The Society has no dogma and considers "rhar belief should be rhe result of individual study, experience, and insight rather than the mere acceptance of traditional ideas, and that it should resr on knowledge, not on assertion."
Ar rhe moment of rhe' Theosophical Society's official birth, i6c8'
Cancer was on rhe eastern horizon (ascendant), a sign of maternal
security and protection afforded to the new born enritv, promoting
growth. In An Astrological Mandala. Dane Rudhyar gives the Sabian symbol for this degree as. "The ini\oUhm'mof multilevel potentialities issuing front au original gertn." And, indeed, rhe 'Theosophical Society was rhe "original genu" from which every
subsequent esoteric "or occult organization has evolved during the
past century, many of them being direct split-o(fs organized by
one-rime members and leaders of rhe Theosophical Society.
"The chart of the Theosophical Society is relevant both as a horary chart m Blavatsky's and Olcott's development (its founding
being the external culmination of a line of activity on their part)
;:iul as a map of their "offspring": a Jistincr. vet collective entity of
their making. There are several interesting connections between the
chart of the organization and those of its two most prominent founders. Blavatsky's natal sun is very near the T.S.'s Uranus and
linked by a tight opposition to its .Mars and Saturn, which are, in THE PRACTICE OF SYNASTRY
turn, conjunct her natal Jupiter. Olcott's 245 Uranus at seventeen Aquarius and his sun and Venus situated in mid-Leo are also linked
with this configuration. Olcott, Blavatsky, and the Theosophical Society seem to have been tapping the same extremely dynamic source
of zodiacal energy that is at its apex at the middle of the fixed signs
and the focal, succedent houses. These four fixed points have been
regarded as channels of the descent of cosmic energy as well. Concerning the significance of these points, Rudhyar writes in Tl}e Astrology of Personality: It is evident that the points of maximum release of energy arc
to be found midway between equinoxes and solstices [and the
angles]. These points arc thus on the following degrees of the
circle; 45-135-225-315; or in terms of the usual zodiacal nomenclature; Taurus 15; Leo 15; Scorpio 15; Aquarius 15. These points are not unknown to some occultists. They correspond
to what has been called; the Four Gates of Avataric Descent.
As an "Avatar" in ancient terminology is in fact a release of
cosmic power, the meaning of the phrase is quite evident. These
Four Gates arc symbolized by the four symbolic creatures; the
Bull—the Lion—the Eagle—the Angel. Each of them depicts a
particular type of dynamic release, a particular type or Ray of
Power—and of power-releasing "initiation." I pp. 2 39-240] The first major event in the history of the Theosophical Society
after its creation in
cumstances .875 was the writing, under extraordinary cir- (sec Volume One of Olcott's Old Diary Leaves for more details), of I sis Unveiled: A Master-Key to the Mysteries of
Ancient and Modern Science and Religion (in two volumes) by H. Plutão . Blavatsky and its publication during the months of September
and October of 1877.1 sis Uitveiled was an immediate success; The
first printing of a thousand copies was completely exhausted within
ten days of publication, and the books aroused much interest in theosophy and H. Plutão .B., attracting many persons to the movement. These' events were taking place just as the 'Theosophical Society's
progressed sun and moon were approaching their third-quarter phase—the waning square that symbolizes release of a catalyst for THE ASTROLOGY OF RELATIONSHIP 24^ the transformation of consciousness to"3 new level, transcending cstahlishcd structures and con lines imposed in the past. The transformation may or may not have actually taken place around November i^, 1S77 (the exact date of the progressed third-quarter moon)
within the collectivity of persons known as the Theosophical Society, bur ir is clear that H. Plutão . Blavatsky and the" Theosophical Society were jusr beginning ro effectually fulfill rhis function (as a catalyst for transforming consciousness) for Western culture.
I l. Plutão .IJ. and Olcott had planned ro move the center of rhe theosophical operation to India for some time before they actually
sailed to India via England on December :S. 1 .S'78 (wirh Transiting
Mars exactly conjunct the T.S.'s natal sun, and Transiting Saturn opposite Olcott's Saturn). Having received instructions from Morya and Koot Hoomi, thev left William Judge in charge of holding
•
■things together in New York. On December 17. 1882, after a few
years in Bombay and tourina Asia, thev found n permanent base at
Adyar, just outside of Madras in the south of India, where the international headquarters of the Theosophical Society has remained since.
In i^Sj: Blavatsky left India for Germany and Inter England where she undertook the writing of her magnum opus. The Secret
Doctrine, in two volumes, Cos wo genesis and Anthropogenesis, broadly outlining a coherent picture of cosmic and human evolution. The Secret Doctrine was published during December 1888 when Transiting Saturn was conjunct both her natal sun and rhe
T.S.'s natal Uranus, and when rhe T.S.'s progressed sun was exactly
conjunct irs natal Venus. T he work is now almost universally recognized as the foundation of occult and ancient knowledge in the modern world.
After long and serious illnesses H. Plutão .B. left the physical plane of
existence on May 8. 1891. in London, England (while transiting sun
was square her naral sun and Venus conjunct her Pluto; wirh the
T.S.'s progressed moon exactly semi-square its natal M.C). There
was a conjunction of Neptune and Pluto at this rime, a conjunction
that occurs once every five hundred years. H. Plutão .B., it has been said,
can be regarded as a seed of the previous five-hundred-vcar cycle,
which began at the end of the fourteenth century with the close of THE PRACTICE OF SYNASTRY 247 the Medieval Order in Europe and the beginnings of the Humanist
Movement and the Renaissance.
After H. Plutão .B.'s passing, the theosophical movement went through
a confused state (from which it has not yet totally emerged), and
eventually many differences of opinion surfaced that led to splits
of all sorts over the years—some of which were initiated by W. Sol .
Judge, Alice Bailey, Rudolph Stciner, Jcddu Krishnamurti, and Max
Heindel. The Theosophical Society, however, has survived and prospered in spite of constant conflicts and difficulties, and if wc arc
to believe what H. Plutão . Blavatsky said almost a hundred years ago, the
next few years may be an important time for both the Theosophical
Society and the world at large. THE ZODIACAL CONTACT CHART
The state of humanity in 1875 was characterized by scientific rationalism and materialism (the emphasis on material needs and concurrent de-emphasis of spiritual values), the supremacy of Western
nations on the international scene, and religious intolerance. It was a
time when there was almost no doubt that Western civilization and
technology were the spearhead of human achievement and would
elevate the entire world from its misery, poverty, and ignorance.
The white male person recognized himself as the highest creature
on the evolutionary scale. He thus believed it was up to him to "enlighten" the savages of uncivilized lands by introducing Western
life styles and religion to all comers of the globe. As recompense
for his efforts in this direction, he claimed the right to exploit material resources and native labor as a means of fulfilling his everincreasing thirst for power, materials goods, and absolute supremacy
in the physical realm of existence.
Perhaps at the pinnacle of "success" in the material world, Victorian man was on the verge of spiritual bankruptcy. The notion
of brotherhood, particularly with people of other races and creeds
and, of course, women, was largely thought to be an impractical,
natve dream—and a most unprofitable course. The thought that
there might be any superphysical order or purpose behind the materialistic evolution advanced by Charles Darwin was considered both THE ASTKOI (XIY OF RELATIONSHIP
"unscientific" and ridiculous by the intellectual communin*—nnd. in
turn, religious leaders held that any theory of evolution, physical or
spiritual, was heresy. The idea of there being realms of existence beyond normal human sensory perception (as Blavatsky demon- strated) was considered to be cither superstitious or the work of the
devil, depending upon whether one's persuasion was scientific or religious.
Only a few persons of the late nineteenth century were able to
anticipate the repercussions and deeper implications of the strictly
materialistic view of life. Indeed, manv people today are just beginning to awaken to a world beyond materialism—and there remain
those who pmmotc industry and business at the expense of the ecological balance of the planet and the welfare of humanity. Two of
the few who felt it imperative to awaken Western civilization to a
purpose beyond the material were H. Plutão . Blavatsky and H. S. Olcott.
Most of both Blavatsky's and Olcott's planets in their zodiacal
contact chart are distributed around the same areas of zodiacal space. Blavatsky has six planets between mid-Leo and mid-Libra,
while Olcott has five planets within the span of mid-Leo to carlv
Scorpio; Blavatsky's remaining planets are situated between late
Capricorn and mid-Aries, while the remaining five planets of 01cott's chart arc located berween late Capricorn and mid-Taurus.
This arrangement indicate;; that the two were tapping similar energy sources and were able to identify with one another's way of
using these respective energies. The fact that Blavatsky's and Olcott's suns arc only a few degrees apart in mid-Leo suggests that
rhev held in common a central source of vital energy that molded
their inner sense of strength, courage, pride, and strong drives toward self-expression. Their Leo suns also point ro abilities fur leadership as well as love of theatrical, personal displays.
There is a sextile aspect between Blavatsky's moon in the tenth
degree of Libra and Olcort's sun in the eleventh degree of Leo signifying an extremely productive and harmonious association, in spite of qccasional differences of opinion thar are bound ro arise between two such individualistic Leo types. The basic purpose upon which their entire relationship was founded was that of fulfilling a 250 THE ASTROLOGY OF RELATIONSHIP planetary need—the introduction af occult knowledge to the Western world.
Blavatsky's function as teacher and author needed to be complemented and promoted by someone who, while being sensitive and
totally dedicated to the purpose of Morva and Koot Hoomi. possessed exceptional executive and organizational abilities. The sextile
between Blavatsky's moon and Olcott's sun is a perfect symbol for
this type of complementary association. In one of the phenomenally
produced cc>mmimicati«nsa from Morva and Koot Hoomi to A. Plutão .
Sinnctt, at that time the editor of one of India's largest newspapers,
Morva wrote, in iSS:. that in their efforts to initiate a new cycle of
•ccult research in the West they
found in America the man [H. S. Olcott] to stand as leader—a
man of great moral courage, unselfish, and having other good
qualities. He was far from being the best, but (as Mr. Hume
speaks in H. Plutão .B.'s case)—he was the best one available. With
him we associated a woman of most exceptional endowments.
Combined with them she had strong personal defects, but just
as she was, there was no second ro her living fit for this work.
Wc sent her ro America, broughr rhem rogerher—and the trial
began. From the first both she and he were given to clearlv
understand that the issue lav entirely with themselves. And both
offered themselves for a trial for certain remuneration fof a spiritual type! in the far distant future. [The Mahatma Letters
to A. Plutão . Sumctt, p. 259I
Whereas Olcort was chiefly responsible for external marrcrs, Blavatsky was more attuned with the inner, occult, and metaphysical
implications of rheir association. It was Blavatsky who. in the early
years of their relationship, gradually inrroduced Olcort to the pur- pose and significance of rheir working together.
In a letter to Olcott from Koot Hoomi the distinctions between
the functions of Blavatsky and Olcott are stressed:
H. Plutão .B. has next to no concern with administrative details, and
should be kept clear of them, so far as her strong nature can be
controlled. But rhis vou must tell all: With occult matters she Blavatsky-Olcoct Zodiacal Contact Chart 'Jy >^(5' ^Hr :^55' JO^O- O'jov 552 301 551 308 338 I7f 338 179 198 120 S1"-6' 75 22 5- 29 59 2 5f 59 239 279 201 18 517 357 55+ Júpiter . 199 3 204 224. 146 ? 'i'S0" 35+ 3°+ 333 310 340 176 540 181 200 122 (J^o-o- 262 211 241 218 248 83 247 88 108 30 3435» Netuno 220 170 199 176 206 42 206 47 66 348 1?l6J* Netuno 26 335 5 3+1 " 207 11 212 231 154. tyy6'#' 179 128 158 >35 1% 360 t6+ 5 24 307 ^295-12' 457 107 156 113 143 339 143 344 3 2S5 233 183 212 189 219 55 219 60 79 1 THE PRACTICE OF SYNASTRY
has everything to do .. . She is our direct agent. [Letters from
the Masters of Wisdom, p. 53iJ
Blavatsky's sun is connected with Olcott's moon by a waxing/
separating quintile aspect, adding a creative quality to their association. Blavatsk Netuno 's Uranus forms a close opposition to Olcott's sun and
Venus, suggesting that their contact encouraged a transformation
of his essential self-image and inner values.
One more point of interest in the zodiacal contact chart are the
numerous septilcs linking Blavatsky's and Olcott's planets. Septiles
link Blavatsky's Mercury to Olcott's moon, her Venus to his sun,
and her Pluto to his Neptune. Tri-septiles connect Blavatsky's Mars
and Olcott's Jupiter, her Saturn and his Jupiter, and her Uranus to
his Mercury. This proliferation of septiles is probably a symbol for
the unusual, eccentric, and transcendental qualities that permeated
many areas of their association and the global, planetary significance
of their work together. HOUSE CONTACT AND HOUSE TRANSPOSITION
CHARTS
Because of the uncertainty of both Blavatsky's and Olcott's birth
times, an interpretation of their house contact and house transposition charts is a highly speculative task. These charts are illustrated
here, however, as a head start for those who would like to explore
more deeply in spite of these possible limitations. BLivacskv's Mouses—Olcocc's Planets Olcotc's Houses—Blavatksy's Planets Blavatsky-Olcott House Contact Chart 0
0
^•3° 101136 7111 • ?
97112. £
61131 "5 Lua 2191^0 61131 21341 0 zSys 2^2 1S1 20 186 222 64 222 5)6^8 526 2^5 296 270 506 148 393 260 20S 239 213 249 91 248 1S3 2 V5 18S 22^- 66 224- W 95 115 9S 336 lli 51- 55 56 92 277 216 247 221 69 8 59 ^6 545 17 126 & 96 $195^ Mercúrio ^ST,30 &
2A3'34
98 360 181 84. oS
✓ 125 27 75 100 2 l 5h 545 10 272 294- 92 501 32S 230 257 99 256 106 135 35 49 230 2 285 187 351 26 223 2 35 262 164. 7° 106 315 542 244 71 57 26
106 THE PRACTICE OF SYNASTRY 255 THE COMPOSITE CHART
Like the natal charts it is derived from, the Blavatsky-Olcott
composite chart has a seesaw planetary pattern, with eight planets in
the western hemisphere of relationship with others, and only the
moon and Saturn in the eastern half. If the angles of the birth charts
are reasonably accurate, the late degrees of Scorpio-Taurus arc on
the meridian with a composite ascendant in the seventh degree of
Virgo. The local composite ascendant computed for Madras, India,
the focal center of their physical energies from 1880 onward, is twenty-five Leo. These angles denote the strong, steadfast nature of
their relationship. The composite sun and Uranus are conjunct,
with an orb of only two minutes of an arc in the fifteenth degree of
Aquarius, in the sixth house of personal reorientation and service.
They are trine to the second house moon, providing them with a vision of how to present their revolutionary message in a practical
and comprehensive fashion. That there were deep karmic implications of their work in serving the needs of a new age (sun-Uranus
in the sixth house, Aquarius) is suggested by the tri-scptlle linking
the sun-Uranus pair to the first house, Saturn.
The fifteenth degree of Aquarius is a particularly intense part of
the zodiac, a point of release for cosmic energy flowing toward the
manifestation of new forms of individual and collective interrelationships. The composite sun in this degree symbolizes the centering
and integrating function of the Blavatsky-Olcott relationship, vitalized by such energies. The close conjunction the sun makes with
Uranus, significator for the sign Aquarius, greatly intensifies this situation. The Sabian symbol for the fifteenth degree Aquarius is of
interest here: "Two lovebirds sitting on a fence and singing happily"; Rudhyar's keynote: "The blessing bestowed upon personal achievements by the spiritually fulfilled consciousness of the Soul."
Another striking feature of the Blavatsky-Olcott composite chart
is the conjunction of Venus, Mercury, and Jupiter in the seventh
house of social contacts in the eighth degree of Pisces. This concentration contributes varied and complex functions (those of inner
evaluation, communication, and preservation to the relationship Blavarskv-Olcott Composite Chart q
3)
jifV W"'
246 0T^V.l2
5)55ti3 246 Mercúrio 2 Júpiter 22 3 222 ^155::+ ITi' Netuno )' 1~V'3 Hi*1' 294* Mercúrio "'0' 3 39 337 137 360 21 304 22^
w 284. 223 42 246 267 190 1 62 360 180 2 Júpiter 44 327 62 360 .1S0 2 Júpiter 44 327 299 119 322 343 266 180 2 Júpiter 44 527 204- 225 148 21 304 ? l53!3 25 223 1 ^131:50 521 2*; 62 61 337 222 360 360 2q8
■/ f iy-5T 137 •r~ 1S0 180 18 180 ^(i70:45 ■s^O 243 2 2 3 321 23 204. ^ 14?!35 21 266 44 44 342 44 225 ^ 226: Mercúrio rO 2 305 190 3^ 3^7 266 328 148 3 21 284.
2S4. THE PRACTICE OF STNASTRY 257 existing between the Blavatsky-Olcott pair. The close opposition
between these three planets and composite Saturn in the first house
suggests that they were able to bring into clear focus their combined energies (Saturn in the first house) for the purpose of stimulating the spiritual growth of others (Venus, Mercury, and Jupiter
in the seventh house, Pisces).
The Sabian symbol for the eighth degree of Pisces beautifully
describes the primary function of the Blavatsky-Olcott union in
terms of their relationship with others; "A girl blowing <7 bugle.'1 Rudhyar's keynote interprets this as "a call to participation in the
service of the race, as an evolutionary crisis approaches." NOTES
1. See The Interpretation of Nature and the Psyche by C. G. Jung. 2. Much of the literature concerning the life and work of IT. Plutão . Blavatsky is inaccurate, some of it actually hostile. Biographers differ greatly
in their characterizations of her, while many of her followers arrempt
to conventionalize and whitewash her. The most reasonable accounts include When Daylight Cuvtes by Howard Murphct (Theosophical Publishing House, xyi5)\ Personal Memoirs of PI. Plutão . [Ibv.usky compiled by
Mary K. Neff (original edition, 1937; currenr edition; Theosophical
Publishing House, 1967); H. S. Olcott's Old Dian' Leaves Vols. 1 and
I] (Madras, India; Theosophical Publishing House, 1N95 and n;ou; 1941
and 1954); and H. Plutão . Blavatsky and the Theosophical Movement by
Charles J. Ryan (original edition, 1932; current edition, San Diego; Point
Loma Publications, 1975).
3. A thorough exposition of the significance and extraordinary production of the series of communications ro A. Plutão . Sinnctt and orhcrs known
as "The Maharma Letters" can be found in The Mahatmas and Their
Letters, Geoffrey A. Barborka (Madras, India; Theosophical Publishing
House, 1973). Complere transcriptions of the 145 Icrrers ro A. Plutão . Sinnctt
arc ro be found in The Mahanua Letters to A. Plutão . Sinnctt, compiled by
A. T. Barker (Madras, India; Theosophical Publishing House, 1923,
1962). BIBLIOGRAPHY I. ASTROLOGY Jones, Marc Edmund. "Arabian Astrology," a study course (Stanwood,
Wash.: Sabian Publishing Society, J932-33).
. Essentials of Astrological Analysis (New York: Sabian Publishing
Society, i960).
. The Guide to Horoscope Interpretation (Stanwood, Wash.:
bian Publishing Society, 1941, 1969). Sa- "Pythagorean Astrology," a study course (Stanwood, Wash.: Sabian Publishing Society, 1919).
. The Sabian Symbols in Astrology (Stanwood, Wash.: Sabian Publishing Society, 1953, 1969),
"Symbolical Astrology," a study course (Stanwood, Wash.: Sabian Publishing Society, 1931).
Rudhyar, Dane. The Astrological Houses: The Spectrum of Individual
Experience (Garden City: Douhlcday & Company, Inc., 1972).
. An Astrological Mandala: The Cycle of Tratisfortnations and its
360 Symbolical Phases (New York: Random House, 1973).
. An Astrological Study of Psychological Complexes and Emotional
Problems (The Netherlands: Servirc, 1969),
. Astrological Timing (New York: Harper & Row, 1972).
. The Astrology of Persoiuditv ("New York: Lucis Press,
Garden City: Doubleday & Gmipany, Inc., 1970). 1936; 26o BIBOOGRAFHY
. The Lunation Cycle (The Netherlands: Scrvire. 1967; Berkeley;
Shambhala, 1971).
. My Stand on Astrology (Palo Alto, Calif.: The Seed Center, 1972).
. Person-Centered Astrology (Lakemont, Ga.: CSA Press. 1973).
. The Practice of Astrology (The Netherlands: Servire, 1968; Baltimore: Penguin, 1970).
. The Pulse of Life (New York: David Mackny, 1943; The Netherlands: Servire, 1963; Berkeley: Shambhala, 1970).
. Triptych (The Netherlands: Servire, 196S).
. various articles in Horoscope and American Astrology, 1934 to date. Gêmeos . PSYCHOLOGY Arthur, Gavin. The Circle of Sex (New Hyde Park, N. Áries '.: University
Books, 1966).
Assagioli, Roberto.
1965). Psychosynthesis (New York: The Viking Press, Frank!, Viktor E. Man's Search for Meaning: An Introdnctionto Logotherapy (Boston: Beacon Press, 1959; New York: Pucket Books,
1963).
Jacobi, Jokmdc. The Psychology of C. G. Jung (New York:
it Row, 1971),
JatTe. Anieln. from the Life and
Harper & Row, 1971).
Jung. C. G.
1970). Analytical Work of C. G. Jung Psychology (New York: Harper (New York: Random House, , ed. Man and His Sywhols (Garden City: Doubleday & Company,
Inc., 1964).
. Memories, Dreams,
1961). Reflections (New York: Random House, BIBLIOGRAPHY 161 . "Synchronicity: An Acausal Principle." In The Interpretation of
Nature and the Psyche, Bollingen Series (New York: Pantheon
Books, I95S).
Maslow, A. H. The Farther Reaches of Hwnan Nature (New York: The Viking Press, 1971).
. Religions, Values, and Peak-Experiences (New York: The Viking
Press, 1970),
Rogers, Carl R. On Becoming a Person (Boston:
1961). Houghton Miiflin, de Ropp, Robert S. Sex Energy (New York: Dcii Publishing Company,
197')•
Singer, June. The Boundaries of the Soul (Garden City: Doubleday &
Company, Inc., 1973).
Whitmont, Edward C The Symbolic Quest (New York: G. Plutão . Putnam,
1969; Harper & Row, 1973). III. OCCULT PHILOSOPHY Bailey, Alice A. Initiation, Human and Solar (New York: Lucis Publishing Company, 1944).
Barborka, Geoffrey A. The Mahatmas and Their Letters (Madras, India:
Theosophical Publishing House, 1973).
Barker, A. T. compiler, The Mahatma Letters to A. Plutão . Siwiett (Madras,
India: Theosophical Publishing House, 1923, 1962).
Bcrcholz, Hazel Silher, ed. Maitreya 5 (Berkeley, Calif.: Shambhala Publications, 1974).
Blavatsky, H. Plutão . his Unveiled (Pasadena, Calif.: Theosophical University Press, 1^77, i960).
. The Key to Theosophy (Pasadena, Calif.: Theosophical University Press, 1H89, 1972).
. The Secret Doctrine, 2 vols. (Pasadena, Calif.: Theosophical University Press, 1888, 1963). 2<}2 BIBLIOGRAPHY
K
•*
Bragdon, Claude. A Prwwr of Higher Space (The Fourth Dimension)
(Tucson: Omen Press. 1972).
Hall, Manly Plutão . The Secret Teachings of All Ages (Los Angeles: The
Philosophical Research Society, jqzS, 1971).
Hanson, Virginia, ed. H. 1*. Blavatsky avf the Secret
(Whcaron, III.: Theosophical Publishing House, 1971)* Doctrine Harrmann, Franz. Paracelsus (New York: John W. Lovell. I8I?I.
Kaltcnmark, Max. Lao Tzu and Taoism
University Press, itfx))- (Palo Alto, Calif.: ).
Sranford Krishna, Gopi. The Anakcnivgof Ku/hLilini (New York: E. Plutão . Dutton,
■975)*
Lead bearer, C XV. Man, Visible and Invisible (Madras, India: Theosophical Publishing House, 1902, 1964).
. The Chakras (Madras, India: Theosophical Publishing House, 1927, 19AS).
Michcll, John. City of Revelation (London: Gamsrone Press, 1972).
. View Over Atlantis (London: Sago Press, 1969).
Pluuuncr, L. Gordon. The M.vhcvt.tucs of the Cosmic Mind (Wheaton,
lil.: Theosophical Publishing House, 1970).
Rudhyar, Dane, Directives for New Life
Publications, 1971 ). (Railroad Flat, Calif.: Seed . Occttlt Preparations for a AYu* Age (Wheaton, 111.: Theosophical
Publishing House. 1975).
. The Planetarization of Consciousness (New York: Harper & Row,
197:),
The Secret of the Golden Flower, translated and explained by Richard
Wilhclm (New York: Harcourr. Brace & World, 1931, 1962).
Smuts. Jan Christiaan. Holism and Evolution (New York: Macmillan, 1926; New York: The Viking Press, 1961).
Stcincr, Rudolf. An Outline of Occult Science (Spring Valley, N. Áries .:
Anthroposophic Press. 1972).
. Cosmic Memory (Blauvelr. N. Áries .: Steiner Books, 1959. I970' BIBLIOGRAPHY 263 Taylor, Thomas. The Theoretic Arithmetic of the Pythagoreans Áries »rk: Samuel VVeiscr, 1816, 1972).
Walcy, Arthur. The Way and Its Power (New York: (New Grove Press, s '95 )Welch, Holmes. Taoism:
Press, 1957, 1965). IV. The Parting of the Way (Boston: Beacon BIOGRAPHICAL Eck, Sven. Damodar and the Pioneers of the Theosophical Movement
(Madras, India: Theosophical Publishing House, 1965).
Encyclopaedia Britavwca (Chicago: Encyclopaedia Britannica, Inc., '973)Endcrshy, Victor A. The Hall of Magic Mirrors: A Portrait of Madame
Blavatsky (New York: Carlton Press, 1969).
Jung, C. G. Memories, Dreams, Reflections (New York: Vintage Books,
1961, 1963).
Murpher, Howard.
trovna Blavatsky When Daylight Co?nes: A Biography of Helena Pe(Wheaton, 111.: Theosophical Publishing House, '975). Hammer on the Mountain: The Life of Henry Steel Olcott
(/S5i-/po7) (Wheaton, 111.: Theosophical Publishing House, 1972).
Neff, Mary K. compiler. Personal Memoirs of H. Plutão . Blavatsky
(Wheaton, 111.: Theosophical Publishing House, 1937, 1967). Olcorx, H. S. Old Diary Leaves, Vol. l-lli (Madras, India: Theosophical
Publishing House, 1895, 1972).
Ryan, Charles. H. Plutão . Blavatsky and the Theosophical Movement (San
Diego: Point Loma Publications, 1975).
Wehr, Gerhard.
1971). Portrait of Jung (New York: Herder and Herder, Win war, Frances. George Sand and Her Times (New York: Lane ca r
Books, 1945, "972).