Key Words for
ASTROLOGY
Hajo Banzhaf & Anna Haebler First published in 1996 by
Red Wheel/Weiser, LLC
York Beach, ME
With offices at:
368 Congress Street
Boston, MA 02210
www.redwheelweiser.com
Translation copyright © 1996 Samuel Weiser, Inc.
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced or transmitted in any
form or by any means, electronic or mechanical, including photocopying, recording, or by
any information storage and retrieval system, without permission in writing from Red
Wheel/Weiser. Reviewers may quote brief passages. First published in German as
Schlüsselworts zur Astrologie by Hajo Banzhaf and Anna Haebler (Kailash/Heinrich
Hugenduble Verlag: Munich 1994). Copyright © 1994 Hajo Banzhaf and Anna Haebler.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Banzhaf, Hajo.
[Schlüsselwortc zur astrologie. English]
Key words for astrology / Hajo Banzhaf, Anna Haebler
p. cm.
Includes bibliographical references
ISBN 0-87728-875-5 (pbk. : alk paper)
1, Astrology. 2. Astrology—Terminology. I. Haebler, Anna. Gêmeos . Title.
BF1708.1 .B3613 1996
133.5—dc20
96-26482
CIP
TCP
Translated by Christine M-Grimm.
Cover art is the title page from
The Astrologer of the Nineteenth Century,
London, 1825.
Typeset in 10 pt Garamond
Printed in Canada
13 12 11 10 09 08 07 06 05
10 Mercúrio 8 7 6 5 Júpiter 3 Contents
Note to the Reader
Introduction
Organization and Levels of Meaning in the Horoscope
How to Use This Book The Luminaries, the Planets, and the Moon's Node
Sun
Moon
Mercury
Venus
Mars
Jupiter
Saturn
Uranus
Neptune
Pluto
Moon's Nodes The Twelve Signs of the Zodiac, or the Sun in the Signs
Aries
Taurus
Gemini
Cancer
Leo
Virgo
Libra
Scorpio
Sagittarius
Capricorn
Aquarius Pisces The Moon and the Planets in the Signs
Moon
Mercury
Venus
Mars
Jupiter
Saturn
Uranus
Neptune
Pluto The Cardinal Axis
The Rising Sign or Ascendant (AC)
The Lowest Heavens or the Imum Coeli (IC)
The Descending Sign or the Descendant (DC)
The Midheaven or the Medium Coeli (MC) The Sun, Moon, and Planets in the Houses
The Energy of the Houses
1st House
2nd House
3rd House
4th House
5th House
6th House
7th House
8th House
9th House
10th House 11th House
12th House The Aspects
Key Words for Aspect Combinations
Sun
Moon
49Mercury
Venus
Mars
Jupiter
Saturn
Uranus
Neptune
Pluto An Illustrated Key to the Horoscope
The Astrological Picture of the World
Glossary of Astrological Terms
Notes
Bibliography
About the Authors Note to the Reader
In compiling the key words, the description of the planets and signs relates
to the gender of the signs (Virgo = feminine, Libra = masculine, for
example) and planets (Venus = feminine, Mars = masculine). The reader
should understand that both sexes are included when the word “king” is
used to describe the qualities of a Leo, for example.
Some words—like “Taurus, the Bull”—cannot be translated into a female
equivalent without becoming rather absurd (“the Bulless” or “the Cow”?),
Here we must find comfort in astrology, which describes Taurus (along with
Cancer) as the most archetypally feminine of all the signs, despite its
masculine name. We ask the readers to equally apply all the astrological key
words to themselves, despite any inherent gender implicacions. Introduction
This book explains all the essential configurations in a horoscope by
showing both aspects of its expression—the light and the dark—with vivid
key words and concise descriptions.
Readers should avoid the popular error of getting lost in the details and
even mistaking a part for the whole: a horoscope consists of an abundance
of individual factors which only allow the entire picture to emerge when all
the factors are seen in relationship to each other. Correspondingly, if you
look up something relating to your horoscope and shake your head in
disbelief after reading the description, you should not be too quick to leave
it at that. Because of a multitude of reasons, an astrological configuration
can be lived in such a concealed manner that the person concerned is quite
certain it has nothing to do with him or her. It is certainly easier to admit to
the aspects of our personality which flatter the ego or correspond to the
spirit of the times. As a result, people had difficulty accepting themselves as
mystics during the 50s because the term “mystic” had almost the same
meaning as “crackpot” at that time. In contrast, today it is considered an
esoteric compliment when a person's mediumistic capabilities are
confirmed during astrological consultations.
In a very general sense, it can be said that configurations strongly
affected by Saturn or Pluto are permitted access to the conscious mind only
with reluctance. Furthermore, in our society we may observe that men
prefer to project their feminine planets (Moon and Venus) onto women, and
women in response prefer to delegate their masculine planets (Sun and
Mars) to men: the more difficult the position of these planets, the greater the
tendency toward this type of projection. Even without looking at the
horoscope, this kind of projection can be recognized when a man
accomplishes overkill with the statement that “all women are…,” or when a
woman generalizes about “men.”
As Johannes Kepler very clearly states, the horoscope shows your
potential and not your predestination. The situation of astrology is similar to
the way researchers can use modern chaos research to perceive the formulas
concealed behind a multitude of manifestations (such as weather clouds)
without being able to predict in which form this formula will manifest itself.
The horoscope is a formula which is the basis for the life of a human being.
Yet, what you make of it, how far you let yourself drift along, or to which heights of development you rise, all lie in a realm beyond the possibility of
interpretation.
These key words should then be understood as a description of one
portion of the whole. Many opportunities for development are concealed in
every aspect in the chart. However, how, and to what degree, they are
manifested, and what level they attain always depends upon the
personality's degree of maturity—and precisely this factor is not revealed in
the horoscope. This is why we have also consciously dispensed with stating
the commonly made differentiation between good and bad, easy and
difficult, harmonious and tension-laden, auspicious and misfortune-bringing
configurations. Such definitions are foolish. We have seen horoscopes that
were full of so-called harmonious aspects, yet the people affected were
caught up in deep crises in life. Life simply ran on without meaning.
Nothing had challenged them and/or even forced them to make something
of their lives. Everything was simply easy and superficial, and after a
certain point in time it became unbearable.
On the other hand, it is widely known that the horoscopes of great
personalities are charged with tensions. For this reason, we have described
all the horoscope factors in their polar tensions as strengths and problem
areas—or—for the aspects—as harmony and discord. We have followed the
development from the obstruction to the solution solely in the case of
Saturn, the Lord of Time (Cronos). It may certainly be true that a difficult
astrological configuration, such as a planet positioned in “detriment” or in
“fall,” or irritated or impaired by difficult aspects (such as a square or an
opposition) initially attracts attention from its critical side. Yet, there is not
only the possibility of transformation, but also the responsibility to
transform, in each of these configurations. From the astrological
perspective, the horoscope describes the starting situation in which we
begin our life on Earth. Now our task is polishing ourselves against our
various tensions until we succeed in uniting all the original discord into a
great harmonious symphony.
Malicious tongues will grumble that this book is a “cookbook” in which
astrology has now once and for all been prepared and served like a
collection of recipes. These people will have fundamentally misunderstood
our intentions. When we describe every detail and give it a pronounced
name, the purpose is to make learning and remembering astrological
terminology easier and to stimulate thought about the configurations which are infrequently discussed elsewhere, such as the light and shadow sides of
the slowly moving planets in the water houses. Above all, however, this
book's concentrated form is designed to save the readers from all the
superfluous words through which they often must sift to find important
concepts, and the tabular form should enable readers to quickly make
comparisons, since comparable statements for all the related configurations
are always written under the same heading. Anna Haebler & Hajo Banzhaf Organization and Levels of Meaning in the
Horoscope
The interplay of three different levels of effect are expressed in a horoscope.
There are planets in signs, planets in houses, and aspects between planets. A
general overview of what that means follows.
1. THE PLANETS IN THE SIGNS OF THF. ZODIAC (THE DAILY CONFIGURATION)
This interplay involves the distribution of all ten bodies (eight planets and
two luminaries) throughout the entire heavens, no matter whether the
“planets” are found below or above the horizon. (Readers should note that
the Sun and Moon are not planets, but in order to avoid clumsy language we
call them “planets.”) You are born under a “sign,” and this is where the Sun
is located in the heavens at the time of your birth. The zodiac corresponds
to the orbit of the Sun, and every year the Sun stands in the same place at
the same time, so the position of the Sun (= sign) can be read from the date
of birth. The Sun moves through all twelve signs. It does not move into the
next sign precisely at midnight. Deviations of up to one day can occur,
particularly because of the leap year cycle. The exact position of the Sun on
the day when the signs change must—this applies to all the other planets as
well—be read in tables, which we call an ephemeris. Figure 1. The planets move in different signs based on the date of birth. 2. THE PLANETS IN THE HOUSES
The decisive factor here is the daily “rotation of the heavens around the
Earth” (which means the rotation of the Earth on its own axis). The
horizontal axis divides the circle into the visible heavens and the invisible
heavens beneath the horizon. This results in the Ascendant (AC), which is
the point of sunrise on the eastern horizon, and the Descendant (DC) on the
opposite side (figure 2a). This axis from the meridional point (MC =
Medium Coeli) to the midnight point (IC = Imum Coeli) divides the circle
into rising and descending signs. The four quarter sections (figure 2b)
created in this manner are then divided again into thirds, whereby a “spoked
wheel” with 12 fields (figure 2c) is created. These fields are also called
“houses.” Figure 2. Dividing the horoscope. 3. THE ASPECTS
These are the significant distances of the planets from each other. The
aspects can be best illustrated using the example of the Moon, which forms all possible aspects with the Sun during the course of a month.
The so-called harmonious and disharmonious aspects are created (as in
music) by dividing the circle with the cardinal numbers, whereby
harmonious and disharmonious aspects (tones) result:
360° ÷ 1 = 360 = Conjunction = 360° ÷ 2= 180 = Opposition = 360° ÷ 3 = 120 = Trine = 360° ÷ Júpiter = 90 = Square = 360° ÷ 5 = 72 = Quintile = 360° ÷ 6 = 60 = Sextile = Planets located directly next to
each other.
Planets located opposite each
other.
Distance
between
planets
corresponds to one side of a
triangle.
Distance
between
planets
corresponds to one side of a
square.
Distance
between
planets
corresponds to one side of a
pentagon.
Distance
between
planets
corresponds to one side of a
hexagon. Figure 3. Aspects in the chart. Júpiter . ILLUSTRATION OF THE LEVELS OF MEANING IN A HOROSCOPE The horoscope portrays the play of life as a comedy or a tragedy, and the
planets are the actors in the play. The signs of the zodiac in which they
stand illustrate the role. The house in which they are located shows the
place on the stage of life where they want to become particularly active, and
the aspects describe the way and manner in which the actors interact with
each other: they support, impede, or block each other, or they may even be
indifferent to each other.
As you can see, a purely harmonious horoscope would be among the
most boring of plays. It also illustrates that harmonies and tensions can be
expressed not only through aspects, but also through the appropriate or
inappropriate roles of the actors and the places where they stand. How to Use This Book
If you are unaccustomed to reading the horoscope, you need to learn the
basic symbols and signs. You will also need to learn the aspects, or you can
have an astrologer break these down for you. Many computer-generated
charts spell out the details of the chart, and will list the planets (and Sun and
Moon) in the signs, the signs that rule the twelve houses in your personal
chart, and the aspects between the planets. We have printed a ready
reference of the signs and symbols on the inside back cover of this book, so
you can quickly look up symbols that are unfamiliar to you. To give you an
idea of how signs and symbols work, we have interpreted some of the
details of Albert Schweitzer's horoscope. Figure Júpiter . Albert Schweitzer. January 14. 1875. 23:50:00 LMT. Kaysersberg. Alsace. Placidus
Houses. Data from brith certificate. The Sun
is found in the 4th house together with Mercury
in
Capricorn
the Moon
together with Neptune
and the Moon's
Node
in Aries
in the 7th house. Venus
is located in Sagittarius
in the 3rd house, Mars
in Scorpio
in the 2nd house, etc. The Ascendant (AC) is Libra
the Medium Coeli (MC) is Cancer
the
Descendant (DC) is Aries
and Capricorn
is located on the Imum
Coeli (IC).
The aspects can be read from the lines connecting the individual planets.
Here Saturn
is located in Aquarius
in the 4th house, which is
directly opposite from Uranus
in Leo
in the 11th house and thereby
forms an opposition. In contrast, it is one-fourth of a circle away from Mars
in Scorpio
in the 2nd house and forms a square aspect.
When you now look up the meanings of the signs, you should always
read both the light and the shadow sides (strengths and problems, or
harmonies and dissonances). Two possibilities are always contained in the
constellation, and no formula will provide certainty in recognizing whether
people live out and fulfill their abilities and tasks on a high level of
development, or simply let themselves drift.
There are various ways to discover the meaning of a horoscope. The
easiest way is to first look at the main themes. Start with the Sun
,
symbolizing the intrinsic character of a human being. Then look at the
Moon , which embodies the temperament. Next, find the Ascendant for
information about your role and behavior. Your ability to assert yourself is
shown by Mars , Venus
illustrates your loves, preferences, and tastes.
Jupiter
symbolizes the concepts of values and ideals, while Saturn
will show your limitations. Uranus
represents your love of freedom,
Neptune
the visions, and Pluto
shows what fascinates you. When
doing this, both the sign and the position within the house should be taken
into consideration, as well as the aspects of the respective planets. If you
become confused by the many statements which result, it is helpful to
visualize the various levels of meaning (see page 13). This will certainly
assist you in finding the red thread once again.
You also have the possibility of summarizing your horoscope into a chain
sentence in order to attain the first general survey of your nature. To do this,
replace the words in parentheses with the key words you have found under
the respective headings in this book:
I am a person with the intrinsic
character of
and I find my greatest
development in (
( Sun/sign)
Sun/house). My role and my feeling for life are
supported or impeded by (AC),
(planets in the 1st house). My temperament is that of
instinctively draws me in the
direction of Moon/sign) and it
Moon/house). I think in the manner of
and prefer to use my mind in Mercury/sign)
Mercury/house). My idea of love, relationships, and
beauty is
I mainly express my sense of beauty
in Venus/sign).
Venus/house). I fight like a
and frequently carry out my conflicts
in Mars/sign)
Mars/house). The attitude toward life that I
consider
valuable and impressive is that of
I feel rich in the area of
in everything that Jupiter touches Jupiter/sign).
Jupiter/house) and
Jupiter aspects). I have difficulties with
Saturn/sign).
My limitations, inhibitions, feelings of guilt, as well as my
greatest opportunities for growth, lie
Saturn/house) and in
in
Saturn aspects).
everything that Saturn touches I live my independence and/or
change my
standpoint in the area of
and in everything that Uranus
touches
I experience deep longings and
desires
for liberation in the area of
in everything that Neptune touches Uranus/house)
Uranus aspects). Neptune/house) and
Neptune aspects). I experience power and helplessness, “tunnel experiences,” obsession
and deepest transformations in the
Pluto/house) and
area of
Pluto aspects).
in everything that Pluto touches
You can find one further interesting way to approach a horoscope by first
looking where your developmental goal lies
Moon's Node/house) and
how this theme fits in with the area of your main self-development (
Sun/house), with what is becoming increasingly important in the course of
your life (Medium Coeli), with your role (Ascendant), your feelings
Moon), etc.
You also have the possibility of visualizing the horoscope by using the
picture key found at the end of the book (page 263). The LUMINARIES, the PLANETS,
and the MOON'S NODE Sun
DIGNITY: DETRIMENT: EXALTATION: FALL: Orbits through the entire zodiac in one year. Stays an average of one
month in each sign.
ARCHETYPE: The hero, the father, SHADOW: The overbearing person, the
the king.
megalomaniac.
The Sun embodies your intrinsic character, your central
concerns, the area and manner in which most of your personality
development occurs. It symbolizes your path and goal, what is most
essential to you. It represents the yang principle, consciousness, the mind,
the will, activity, and vital energy, dynamic force, individual creativity and
self-realization, radiance, warmth, motivational capability, courage,
optimism, and impetus in life. Together with Mars, the Sun embodies the
masculine principle in the horoscope. At the same time, the Sun reflects
the fatherly masculine element which expresses the attitude toward one's
own father, substitute fathers, and people in positions of authority.
PRINCIPLE: STRENGTH: The self-confident individual. Powerful development of one's own being. Makes a strong impression and has a striking personality.
Healthy self-reliance, very lively, exudes warmth. Is hearty,
magnanimous, creative, independent, and self-confident. The overextended person. Either a self-aggrandizing
exaggeration of one's own possibilities and a puffed-up, arrogant
personality, or a frail, weak-willed, fawning posture with great difficulties
in the development of one's own essence, a late bloomer.
PROBLEM AREA: GOAL: The urge to become what one is, i.e. to develop individual character. The search for wholeness, for the inner center, the true identity. The “journey of a hero.” All role models and forceful
personalities: father, rulers, authority figures, politicians, organizers,
aristocracy, but also egotists, tyrants, swindlers, and megalomaniacs.
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE SUN PRINCIPLE: PHYSICAL CORRELATIONS: Heart, spinal cord, blood circulation, solar plexus, respiratory system.
MYTHOLOGICAL CORRELATIONS: Helios (Greek)/ Sol (Roman), the sun god —above all, Apollo (Greek and Roman), also often called Phoebus
(bright), son of Zeus and Leto, god of the bright sunny days, the arts,
healing arts, and wisdom. THE SUN IN THE SIGNS
This has the same meaning as the description of the individual signs
of the zodiac on pages 24 to 47.
Since the sun stands for the intrinsic character of a person, all of the
essential features, such as the ARCHETYPE, SHADOW, MOTIVATION, and TASK
IN LIFE, as well as what he or she STRIVES FOR, and the PITFALLS specific to
each sign, EXAMPLES, and the typical GUIDING PRINCIPLE are to be found
here. In addition, ACTIONS, THOUGHTS, and FEELINGS are described in their
characteristic natures. Without specifically depicting it, the portrait
resulting from the features is the picture of a mature man, expressed as
part of his self-image in the horoscope of a man, and as part of the
searching image in the horoscope of a woman.
The TYPICAL OCCUPATIONAL AREAS are those generally assigned to the
respective astrological signs and not limited to the position of the Sun.
They can also be addressed by a noticeable grouping of planets within a
sign or through Mercury, the MC, or other important configurations. Moon
DIGNITY: DETRIMENT: EXALTATION: Orbits through the entire zodiac in 27 days.
Stays an average of about 2 days in each sign.
ARCHETYPE: The mother, the SHADOW: The monster that
child.
everything. FALL: devours PRINCIPLE: The Moon represents the inner nature, the feeling realm, the unconscious, and the instinctive reactions. The position of the Moon
shows in what direction you are urged, what you spontaneously react to,
and what you instinctively detest and avoid. According to the cyclical
character of the Moon, these are delicate and erratic occurrences, which
come and go according to their own rhythms. The Moon also stands for
the ability to establish contact, the longing for closeness and security, the
home, the way of life, attachment to home, memories, and the need for
emotional security. Together with Venus, the Moon symbolizes the
feminine principle in the horoscope. The Moon embodies the motherly
feminine element, through reflecting the mother and childhood
experiences as well as substitute mothers, even those of institutions like
stock exchanges, universities (alma mater), or the mother church.
STRENGTH: The soulful individual. Harmonious configurations support the flourishing of the emotional nature, the willingness to open one's inner
self, and trust in the wisdom of unconscious powers which guide people.
This represents security, emotional safety, and a healthy relationship to
family, background, homeland, and especially to the mother and one's own
motherhood.
The moody person. Difficult configurations represent
emotional wounds, reticence, mistrust, fear, touchiness, moods,
unpredictability, as well as vanity, exaggerated smugness, laziness, and
lethargy.
PROBLEM AREA: GOAL: Development of feelings and fantasies, encountering the images of the soul. The urge toward emotional security and closeness. The
blossoming of female nature. The urge to build a nest, start a family, and
be a lively part of the clan. The desire to be well-liked or become popular. REPRESENTATIVES OF THE MOON PRINCIPLE: Everyone in serving, care-giving, and helping positions: doctors, healers, nurses, spiritual counselors,
therapists, and those representing dreams and fantasies in art, in writing,
and in the circus and theater.
PHYSICAL CORRELATIONS: Stomach, uterus, lymph system, female breasts, circulation of fluids, autonomous nervous system. MYTHOLOGICAL CORRELATIONS: The triple Goddess as expression of the cycles of life: 1. Artemis (Greek)/Diana (Roman), the virgin = growth. 2.
Selene (Greek)/Luna (Roman), the woman = maturity. 3. Hecate (Greek
and Roman), the old one = decline. THE MOON IN THE SIGNS
See pages 50 to 61.
The description initially reflects the typical mother-child relationship for
the sign which can be read from the position of the Moon: the CHILD in
the person, the DIFFICULT LESSONS TO LEARN, and INNER MOTHER IMAGE or
the way in which the respective person is prepared to see the mother.
Furthermore, a description is given of how the Moon is expressed as
MOTHER in the mature adult and its meaning as light and shadow aspects
in the IMAGE OF THE WOMAN. For a feminine horoscope, an essential
aspect of the self-image for the mature woman is expressed. In contrast, in a man's horoscope this signifies a part of his inner femininity and his
searching image in a partnership.
The additional meaning of the respective Moon position for each
person, independent of age and sex, can be found in the two sections
STRENGTH and PROBLEM AREA.
Since the Moon also stands for home, homeland, and the type of
home, the corresponding image is described under STYLE OF LIVING. Mercury
DIGNITY: DETRIMENT: EXALTATION: FALL: and
Orbits through the entire zodiac in about 87 days.
Stays an average of 7 days in each sign.
ARCHETYPE: The trader, the navigator, the SHADOW: The crook, the
scout.
liar.
Mercury stands for mind and intellect, for the theory of
combinations, speech, communication, mediation, tactics, knowledge,
mental flexibility, orientation facility, analytical and logical thought, and
the manner of judging and deciding. Mercury is also the negotiator
between the conscious and the unconscious mind because its powers of
thought support the recognition and understanding of the images of the
unconscious, such as dreams. Mercury also represents expression in
speech, curiosity, the thirst for knowledge, and a certain readiness,
ambition, and ability to learn.
PRINCIPLE: STRENGTH: The clever person. Quick, clear ascertaining of thoughts and ideas. Ingenious capacity for following a train of thought; combining,
analyzing, and differentiating. Talent for observing and having a “good
grasp.” Excellent capacity to adapt or orient oneself. Collects information
with great curiosity. Pursues knowledge and enjoys the pleasure of
recognition. Nimbleness of language, quick-wittedness, and rhetorical
knowledge. Smooth sales person and negotiator. Methodical doubt which
leads to steadily increasing insight. Carefully thinks through and weighs
ideas and examines for accuracy and usefulness.
PROBLEM AREA: The trickster. Interest in everything is only superficial and passing. Cunning, sly bluffer. Calculating, corruptible, crafty, audacious,
false, and wily. Cannot see the whole picture. Feels no obligation to honor values. Profanes the holy, is ice-cold in business, and would “sell his
grandmother.”
GOAL: Collecting, mediating, and distributing knowledge and information. Search for new perceptions and new paths. Critical examination and fine
differentiation of thoughts, ideas, and theories, as well as logical points of
view, including their usefulness. But, also bluffing, deceiving, and
tricking.
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE MERCURY PRINCIPLE: Teachers, school children, university students, poets, salespeople, analysts, doctors, critics, scientists,
researchers, journalists, linguists, orators, translators, attorneys, but also
forgers, counterfeiters, cheaters, thieves, liars, and swindlers.
PHYSICAL CORRELATIONS: Respiratory system, nervous system, speech center.
Hermes (Greek)/Mercury (Roman)—
messenger of the gods with winged shoes, mediator between heaven and
earth. God of paths and journeys, business people and artisans, shepherds,
thieves, and highwaymen. God of speech and guide for souls into the
underworld. Messenger of dreams.
MYTHOLOGICAL CORRELATIONS: MERCURY IN THE SIGNS
See pages 62 to 67.
In addition to the STRENGTH and PROBLEM AREA specific to this sign, the
NARRATIVE STYLE and the manner in which the respective Mercury MAKES
DECISIONS, along with the criteria BETWEEN which Mercury prefers to
differentiate is presented here. (How the decision is implemented is
decided by the position of Mars.) Venus
DIGNITY: DETRIMENT: EXALTATION: FALL: and and
Orbits through the entire zodiac in 225 days.
Stays an average of about 19 days in each sign.
ARCHETYPE: The muse, the lover, the SHADOW: Persephone, the femme
beautiful one.
fatale, the whore.
PRINCIPLE: Venus is the symbol for love, feeling, harmony, the ability to give and take, relationships, and partnership. As the embodiment of the
erotic, Venus also means temptation, the capability to devote oneself
completely, longing, and the desire for union, connection, and merging.
Venus represents esthetic perception and therefore, on one hand, artistic
interests and talents; on the other hand, good taste and sensory pleasures
that grant us the enjoyment of hearing, smelling, touching, tasting, and
seeing. Both the Moon and Venus represent the female principle.
However, Venus represents the aspect of the young woman, the beloved,
and the independent woman.
The temptress. Aspires toward vivacious relationships,
harmony, balance, reconciliation, and warm-hearted empathy. Would like
to be sought after, loved, pampered, and flattered. Loves luxury, elegance,
and good manners. Patient, can be very devoted, understanding,
benevolent, sincere, sociable, affectionate, graceful, and unselfish. Certain
of taste and artistically talented. Sensuous, esthetic, with a cultivated
enjoyment of life. Enjoyment of everything that is beautiful.
STRENGTHS: The phony. Separates from others easily and often.
Overemphasizes external factors. Vain, superficial, tasteless, tricky,
perverse, addicted to amusement, easily seduced, greedy to possess,
compulsive, lazy, unscrupulous, infantile and unrestrained, uncouth,
jealous, cruel, snobbish, argumentative, and depraved.
PROBLEM AREA: To be sought after and to search for, enter into and create
relationships. To cultivate love and eroticism in their highest forms. To
express and nurture beauty, art, and harmony in this world. To develop
and maintain good style, cultivated manners, and fine taste.
GOAL: REPRESENTATIVES OF THE VENUS PRINCIPLE: All people who bring beauty or love into the world: painters, sculptors, actors, authors, musicians,
designers, cosmeticians, architects, and loving people, including those
who work in the area of the fine or dubious entertainments.
PHYSICAL CORRELATIONS: Sense of equilibrium, mucous membranes, veins, kidneys, inner sex organs, sweat glands, and erogenous zones.
MYTHOLOGICAL CORRELATIONS: Aphrodite (Greek) or Venus (Roman)—the goddess of love, beauty and peace, also of art and harmony. VENUS IN THE SIGNS
See pages 68 to 73.
In addition to the STRENGTH and the PROBLEM AREA is the IMAGE OF THE
YOUNG WOMAN, which Venus embodies. In a feminine horoscope, this
describes an essential part of the self-image, whereas Venus in the
masculine horoscope symbolizes the anima and thereby the central
aspect of his inner femininity and his searching image in partnerships.
Venus” typical sensitivity for taste and style are expressed in the related
section of STYLE OF ART and the coloration of its erotic tension is
found in the section EROTICISM. Mars
DIGNITY: DETRIMENT: EXALTATION: FALL: and and
Orbits through the entire zodiac in 687 days.
Stays an average of about 2 months in each sign.
ARCHETYPE:
The hero and SHADOW: The violent person,
conqueror.
destroyer. the PRINCIPLE: Mars represents strength of will and the desire of an individual to conquer. It stands for stamina, the perseverance and energy that you
need to fight the obstacles in life and penetrate the world. Mars shows
straightforwardness of approach, a high degree of determination, readiness
to take on conflict, and enjoyment of risk. In every conflict Mars
embodies the energy you fight with and how you fight. It represents
aggression, problems of aggression, as well as drive, urge, and passion.
Together with the Sun, Mars symbolizes the masculine principle in the
horoscope, with Mars embodying the youthful aspect, the lover, and the
hothead.
The resolute individual. Strong, goal-oriented action with
great staying power. Imposing willpower, great commitment, and
considerable willingness to take risks (while keeping a level head!). The
force of aggression finds an appropriate goal which it can conquer,
simultaneously discharging itself and spontaneously developing in
committed, courageous, decisive, passionate, or persevering ways.
Powerful, but controllable drives. Lusty, satisfying sexuality.
STRENGTHS: The brute. Spontaneous, completely uncontrollable
discharge of energy or pent-up aggressions with unpredictable outbursts.
Impatient, hot-headed, brutal, unrestrained, sadistic, distracted by vague
drives. The force of aggression spreads out destructively, and not
infrequently, self-destructively. Frustrated, extreme, violent, and totally
dissatisfying sexuality
PROBLEM AREA: GOAL: The goal of Mars' power is the actualization of your essential nature, to further your development and accomplishments, and also to
protect and safeguard you from the attacks of others. Mars is the fighting
strength with which you stand up for yourself, which helps you win, to get
what is yours by right and to keep it, or to be the first. The goal of Mars is
also sexual satisfaction. Problematic goals, which Mars can also lead to,
concern violent wrongs, such as robbery and murder, revenge campaigns,
wars and war crimes, and all situations in which the bare “might” of those
who are stronger triumphs.
All pioneers, conquerors,
warriors, daring entrepreneurs, leaders, adventurers, soldiers, athletes, and
other competitors. Everyone who uses knives, from butchers to knifethrowers to surgeons. But, also those who destroy blindly, fanatics,
egotists, and tyrants along with their torturers.
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE MARS PRINCIPLE: PHYSICAL CORRELATIONS: Muscles, gallbladder, blood, red blood cells, the body's heat regulation system, male sexual organs.
MYTHOLOGICAL CORRELATIONS: Aries (Greek)/Mats (Roman)—the god of war, whom the Greeks considered a brute and was therefore unloved and
disfavored, but raised to the status of a god of state by the Romans. MARS IN THE SIGNS
See pages 74 to 86.
In addition to the STRENGTH and PROBLEM AREA specific to the sign, the
IMAGE OF THE YOUNG MAN i s to be found here.
In a man's horoscope, this describes an essential part of his self-image,
whereas in the feminine horoscope it symbolizes the central aspect of the
animus, the inner masculinity, and the woman's searching image.
The energy with which Mars carries out its decisions and plans is
found under RESOLUTION. Its combative attitude is shown by the sections AGGRESSION, OUTLETS FOR AGGRESSION, and WAY OF FIGHTING, whereby the strength and form of expression of the respective Mars energy is listed
under SEXUALITY. Jupiter
DIGNITY: DETRIMENT: EXALTATION: FALL: and and
Orbits through the entire zodiac in around 12 years.
Stays an average of about one year in each sign.
ARCHETYPE: The high priest, the SHADOW: The Pharisee, complacent
missionary, the just person.
person, the self-righteous individual.
PRINCIPLE: Jupiter represents trust in life, the belief in life's meaning, the ideals and values of a person, and the search and discovery of personal
meaning in life. It also stands for the forces of growth which give life its
impetus, promotes thriving, good fortune, and prosperity, and especially
benefits the development of the personality and broadening of individual
horizons. A person experiences everything Jupiter touches as being rich.
Jupiter also means dignity, wisdom, belief, hope, morals, grace,
convictions, confidence, trust, affluence, wealth, and growth, success,
future, optimism, generosity, expansion, justice, reverence, goodness,
goodwill, and abundance.
STRENGTH: The dignified person. Highly developed sense of morality and ethics, as well as strong inner belief and great trust in yourself and in life.
Generosity, sense of responsibility, justice, goodness, compassion,
reverence, and willingness to forgive. The talent to understand meaning
and connection in a global or higher sense. Jupiter also stands for
individual luck, in that everything it touches in a person's horoscope is
experienced full of trust and certainty of success.
PROBLEM AREA: The degenerate. Overestimates his or her own personality. Unscrupulous, high-handed, vain, power-hungry, addicted to pleasure,
lazy, and self-satisfied. The otherwise benevolent Jupiter becomes
unpleasantly exaggerated or purely superficial in an attitude of hypocrisy,
fanaticism, self-aggrandizement, degenerating in terms of body, emotions,
and character. The tendency to smugly overstep laws, have both extravagant expectations
and standards in life, as well as feigned generosity and intolerance is
manifested.
Aspires to truth, higher understanding and global, commonly
binding principles and values, The search for the personal God, The
fulfillment of meaning and experience of being carried through life by
meaning. Fortune and fulfillment.
GOAL: REPRESENTATIVES OF THE JUPITER PRINCIPLE: Exemplary and/or cultivated personalities. Teachers, educators, priests, prophets, philosophers, poets,
scholars, legal experts, judges, athletes, doctors, alternative health
practitioners, healers, adventurers, world travelers, and patrons of arts and
other worthy causes.
PHYSICAL CORRELATIONS: Liver, growth of cells, fat reserves. MYTHOLOGICAL CORRELATIONS: Zeus (Greek)/Jupiter (Roman)—father of the gods and lightening-hurling ruler of Olympus. Protector of the people,
bringer of victory, preserver of justice, freedom, tradition, and order JUPITER IN THE SIGNS
See pages 86 to 91.
In addition to the STRENGTH and PROBLEM AREA specific to this sign, there
is the IDEAL toward which Jupiter aspires, as well as the RELIGION or
PHILOSOPHY to which Jupiter's position most often corresponds. The
explanations given emphasize the characteristic feature of religion or
philosophy as classified by Jupiter. Saturn
DIGNITY: DETRIMENT: EXALTATION: FALL: and and
Orbits through the entire zodiac in 29 years.
Stays an average of about two years in each sign.
ARCHETYPE: The old, wise man, the SHADOW: The embittered person, the
hermit.
adversary.
Saturn represents structure, steadfastness, and limitation. It
therefore means security, stability, stamina, and consistency. Saturn also
represents the ability of a person to set boundaries, but also the boundaries
you experience as unpleasant, those which do not let you reach what you
desire. Saturn is the ruler of time, who sees to it that everything comes to
an end at some point. As a result, Saturn symbolizes separations and
farewells. As ruler of “the great silence,” it also represents seclusion,
which can be experienced as being painfully abandoned or as inner
composure in stillness. Furthermore, Saturn means conscience, form,
structure, compression, concentration, crystallization, obligation,
deceleration, justice, law and order.
PRINCIPLE: STRENGTH: The bumble individual. Authentic humility, genuine modesty. The power to be true to oneself and the willingness to face the most
difficult jobs. Greatly developed ambition combined with immense
endurance. Takes duties unusually seriously. Extremely disciplined,
achievement-oriented, and dependable. Mature contentment. Aspires
toward material security and public recognition. Sets rules and boundaries,
creates clear structures, imposes and monitors laws, takes care of order
and safety. Willing to take on responsibility. Conscientiousness, patience,
wisdom, dependability, consistency, and content modesty.
PROBLEM AREA: The hard-hearted person. Afraid to live, most of all afraid to fail, to not be good enough or lovable enough. Conflicts with authority.
Determined hardness, obstinate inflexibility, dark ambition, and a cold need for admiration. Strangles all living impulses with the danger of
losing oneself in depression, melancholy, bitter negation of life, or selfdestructive drudgery. Compulsiveness to achieve, rigidity, inferiority
complex, ingratiating subservience, shabbiness, lack of success,
embitterment, and loneliness. Wasted, suppressed emotional life, and rigid
behavior. Complete deficit human warmth and sincerity as well as the
playful elements in life. Inhibited, constrained, awkward, cruel, evil, cold,
narrow-minded, stubborn, reticent, irreconcilable, and relentless.
Development of the autonomous personality and a steadfast
character through the actualization of existing capabilities and your true
calling. Increase of experience and wisdom in life. Clarity, self-control,
and self-restraint. Recognition of the unvarnished truth, naked reality, and
concentration on what is most essential.
GOAL: REPRESENTATIVES OF THE SATURN PRINCIPLE: Philosophers, wise men and wise women, hermits, monks and nuns, elderly people, ancestors.
Lawmakers and keepers of the law, judges, critics, bosses, gray
eminences, mentors, sculptors, architects, and builders.
PHYSICAL CORRELATIONS: Skeleton, bone marrow, calcium balance, teeth, structural and connective tissue, spleen, ears.
MYTHOLOGICAL CORRELATIONS: Cronus (Greek)/Saturn (Roman)—the god who rebelled against his father Uranus, but also ate his own children.
Ruler of time and keeper of threshold between life and death, between
time and eternity. Also the ruler of Elysium, the island of the blessed, and
the ruler of the Golden Age. SATURNI IN THE SIGNS
See pages 92 to 97.
In its most difficult form, Saturn means a block opposing the typical
qualities of the prevailing sign, which are listed under PROHIBITION OR DISDAIN OF. The corresponding fear is under the heading of THRESHOLD. Experience shows that Saturn, on its way toward freedom, turns to
compulsive behavior, somewhat in opposition to its original bans, and
more or less lives as if it were a compulsion. This phase is described in
the section COMPULSION, while the behavior of a liberated and
transformed Saturn is portrayed in the section on LIBERATION. Uranus
DIGNITY: DETRIMENT: EXALTATION: FALL: Discovered on March 13, 1781 by Friedrich Wilhelm Herschel.
Orbits through the entire zodiac in around 84 years.
Stays an average of about 7 years in each sign.
ARCHETYPE: The (wise) fool, the hero of SHADOW: The revolutionary, the
freedom.
traitor.
Uranus represents the ideals of the French Revolution—
freedom, equality, and brotherhood. It embodies what is ingenious in
human beings, their striving for independence and individual freedom.
Uranus is also considered to be the great liberator. It stands for surprising
changes, flashes of inspiration, and sudden upheavals.
PRINCIPLE: STRENGTH: The individualist. Striving for independence and freedom on all levels (mental, emotional, and material). Split-second perceptions,
spontaneous solutions, and the spirit of discovery. Intuitive perceptions at
the right moment. Urge toward cosmic consciousness and expansion of
consciousness. Original, unconventional, enjoyment of experimentation.
The gift of the “seventh sense.”
The person who changes viewpoints. Restless and
constantly “charged up.” Unsettled and always searching for something
new, for change, revolution, and subversion. Arbitrary, unpredictable,
inconsiderate, destructive, and extremely willful. Compulsive aversion to
everything obligatory. Freedom at any cost, which frequently causes a
breach of contract to be committed so that others feel betrayed. Unwilling
or incapable of being concerned with the “banal” problems of everyday
life.
PROBLEM AREA: GOAL: Realization of democracy, freedom, and human rights, Overcoming old structures, attitudes, ideas, and opinions on an individual and collective level. Liberation from old ties. Disintegration of all bonds.
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE URANUS PRINCIPLE: Inventors, technicians, pilots, artists, revolutionaries, anarchists, astrologers, futurists, mental acrobats,
yogis with double consciousness (for this world and other worlds),
eccentrics, philosophers, and recluses.
PHYSICAL CORRELATIONS: Nervous system, tension and discharging of tension, rhythm.
MYTHOLOGICAL CORRELATIONS: Ouranous (Greek)/Uranus (Roman)—lord of the heavens, son of chaos, husband of Gaea (Earth), and father of
Cronus. Original ruler. Symbol of mental fertility, creative ideas, and the
lofty standpoint URANUS IN THE SIGNS
See pages 98 to 99.
Uranus orbits through the zodiac in 84 years, which means an average of
seven years in each sign. Its position in the sign of the horoscope
therefore primarily makes a statement about the generation born within
this time period. The individual coloration that Uranus gives a horoscope
can only be read from its position by house and from its aspects to the
personal planets. Since Uranus is always a fervent advocate of individual
freedoms, the values relating to freedom that arise for a generation under
the respective position of Uranus, together with their problematic
opposite pole, are listed in the table as both STRENGTH and PROBLEM AREA
. Neptune
DIGNITY: DETRIMENT: EXALTATION: FALL: Discovered on September 23, 1846 by Johann Gottfried Galle.
Orbits through the entire zodiac in 156 years.
Stays an average of about 14 years in each sign.
ARCHETYPE:
The
mystic,
the SHADOW: The crackpot, the addict,
visionary. the martyr.
the alcoholic.
PRINCIPLE: Neptune represents the principle of dissolving boundaries. It corresponds to a person's “cosmic antennas” which permit one to feel the
transcendental and the subtle. It allows one to sense concealed
correlations, future trends, and other developments. At the same time,
Neptune stands lor the individual's longing to overcome everyday
consciousness and see the highest things. In the process, Neptune's
striving is actually directed toward the spiritual realm, but is frequently
confused with spirits and other intoxicants. The permeability to which
Neptune gives rise frequently results in one of the highest levels of
sensitivity and a weakening of the body.
The medium. Strong spiritual aspirations. Deep inner
conviction, often based on personal experience, that a divine power is at
work in everything and should be recognized as such. Great receptivity
and sensibility. Compassionate behavior, characterized by almost
boundless sympathy. Idealistic, soft, able to be devoted, and mediumistic.
Strong desire for mystic experience. Full of faith in being protected and
guided by a higher power. Strong visionary abilities, excellent intuitive
understanding, and an unusual wealth of emotional images and
imagination.
STRENGTH: PROBLEM AREA: The drunk or drug addict. Drawn in a dangerous direction by a strong—frequently unrecognized or underestimated—inner force.
Easily seducible and endangered by addiction, particularly to intoxicants. Also in danger of being overcome and swept away by collective currents,
ranging from less harmful trends of the period to the violent excesses of
mass hysteria. Falls easily into the role of the victim and the person who
suffers, as well as that of the seducer, charlatan, schemer, or liar. Unstable,
intangible, unpredictable, destructive, and slimy. Great difficulties in
setting limits, up to the point of total identification with other people.
Incapable of assuming responsibility for one's own life. Letting oneself
drift without any solid ground to stand on. Desperation, melancholy,
confusion, self-deception, and lack of orientation.
GOAL: The striving to go beyond the limits of the self and merge into a “we” feeling. The longing to be found, touched, and redeemed in trance
and ecstasy by the divine. To find true spirituality and be a living witness
of the divine effect in the world.
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE NEPTUNE PRINCIPLE: Inspired artists, talented actors and actresses, musicians, poets, priests and priestesses, preachers, mystics,
occultists, chemists, nurses, doctors (particularly homeopaths),
psychologists, trend researchers, forecasters, as well as addicts, the downat-the-heels, the unstable, swindlers, and criminals.
PHYSICAL CORRELATIONS: The pineal gland. MYTHOLOGICAL CORRELATIONS: Poseidon (Greek)/Neptune (Roman)—god of the seas, earthquakes, and fertility. NEPTUNE IN THE SIGNS
See pages 100 to 101.
Neptune orbits through the zodiac in 165 years and therefore stays an
average of about 14 years in each sign. Its position in the sign of the
horoscope therefore primarily makes a statement about the generation
born within this time period. The individual coloration that Neptune
gives a horoscope can only be read from its position in a house and from its aspects to the personal planets. Since Neptune always represents
DISSOLUTION, dream, vision, and IDEALIZATION for a generation under the
respective position of Neptune, this is listed together with its problematic
side of LACK OF DISCIPLINE and WEAKENING in the table under Neptune. Pluto
DIGNITY: DETRIMENT: EXALTATION: FALL: Discovered by Percival Lowell on February 18, 1930.
Orbits through the entire zodiac in about 248 years.
Stays an average of around 21 years in each sign.
Because of its very unusual orbit, the length of its stay in a sign
fluctuates between 11 and 30 years.
ARCHETYPE: The magician, the shaman. SHADOW: SHADOW: The black
The black magician.
magician.
PRINCIPLE: The power of deepest transformation. Pluto represents the black gold of the alchemist, the dark wealth of the depths, the archaic original
source, and the archetypal forces beyond all moral valuation. Pluto
embodies the archaic feminine element that can be both fruitful, creative,
and healing, as well as dark, cruel, brutal, sadistic, destructive, devouring,
and lethal. The solar consciousness fears it as an abyss of Hell.
Experiences with Pluto are always related to power and helplessness,
dependency, subjection, and emotional entanglement. They sometimes
also include an aspect of obsession. Pluto, the smallest and most distant
planet, has its effect according to the principle of homeopathy: the smaller
and less comprehensible the dosage, the stronger its effect.
STRENGTH: The powerful person. Mighty forces of the soul such as the powers of suggestion, hypnotic capabilities, and strong healing forces.
Tremendously creative potency, intensive strength, and an almost
insuperable will. Drive for far-reaching changes in oneself and others.
Does not shy away from the deepest abysses. Overcoming and
fundamental transforming of old values and structures.
PROBLEM AREA: The obsessed individual. Misuse of power. Inclination toward sadism and tyranny. Unconscious forces (autonomous complexes)
that possess the conscious mind. Compulsive and obsessive character, destructive, uninhibited, dominated by instincts, fanatic, destructive for
oneself and others. Pathological addiction to control. The inability to
simply let things be, let go of people and things, and gain distance to the
situation.
GOAL: Radical transformation in favor of a deep truth. The perception that nothing in life can stay as it is, that every beginning, every birth already
bears its own end and rebirth within itself.
REPRESENTATIVES OF TFIE PLUTO PRINCIPLE: Analysts, doctors, researchers, dictators, scientists, speculators, violent criminals, charismatic leaders,
demagogues, leaders of mass movements, hypnotists, and occultists.
PHYSICAL CORRELATIONS: Sexual organs, ability to regenerate. MYTHOLOGICAL CORRELATIONS: Hades (Greek = the invisible)/Pluto or Dis- Pater (Roman = the rich man)—god of the underworld. Son of Cronus and
Rhea, brother of Zeus and Poseidon, and husband of the (abducted)
Persephone. Symbol for the realm of the shadow, the knowledge from the
depths, and the experience of death and rebirth. PLUTO IN THE SIGNS
See pages 102 to 103.
Pluto orbits through the zodiac in 248 years and thereby stays an average
of 21 years in each sign. Its position in the sign of the horoscope
therefore primarily makes a statement about the generation born within
this time period. The true individual coloration that Pluto gives a
horoscope can only be read from its position by house and from its
aspects to the personal planets. Since PLUTO always stands for
TRANSFORMATION, which means extensive changes in favor of a deeper
truth, as well as EXPERIENCES OF POWER AND HELPLESSNESS (for culprit and
victim), the themes specific to a sign that are significant to a generation
under the respective position of Pluto, are listed in the table. Moon's Nodes
The Moon is located in part to the south and in part to the north of the
Sun's orbit. Moon's Nodes is the name given to the interface of its orbit
with that of the Sun. If the Moon comes from the south, it is called the
Ascending Moon's Node, North Node, or Dragon's Head
If it comes
from the north, it is called a Descending Moon's Node, South Node, or
Dragon's Tail
Both points are opposite each other: an aspect to one of
the Moon's Nodes automatically means an aspect to the other.
The astrological meaning of this Moon's Node axis is the crucial point in
a person's life. It shows the tasks to be mastered and the purpose of
existence. The South Node symbolizes the past—old patterns and ways
of behaving that the soul of an individual has already brought along with
it. Karmic astrology speaks of past lives here. In contrast, the North
Node points to the future. It shows the direction to be pursued and
symbolizes the tasks waiting to be resolved.
It is essential to meaningfully connect both themes of the Moon's
Nodes, for the Descending Node tends to obstruct development and
functions as a brake; in contrast, the Ascending Node indicates the
challenging new direction. Aspects between the Moon's Nodes and the
planets provide further information about supportive or inhibitive
powers.
This means that nodal axis provides an initial, direct insight into the
tasks presented in the horoscope, even though these themes are usually
expressed elsewhere in the chart. However, the information given in the
Moon's nodal position reduces the horoscope to a common denominator,
reflecting the issue at hand—the quintessence.
MOON'S NODE IN THE SIGNS The meaning of the Nodes is expressed primarily by house position
rather than the sign involved. The individual meaning of the Moon's
Node axis must therefore be looked up under the corresponding house.
An impression of the themes addressed by the position in the sign will be
provided by checking the significance of the house as it relates to the
sign (Aries = 1st house, Taurus = 2nd house, Pisces = 12th house, etc.). The TWELVE SIGNS
of the ZODIAC,
or the SUN IN THE SIGNS Aries (the Ram) The Fighter From March 21st to April 20th
RULER: EXALTATION: DETRIMENT: FALL: ELEMENT: Fire QUALITY: Cardinal CHARACTERISTIC: SEX: Masculine TEMPERAMENT: Choleric Warm and dry (quick–tempered) SYMBOL: Man rune = the outstretched hands as a symbol of the adult
human being. Furthermore, it symbolizes new life and striving tor light.
Later, it was also interpreted to mean the horns of the ram. PHYSICAL CORRELATIONS: Head, face, CORRELATION The
blood
awakening of the forces in Spring
ARCHETYPE: The warrior
SHADOW: The destroyer
MOTIVATION:
Spontaneous STRIVES FOR: Development of will
enthusiasm
and achievement of conquests
TASK IN LIFE: Attack, struggle, and PITFALL: Too much activity, always
assertion
taking the bull by the horns
EXAMPLES: Heroes, great generals, GUIDING PRINCIPLE: I want!
and leaders.
MYTHOLOGICAL MOTIFS: TO SEASONS: Helle and Phrixus. The quest for the Golden Fleece.
Aries is the awakening of the forces. The central
concern of this sign is the development of the ego, asserting one's own
will, and conquering the world. Aries represents the archetypal masculine
force which acts in an impetuous, strong-willed, and impulsive manner. It
is characterized by activity, initiative, impatience, and rushing forward
without becoming weary. Aries quickly recovers from low blows. The
CENTRAL THOUGHT: Aries person is considered indefatigable and daring. The Aries type is a
pioneer with a warm, carefree openness which often has something
sympathetically boyish (or girlish) about it, even when he or she is older.
A contagious, untroubled optimism and vigorous joy of living can also
give other people the momentum and courage to face life.
Actions
The energetic individual. Spontaneous, impulsive, and
sometimes quite the go-getter. Uncomplicated, direct, spirited, and
lighthearted. Very dynamic, but never long-winded. Spontaneously
switches from one goal to another. Never has the feeling of disgracing
himself or herself.
PROBLEM AREA: The impatient person. Wants everything right away.
Thoughtlessly rushes into plans without any sign of patience or stamina.
Hurts others through inconsideration, often because of thoughtlessness.
Primitive daredevil.
STRENGTH: Thoughts
STRENGTH: The pioneer. Unburdened by other people's experiences, Aries goes his or her own way and finds surprising and unusual perceptions,
methods, and solutions in the process. Open for new insights, even at a
ripe old age.
PROBLEM AREA: The headstrong individual Explains the world to himself
or herself in the way that he or she would like to have it. Is not concerned
about objective viewpoints or an explanation of his or her standpoint.
Irresponsible because of immaturity. Stubborn and arbitrary.
Feelings
STRENGTH: The never-say-die person. Recovers in a flash from every defeat, stands up and storms on. Inexhaustible optimism, a great deal of
initiative, boldness, enthusiasm, and carefree confidence.
PROBLEM AREA: The inconsiderate person. Reckless egotism. Extremely
shortsighted attitude toward life. Lack of understanding and self-control.
Brutal. Medicine—above all surgery. Sports,
police, and military. Technical occupations and crafts that work with fire,
as well as processing of metal. Risk professions like race driver or pilot.
Tasks that demand a pioneer spirit.
TYPICAL OCCUPATIONAL AREAS: Taurus (the Bull) The Connoisseur From April 21st to May 20th
RULER:
FALL:
CHARACTERISTIC: Cold and dry EXALTATION: DETRIMENT: ELEMENT: Earth QUALITY: Fixed SEX: Feminine TEMPERAMENT: and Melancholic a circle with the semi-circle above it = the horned cow or
bull's head. The image of the nurturing mother cow, as well as the symbol
of the life-giving Mother Earth.
SYMBOL: PHYSICAL CORRELATIONS: Neck, nape, CORRELATION TO SEASONS: The time shoulders, mouth, throat, esophagus. in which plants take root and
become strong.
ARCHETYPE: The farmer.
SHADOW: The bullheaded person.
MOTIVATION: Routine and the joy of STRIVES
FOR:
Security
and
familiar things.
enjoyment.
TASK IN LIFE: Preserving what has PITFALL: Immoderation as a form of
been tested by time, developing stupor
or
addiction
to
an
enjoyment of the pleasures of life
ultraconservative approach.
EXAMPLES: Shepherds, protectors, GUIDING PRINCIPLE: I possess. I
and preservers.
maintain! Or also: I wait.
MYTHOLOGICAL MOTIFS: The Minotaur. The abduction of Europa.
CENTRAL THOUGHT: Taurus is the sign of rootedness and the greatest degree of inertia. It is characterized by love and loyalty to what is familiar, taking
care of what has grown and been tested by time, as well as the patience
with which the Taurus can integrate himself or herself into the natural
growth cycles. Taurus can wait—longer than any of the other signs. Solely
because of this ability, Taurus is able to achieve certain things. Taurus loves to stand? on solid ground and defends self against surprising
innovations and incalculable risks (particularly those which are financial).
The enjoyment of the pleasures of life achieves its highest level of
development in this sign and makes the Taurus into a thankful
connoisseur.
Actions
STRENGTH: The person of action. Practical, down-to-earth, decisive, and persevering. Taurus is slow to warm up to things, but then emphatically
stays with them and accomplishes something. Likes to work with other
people.
PROBLEM AREA: The loafer. Lethargic, lazy, recklessly self-indulgent,
gluttonous, a slave to the instincts, unreliable. Patient and sullen
tolerance can lead to apathy. One-sided material striving.
Thoughts
STRENGTH: The pragmatic person. Thinking is concrete and practice- oriented. Is not fond of theoretic flights of fancy or a confusing variety of
ideas. When considering a situation, always asks the question: What can
you do with it?
PROBLEM AREA: The slow-witted individual. One-sided, unteachably
stubborn, and sometimes very slow as well. Sticks to reality and has
difficulty with abstractions.
Feelings
STRENGTH: The faithful and social person. Loves the stimulation of what is familiar and time-tested. Has a natural manner, is cheerful, tender,
affectionate, and sociable. Capable of deep friendship and partnership
(likes to form a “pack”). Faithful and reliable.
PROBLEM AREA: The jealous heart. Uncontrollably monopolizing and
possessive. Extremely jealous and greedy. So stubborn that he or she
can't be talked into changing his or her mind. Dangerously hot-tempered
once he or she sees “red.” TYPICAL OCCUPATIONAL AREAS: The maintenance of values in relation to property and soil: agriculture, gardening, real estate, architecture. In the
figurative sense: banks, stock market, applied and political economy.
Fields in which enjoyment and taste are in the foreground: food,
gastronomy, hotel trade, fashion, jewelry, cosmetics, music, painting,
sculpture, and the art trade. Professions related to the past: historians,
archaeologists, ethnologists. Crafts and natural sciences. Gemini (the Twins) The Curious person From May 21st to June 21st
RULER: EXALTATION: — DETRIMENT: FALL: — ELEMENT: Air QUALITY: Mutable CHARACTERISTIC: Warm SEX: Masculine and moist TEMPERAMENT: Sanguine (optimistic) = the two temple columns as symbol of the day and night side,
as the division of unity, as the differentiation into subject and object,
masculine and feminine, the conscious and unconscious, light and dark,
heaven and earth, etc.
SYMBOL: Lungs, CORRELATION TO SEASONS: The time
bronchial tubes, collarbone, arms when sprouts divide themselves into
and hands.
stem, leaf, and bud, differentiating
themselves from other shoots.
ARCHETYPE: Trader or intellectual.
SHADOW: The cynic.
MOTIVATION: Curiosity and the joy of STRIVES
FOR:
Knowledge and
acting as a mediator.
diversity.
TASK IN LIFE: Differentiating lies PITFALL: Ice-cold rationality.
from truth through constant doubt.
EXAMPLE:
Great thinkers and GUIDING PRINCIPLE: I think. I doubt.
universal scholars.
PHYSICAL CORRELATIONS: MYTHOLOGICAL MOTIFS: All of the dissimilar brothers or sisters: Castor and Polydeuces, Hercules and Iphicles, Prometheus and Epimetheus, Cain and
Abel, Gilgamesh and Enkidu, Parsifal and Feirefiz, Osiris and Seth, Isis
and Nephtys, Inanna and Ereshkigal. CENTRAL THOUGHT: Gemini is the sign of versatility. Gemini people love to perceive what is only apparently homogeneous in all of its facets. As
intellectually-oriented people, it is a great joy for them to see things in a
very differentiated manner, particularly on the mental level. This makes
them masters in the revelation of differences, but also relativists and
doubters who must even question the sublime and the holy without
restraint. They are characterized by the desire to take up new thoughts and
ideas and pass them on, making them good traders and agents. This
primarily applies to news, but naturally also for goods with a quick
turnover.
Actions
STRENGTH: The clever mind. Deliberate, well-planned, methodical actions subject to rational approaches on the basis of clear perceptions and
critically examined concepts without significant emotional participation.
Smart, quick, and clever.
PROBLEM AREA: The fickle person. Begins much and finishes nothing.
Must be constantly occupied, but continually dissipates strength. Lacks
in depth.
Thoughts
The philosopher. Resourceful, practical, logical, and
emphatically intellectual. Great imaginative faculty. Able to analyze
precisely. Quick ability to combine and think independently. Agile,
quick-witted, ingenious, and sophisticated.
PROBLEM AREA: The superficial individual. Appallingly superficial,
ingratiating and crafty, phony, and cynical. Pure “head knowledge”
without inner participation. Perpetually doubts everything.
STRENGTH: Feelings
STRENGTH: The butterfly. Lively, carefree, happy, curious, dazzling and cheerful, slightly ironic, charming, sociable, and entertaining. Always
tries to be fair.
PROBLEM AREA: The fugitive. Superficial, flighty feelings, fleeting love
play and flirtations. Restless, always looking for something new. Tends to intellectualize, rationalize, or “explain away.” Fears emotional depth
and flees to intellectual realm or seeks dissipation and distraction.
TYPICAL OCCUPATIONAL AREAS: Agent: particularly stockbrokers, real estate agents, or sales representatives. Commercial professions, above all in
connection with communication: publisher and book dealer, writer,
positions in trade and commerce, correspondent, interpreter, journalist,
reporter, teacher. Intellectually-oriented occupational areas like
mathematics, philology, and study of literature. Cancer (the Crab) The Romantic From June 21st to July 22nd
RULER: and
ELEMENT: Water
EXALTATION: FALL:
CHARACTERISTIC: Cold SEX: Feminine and moist DETRIMENT:
QUALITY: Cardinal
TEMPERAMENT: Phlegmatic (lethargic) = the claws of the crab are two spirals moving in opposite
directions as symbols of the ascending and descending course of the Sun.
At the time of the summer solstice, the Sun reaches the Tropic of Cancer
and begins to travel “backward.”
SYMBOL: Stomach, CORRELATION TO SEASONS: The time
female breasts, glands.
when the fruit is formed.
ARCHETYPE: The poet, the mother.
SHADOW:
The mother–hen, the
eternal child.
MOTIVATION: Solicitude, helpfulness, STRIVES FOR: Emotional safety and
but also ambition.
security.
TASK IN LIFE: Forming emotional PITFALL: Flight into wishful thinking,
bonds and expressing deep feelings. refusal to become an adult.
EXAMPLES: Great poets; romantics.
GLIDING PRINCIPLE: I feel.
PHYSICAL CORRELATIONS: MYTHOLOGICAL MOTIFS: The crab which bit Hercules in the heel as he fought against the Hydra, and all the stories related to the Great Mother.
CENTRAL THOUGHT: Cancers are the romantics of the zodiac. They have access to the images of the soul, which they experience in dreams and
express in new forms time and again. Cancers protect themselves against
their own tearfulness by gathering people around like a protective shield,
binding people closely through help and solicitude. The domain of Cancer
is the family, which offers true safety and security. If it were not for their
enormous ambitions, they would never leave this protective area. Enduring attachment to homeland, family, and childhood, intensive
yearnings, and a capacity for deep emotions allow truly loving people to
develop from this sign.
Actions
STRENGTH: The indirect person; one willing to help. Instinctive reactions based on unconscious impulses, feeling (sympathy), and ambition.
Develops great tenacity. Never takes a straight path, but reaches goals
indirectly. Social–minded, tender, and prepared to help or protect another
person at any time.
PROBLEM AREA: The childlike individual. Apparently selfless actions
based on the fear of otherwise being abandoned. Shy, faint–hearted,
fearful, and hardly willing to change things. Fears conflicts. Flight into a
dream world, depression, or exaggerated ambition. Regression into
childlike behavior.
Thoughts
STRENGTH: The dreamer, the psychologist. Vivid, imaginative thinking strongly influenced by the unconscious mind. Great capability for feeling
other people's desires and thoughts and reacting to them. Deep
understanding of the concerns of the soul.
PROBLEM AREA: The wishful thinker. Caught up in wishful thinking far
removed from logic and objectivity. Also clings to absurd ideas just
because they feel more pleasant than hard reality. Narrow point of view
which is meant to be the standard for other people as well. Lack of
independence. Mechanically repeats what other people say.
Feelings
The romantic. Capable of very deep feelings. Sensitive,
impressionable, devoted. Emotional connection to homeland and family
are just as essential as the confirmation from other people. Is
enthusiastic, naive, trusting, and affectionate in relationships. Great need
for safety and security.
PROBLEM AREA: The overly devoted person, the blackmailer. Possessive.
Clings to the beloved, whom he or she stifles with solicitude and misuses
STRENGTH: as a personal support. Superimposes moods on the surroundings. “Guilt–
feeling politics.” Tears as means to an end. “Tyranny of the weak.”
Emotional egotism.
TYPICAL OCCUPATIONAL AREAS: All helping, caring, and socially committed occupations, particularly doctors, medical and geriatric nurses,
kindergarten teachers, psychologists, occupations in the artistic area such
as acting, poetry, music, writing, literature, and art history. Positions in
area of family, groups, and homeland, such as the preservation of regional
traditions, local politics, gastronomy, society and club work. Leo (the Lion) The Supremely Confident Person From July 23rd to August 22nd
RULER: EXALTATION: DETRIMENT: FALL: — ELEMENT: Fire QUALITY: Fixed CHARACTERISTIC: Warm SEX: Masculine and dry TEMPERAMENT: Choleric (quick-tempered) = the snake, an ancient sign of the sun and its course, symbol
of life as it constantly renews itself and of eternity.
SYMBOL: Heart, CORRELATION TO SEASONS: The
circulatory system, spinal column. splendor of completely ripened fruit.
ARCHETYPE: The king.
SHADOW: The lord and master, the
braggart.
MOTIVATION: Joy in creativity and STRIVES FOR:
Greatest possible
generosity.
degree of self-expression and
admiration.
TASK IN LIFE: Becoming a dignified PITFALL: Superficiality and selffocus of attention.
aggrandizement
EXAMPLES: The truly great rulers and GUIDING PRINCIPLE: I create. I came I
leaders.
saw I conquered
PHYSICAL CORRELATIONS: MYTHOLOGICAL MOTIFS: Hercules and the Nemean Lion. All the sagas of Sun heros and Sun gods.
CENTRAL THOUGHT: Life stands in its fullest blossom and finds its most magnificent development in the sign of Leo. This is expressed in the Leo
person's distinct self-confidence and rousing joy of life. The true kings, for
whom the Earth has produced gold, diamonds, purple robes, and silk, are
at home here. Luxury has been created for them, and they know how to
enjoy it with the proper attitude. Leos are masters of the generous gesture
and expressive design. They know how to create the best effects. They
have an extraordinary understanding of how to plan and organize on a large scale. They love to sun themselves in the light of their own
generosity.
Actions
The organizer. Calm, self-reliant, optimistic, and decisive
actions. Constantly plans and risks the “great success” because they are
uncomfortable with small steps. Life is considered to be a stage for
showmanship. The distinct self-confidence also encourages and
motivates other people. Leos are frequently self-made people and
masters of organization.
PROBLEM AREA: The high and mighty. Complacent, ego-related behavior,
narcissistic, vain, and megalomaniac. Others are reduced to the role of
admirers. Too good for trivial everyday affairs.
STRENGTH: Thoughts
STRENGTH: The careerist. Intuitively comprehends and evaluates things with an overall perspective. Creative intelligence. Strong convictions,
self-confidence, and a vital optimism color his or her way of thinking.
PROBLEM AREA: The condescending person. Completely undifferentiated
thinking in the form of clichés. No interest in objective perceptions.
Superficial and overbearing, without a sense of subtlety. Hates criticism
and has no idea what self-criticism is.
Feelings
STRENGTH: The zestful individual. Hearty, benevolent, humorous, and
always generous. Passionate and cheerful. Loves feeling self-important.
PROBLEM AREA: The boaster. Dependent on constant admiration and
confirmation from others. Embarrassing “lord and master” behavior.
Only short-lived passions. Feelings are vulgarized, and emotional
sympathy reduced to a minimum. Love is only possible as a narcissistic
reflection.
TYPICAL OCCUPATIONAL AREAS: Leadership tasks that emphasize prestige and demand self-confidence and initiative: the manager, organizer,
representative, politician, senior physician, wholesale merchant, officer, director, and actor. Careers devoted to luxury: gold, jewelry, and art
trades, interior decoration, textile branch, and cosmetics. Virgo (the Virgin) The Thorough Person From August 23rd to September 22nd
RULER: EXALTATION: DETRIMENT: FALL: ELEMENT: Earth QUALITY: Mutable CHARACTERISTIC: Cold SEX: Feminine and dry TEMPERAMENT: Melancholic = the m is interpreted as the analogy to a death rune
(corresponds to harvest time).
SYMBOL: Intestinal CORRELATION TO SEASONS: The time
tract, metabolism, solar plexus.
of harvest.
ARCHETYPE:
The person who SHADOW: The Philistine, the pedant,
harvests, the craftsman.
the misanthropist.
MOTIVATION: Joy in details.
STRIVES FOR: Purity and health.
TASK IN LIFE: Critically examining PITFALL: Perfectionism.
everything for its suitability.
EXAMPLES: The master; the sober- GUIDING PRINCIPLE: I take it literally.
minded, critical scientist.
Or: I examine.
PHYSICAL CORRELATIONS: MYTHOLOGICAL MOTIFS: Astraeus, the goddess of justice who left the Earth and became the constellation Virgo. The myth of Demeter.
CENTRAL THOUGHT: The sign Virgo corresponds to the harvest in which the chaff is separated from the wheat. No other sign has such strong instincts
when it comes to differentiating between what is healthy and unhealthy,
useful and pointless, valuable and damaging. Since Virgo people like to
place this ability at the service of humanity, they prefer to take on tasks in
which they can care for and protect an organism. They do this for the
human organism in the role of doctor, for the business world as business
economists, and for the nation as political economists. The love of detail
contrasts to timidity when it comes to “great success.” Virgos are cut out to be the “second man or woman” leaving entrepreneurial risks to others,
while putting more effort into looking after the computations, detail
planning, and practical matters.
Actions
STRENGTH: The economist. Always concerned with what is optimum: achieving the greatest possible use with the minimum amount of (work)
effort. Orderly, diligent, thorough, and reliable. The Virgo person is
considered extremely orderly, but this is not always true. Seen in more
precise terms, he or she fights against chaos. One individual may be
more successful at this, the other less.
PROBLEM AREA: The fussy person. Mistrustful, pedantic, and one-sided in
an orientation toward practicality. Cleaning mania, exaggerated striving
for security, and fearful thriftiness. Nerve-racking perfectionism.
Thoughts
STRENGTH: The scientist. Clever, critical approach that looks toward the future and is oriented toward sober, measurable, and verifiable results.
Objective, pragmatic, down-to-earth, shrewd, but also flexible attitude.
PROBLEM AREA: The narrow-minded thinker. Fanatic for security. Narrowminded and obsessed with details. A compulsive slave to rationality and
dogged faith in science because of fear of what cannot be explained.
Only believes in what can be “proved.”
Feelings
The cautious person. Careful, reserved, almost demure,
chaste, and pure. Slowly warms up to things only after a detailed critical
examination. Then is reliable, faithfully caring, and very willing to help.
PROBLEM AREA: The inhibited individual. Critical, cool, and inhibited.
Love and the ability to be devoted are subject to considerations of
practicality. Only falls in love when everything is “just right.” Tends to
find faults, be resigned, envious, and bitter.
STRENGTH: Areas in which the chaff is critically
separated from the wheat: as a critic or economist. Also, jobs in which the
TYPICAL OCCUPATIONAL AREAS: love of detail has a primary position such as bookkeeping, editing, data
processing, but also the medical profession—particularly dentists.
Occupations in which a practical mind (technology, crafts) or manual
skills are required (from precision mechanic to massage therapist). Also,
teachers, specialists, and sober-minded (natural) scientists. Prefers to work
as a salaried employee. Libra (the Scales) The Artist From September 23rd to October 22nd
RULER: EXALTATION: DETRIMENT: FALL: ELEMENT: Air QUALITY: Cardinal CHARACTERISTIC: Warm SEX: Masculine and moist TEMPERAMENT: Sanguine (optimistic) = symbol of a scale, or the evening Sun above the horizon,
both symbols of equilibrium and peace in the sign of the autumnal equinox
SYMBOL: Kidneys, CORRELATION TO SEASONS: Autumnal
renal pelvis, bladder, skin.
equinox, the time of balance in
nature
ARCHETYPE: The artist, the wise SHADOW: The eternally indecisive
judge.
person, the snob.
MOTIVATION: Love of beauty.
STRIVES FOR: Beauty and harmony.
TASK IN LIFE: Bringing beauty into PITFALL:
Beautiful
hollowness,
the world
esthetic superficiality.
EXAMPLES:
The great artists, GUIDING PRINCIPLE: 1 weigh. Or: I
esthetics, and people who have balance.
attained their perfect form.
PHYSICAL CORRELATIONS: MYTHOLOGICAL MOTIFS: Cupid and Psyche. The Judgment of Paris.
CENTRAL THOUGHT: Libra is the sign of harmony. Its main concern is creating harmony, maintaining it, and enjoying it. This applies to the
harmony of forms in architecture, art, and design, as well as to forms of
social manners, particularly the harmony in close interpersonal
relationships like friendship, marriage, and partnership. This makes it the
sign of the artist, the aesthetic, as well as the mediator and peacemaker. It
is a pleasure for Librans to let life become graceful beyond all the dry
necessities to bring joy to the senses through beauty, harmony, and good
taste. Despite all the relating to other people, Libra people still do not want to be monopolized. Instead, they love the feeling of freedom. In the
search for decisions that least disturb harmony (which means not hurting
or doing injustice to anyone, if possible), Librans need considerably more
time than other signs, which explains their famous weakness in making
decisions.
Actions
STRENGTH: The person who balances, A creative and impulse-giving way of functioning, always with style and concern not to rub anyone the
wrong way. Tactful, enterprising, good-natured, tolerant, and sociable.
PROBLEM AREA: The half-hearted individual. Notorious difficulties in
making decisions, unable to engage in conflict, and therefore dependent
on the surrounding world and people's sympathy. Puts on act of pseudosuperiority. Starry-eyed and unrealistic.
Thoughts
STRENGTH: The highbrow. Graphic way of thinking, influenced by form and harmony. Clever strategist in questions of an equilibrium of energies.
Very good style in manner of expressing thoughts. Open for innovations.
Enjoys communication.
PROBLEM AREA: The fickle person. Indecisive, susceptible, superficial,
suppresses unpleasant insights. Sometimes calculating and very cunning.
Feelings
The peacemaker. Enjoys contacts, easily willing to
compromise, compensatory. Always oriented toward the other person,
but at the same time concerned about freedom and inner independence.
PROBLEM AREA: The uncommitted individual. Because of fearing the highs
and lows of life, piteously fixated on the uncommitted happy medium.
Greedily demands sympathy from others, is moody and capricious.
Suppresses feelings. Telltale craving for compromise because of
pathological need to avoid conflict.
STRENGTH: TYPICAL OCCUPATIONAL AREAS: All professions that bring beauty into the world such as art—especially music, dance, acting, fashion, photography, advertising, interior design, work with flowers, colors, luxury articles,
cosmetics. Tasks in which cultivated style and sociability can be
expressed: representatives, solicitors, diplomats, entertainers, and
mediators. The entire legal field is represented here with the task of
mediating peace, producing compromises, and representing the just cause. Scorpio (the Scorpion) The Gray Eminence From October 23rd to November 21st
and EXALTATION: DETRIMENT: FALL: ELEMENT: Water QUALITY: Fixed CHARACTERISTIC: SEX: Feminine TEMPERAMENT: RULER: Cold and moist Phlegmatic (lethargic) = the m is attributed to a death rune completed by the death
sting of the scorpion.
SYMBOL: PHYSICAL CORRELATIONS: Genitals. CORRELATION TO SEASONS: When the outer nature dies to form humus
beneath the Earth for the new year.
ARCHETYPE: Magician, shaman.
SHADOW: The vampire.
MOTIVATION: Impulse into the depths. STRIVES FOR: Security and power.
TASK IN LIFE:
Being a true, PITFALL: Intoxication with power.
completely irritating healer.
EXAMPLES: All the gray eminences, GUIDING PRINCIPLE: I probe. Or: I
alchemists (Faust).
desire.
MYTHOLOGICAL MOTIFS: Orion's death. Gilgamesh and the scorpion people.
CENTRAL THOUGHT: Scorpio is the sign of depth and the extremes. Nothing interests the Scorpio less than what is superficial and mediocre. Scorpio's
world is cryptic. Scorpio is the Faustian human being, irresistibly drawn
by the urge to explore everything that is concealed, secretive, suppressed,
to the taboos that a society produces. The spectrum of feelings contains
only extremes, like love and hate. Scorpio is a stranger to medium tones.
Scorpio possesses immense powers of the soul that can be used for the
benefit of others. Scorpio can be a healer and a helper, but can also use
this ability to make other people dependent, or can even destroy others.
This makes a responsible manner of dealing with power the explosive
theme of this sign. Actions
STRENGTH: The uncompromising person, the breaker of taboos. Scorpio does not enter into lazy compromises, and can be an example and leading
figure for others. Places a finger mercilessly and with a sure instinct on
the sore spots of others and can thereby initiate a healing process. Tough,
tenacious, strong-willed, provocative, and often uncomfortable for
others.
PROBLEM AREA: The destroyer. All actions serve the intensification of
personal power. Tyrannical, destructive, and self-destructive.
Thoughts
STRENGTH: The detective. The urge to reveal secrets and courage to also venture into dangerous areas in the process. Profound and analytic.
Sharp-witted and unyielding in the quest for the last truth. Is certain to
talk about what everyone else would like to keep silent about.
PROBLEM AREA: The pigheaded person. Cynical, fanatic, dogmatic, and
stubborn. Strongest powers of wishful thinking, which easily become
fixated on one idea.
Feelings
STRENGTH: The powerful individual. Enormous emotional strengths and wishful powers that can be compelling for others. Intensive, inscrutable,
passionate, and lustful feelings. Strong sexuality. Access to dark, archaic
powers of the soul.
PROBLEM AREA: The vampire. Giving in to the temptations of one's own
power. Sucking other people dry emotionally and keeping them in
subjection and dependence. Pathologically jealous and envious,
vindictive, sadistic, and blindly destructive. Desperately at the mercy of
the extremes of one's own emotions.
TYPICAL OCCUPATIONAL AREAS: Wherever the penetration and exploration of the unknown, the mysterious, and the concealed is concerned: explorers,
investigators, detectives, cave-explorers; in espionage as well as
psychoanalysis; x-ray technology, but also esoterics and secret teachings. The entire field of healing and therapy; professions treated as outcasts by
society, such as garbage collection; tasks associated with death:
companion to the dying, director of funeral home, executor of wills, and
trustees in bankruptcy. Sagittarius (the Archer) The Citizen of the World From November 22nd to December 21st
RULER: EXALTATION: — DETRIMENT: FALL: — ELEMENT: Fire QUALITY: Mutable CHARACTERISTIC: SEX: Masculine TEMPERAMENT: Choleric Warm and dry quick-tempered) = the arrow aims into the heavens and symbolizes striving for
higher things. The winged centaur reminds us that Sagittarius also has an
instinctual nature, which should not be forgotten, despite lofty striving.
SYMBOL: Hips, CORRELATION TO SEASONS: The
thighs, liver and gallbladder.
Advent season, leading to the new
birth of the light on the shortest day
of the year.
ARCHETYPE: The high priest, the SHADOW:
The
pharisee,
the
missionary.
hypocrite.
MOTIVATION: The search for meaning. STRIVES
FOR:
Ideals, religous
convictions, and justice.
TASK IN LIFE: Proclaiming the PITFALL:
Self-righteousness and
meaning and guiding.
hypocrisy.
EXAMPLES: The great preachers and GUIDING PRINCIPLE: I believe. It is
evangelists.
clear to me.
PHYSICAL CORRELATION'S: MYTHOLOGICAL MOTIFS: The wise centaur Chiron who taught Hercules.
CENTRAL THOUGHT: In the sign of Sagittarius, the issue is expanding the horizons of both the inner and outer worlds. This can be seen in the
distinct fondness of travel, leading to encounters with distant cultures, as
well as the endeavor to expand inner horizons thanks to these trips and
continual improvement of one's knowledge. Above all, Sagittarius is
driven to seek meaning. Deeply religious on the inside, aware that a higher
purpose is concealed within all of Creation, it is the concern of this sign to find this meaning and proclaim it. Since the feeling for justice is strongly
developed, Sagittarians strive for justice, guided by truly high values or by
extreme prejudices and embarrassing slips into self-righteous priestly
smugness.
Actions
The self-motivated person. Great joy in achievement and
movement, associated with an ability to be inspired and motivated.
Aspires to leave narrow surroundings and strives for higher goals.
Dignified, supremely confident, sophisticated. Acts on the basis of noble
convictions, guided by respect, love, and reverence for humanity and
Creation.
PROBLEM AREA: The arrogant individual. Big-mouthed dazzler and showoff. Incapable of setting limits or developing modesty and humbleness.
Fearfully concerned with outward appearances. Can admit no weakness.
STRENGTH: Thoughts
STRENGTH: The educated mind. Strives for higher education and broad horizons. Liberal mind. Inner convictions and acquired worldview
subjectively color thinking. Tends to have magnificent plans and farreaching goals.
PROBLEM AREA: The conceited thinker Moral arrogance, fanatic
convictions, know-it-all, presumptuous infallibility, insincerity,
hypocrisy, lies, sensitivity to criticism. Condescending talkativeness (the
small-time philosopher).
Feelings
STRENGTH: The enthusiast. Flooded with and spurred on by high to holy feelings. Great ability to become enthusiastic. Doesn't want to disappoint
anyone in any way, shape, or form. Need for freedom which also
demands considerable elbow room in partnerships. Loves to work
together with the partner on the realization of mutual goals and ideals.
PROBLEM AREA: The masked person. Fear of disgrace, particularly of
being unmasked and exposed as simply a normal human being with all
one's faults and weaknesses. Everything that deals with foreign
countries, travel, and foreign trade, particularly in connection with
representative assignments: diplomats, politicians, foreign correspondents,
interpreters, exporters, tour operators and managers. People searching for
meaning and guides in life like philosophers, theologians, spiritual
advisors, and counselors. Judicial professions and the world of sports.
TYPICAL OCCUPATIONAL AREAS: Capricorn (the Goat) The Patriarch From December 22nd to January 20th
RULER:
FALL: and CHARACTERISTIC: EXALTATION: DETRIMENT: ELEMENT: Earth QUALITY: Cardinal Cold ISEX: Feminine and dry TEMPERAMENT: Melancholic SYMBOL: = symbol of the sun which slowly rises upward from the
depths (winter solstice).
PHYSICAL
CORRELATIONS:
Bone CORRELATION TO SEASONS: Clear,
system, knees, nails.
cold, harsh winter.
ARCHETYPE:
The patriarch, the
SHADOW: The grumbler.
hermit.
MOTIVATION:
Feeling
of STRIVES FOR: Completion of the work
responsibility.
that has been started.
TASK IN LIFE: Resolutely representing
law and order, principles and PITFALL: The joyless drudge.
standards.
EXAMPLES: Old Testament father
GUIDING PRINCIPLE: I complete. I am
figures or the king as the first
responsible.
servant of his state.
MYTHOLOGICAL MOTIFS: The goatfish, as well as Atlas, Christopher, and other great bearers of burdens.
CENTRAL THOUGHT: The true prime movers are at home in the sign of Capricorn. Here they work with patience and resilient persistence to
dutifully fulfill the tasks that they have assumed and bring them to
completion. This is less meant to enhance their own fame than to complete
the work, behind which they then step into the background. Faithfulness,
discipline, resolution, and a sense of duty are the essential characteristics of this sign, as well as supporting the inclination toward law and order,
standards and structures.
Actions
STRENGTH: The individual who bears responsibility. Naturally assumes responsibility and does not let go until plans that have been set in motion
are put into effect. Only tangible results count. Diligent, precise,
persevering, dependable, sober, down-to-earth, indefatigable, energetic,
and persistent.
PROBLEM AREA: The person who has no mercy on himself or herself.
Listless fulfillment of responsibilities, joyless drudgery, addicted to work
and responsibility, permanent pressure to perform, dread of innovation,
and fears of competition. Rigid clinging to old time-tested patterns and
structures. Unsociable, restless, gruff, unfair, and stingy.
Thoughts
STRENGTH: The clear mind. Clear, precise evaluation of effort,
expenditure, and yield. Immediately recognizes what is feasible and what
is not. Practical and healthy common sense. Sensible, profound, and
extremely concentrated.
PROBLEM AREA: The uncomprehending person. Headstrong, ponderous,
inflexible, ruled by “time-tested” patterns of thought and persistently
closed to innovations.
Feelings
STRENGTH: The serious soul. Only opens up very slowly and hesitantly, but then is loyal, reliable, dependable, dutiful, and very responsible. Can
clearly set boundaries. Sensuality is well-controlled but strong. Takes
feelings seriously. Is careful and tends to be mistrustful.
PROBLEM AREA: The withdrawn person. Sharp separation between feeling
and actions. Reserved, closed, ice-cold, ruthlessly cool, and
inconsiderate. At times sentimental, depressive, and melancholy. Denies
the childlike, playful, tender side that needs devotion. TYPICAL OCCUPATIONAL AREAS: Positions that bear responsibility in public life: politicians, state officials, managers in all areas. Wherever a good
sense of lasting values is required: in the field of banking and real estate,
in the insurance business, or as a trustee. Where clear structures are
created and solid material (above all, stone) is processed, from the
construction industry to sculpture. Professions that require a sober
attitude, prudence, seriousness, and much endurance. Aquarius (the Water Bearer) The Individualist From January 21st to February 19th
RULER: and FALL:
CHARACTERISTIC: and moist EXALTATION: — DETRIMENT: ELEMENT: Air QUALITY: Fixed Warm SEX: Masculine TEMPERAMENT: Sanguine (optimistic) SYMBOL: = wave lines as the symbol of constant movement that
disappears into infinity.
PHYSICAL CORRELATIONS: Lower leg, CORRELATION Cool,
pancreas.
clear, still winter, and Carnival time.
ARCHETYPE: The wise fool.
SHADOW: The lunatic, the lonely
person, the eccentric.
MOTIVATION: Originality and hunger STRIVES FOR:
Utopia or stoic
for knowledge.
tranquillity.
TASK IN LIFE: Overcoming old to PITFALL: Always needing to be
bring innovation into the world.
special.
EXAMPLES:
Great
humanists, GUIDING PRINCIPLE: 1 know (that I
philosophers,
reformers,
and don't know anything).
rationalists.
TO SEASONS: MYTHOLOGICAL MOTIFS: Ganymede, the cup-bearer of the gods.
CENTRAL THOUGHT: Aquarius topples old values in order to replace them with new ones. It clears away class distinctions in order to produce
equality between employer and workers, the sexes, the races, varying
cultures, etc. Concerned with the realization of utopia, with the freedom of
the individual, and with bursting encrusted structures. At the medieval
court, this principle was demonstrated in the role to the court jester, the
only one who had the jester's license to speak the truth. Since the French
Revolution, which resulted shortly after the discovery of the planet Uranus
(ruler of this sign), its principles of “freedom, equality, brotherhood” have been on every one's lips. Aquarius possesses extraordinary powers of
abstraction, tends to view things from above, and is very imaginative and
inventive.
Actions
STRENGTH: The considerate person. Strives for independence. Wants to be free from all limitations and inhibitions. Always wants to set self apart
from the masses and emphasize personal qualities. After careful
consideration, he or she works conscientiously, cleverly, and with
endurance.
PROBLEM AREA: The withdrawn individual. Ego weakness and unmastered
feelings of inferiority can lead to dangerous overcompensation.
Unpredictable and slightly crazy. Has a difficult time being resolute,
integrating or even subordinating himself or herself.
Thoughts
STRENGTH: The observer with a perspective. Likes to get a clear,
objective picture of things, properly evaluate situations, develop farreaching prospects, and contribute ingenious ideas from a “bird's-eye
view.” Original, witty, imaginative, quick-witted, bizarre, and objective;
a rational, aloof mind.
PROBLEM AREA: The armchair philosopher Detached from the “heaviness
of the earth,” lost in intellectual edifices. Has the entire world in his or
her head, but no drive to translate the ideas into action or examine them
for feasibility.
Feelings
STRENGTH: The buddy. Charming and noncommittal, lively, sympathetic, fair, companionable. Feeling or showing feelings is complicated. Prefers
to conceal feelings behind a friendly and cool, reserved attitude. Shies
away from committed relationships, preferring to be alone. May also
avoid relationships because of a love of variety.
PROBLEM AREA: The eccentric. the isolated individual. The unusual and
eternally misunderstood person with claim to all special rights.
Anarchistic tendencies. An anti-attitude at all costs. Fear of deep feelings in which one could get lost. Impersonal, distanced, controlled, and icecold, which explains being lonely and isolated.
TYPICAL OCCUPATIONAL AREAS: Professions that demand creativity and
allow great freedom of movement: above all marketing, advertising, and
public relations. Tasks in which the latest technology is applied, new
developments take place, and inventions are made. Foresighted
occupations such as futurist, and astrologer. Scientists who take unusual
paths or employ the newest methods that are difficult to explain
(alternative medicine and homeopathy). Pisces (the Fishes) The Medium From February 20th to March 20th
RULER: and FALL:
CHARACTERISTIC: EXALTATION: DETRIMENT: ELEMENT: Water QUALITY: Mutable Cold SEX: Feminine and moist TEMPERAMENT: Phlegmatic (lethargic) SYMBOL: = two fish are attached to each other, both trying to swim in a
different direction.
PHYSICAL CORRELATIONS: Feet and CORRELATION TO SEASONS: Fasting
ankles.
period when the saved seeds are
offered to Mother Earth as a
sacrifice.
ARCHETYPE:
The prophet, the SHADOW: The addict, the unstable
Samaritan.
person.
MOTIVATION: Longing to leave the STRIVES FOR: Being one with the
prison of the body.
Holy Spirit.
TASK IN LIFE: Living witness to the PITFALL: Mistaking the spirit of wine
work of God in this world
for the Holy Spirit.
EXAMPLES:
Great peacemakers, GUIDING PRINCIPLE: I sense. Or: I
spiritual advisers, and artists.
love.
MYTHOLOGICAL MOTIFS: Fish that save the heroes (Jonah) by swallowing them and spitting them out after a phase of purification (rebirth).
CENTRAL THOUGHT: Pisces has great longing for spiritual experiences,
transcendent worlds, or simply release from the confines of the body,
which can be experienced as a prison. Pisces places little value on the
values of this world and is therefore willing to make sacrifices to help
others. Boundless sympathy often moves Pisces. This is the sign of great
spiritual advisers who listen and understand without evaluating. Their problem is developing a distinct feeling of self-identity, which is why
Pisces tends to experience the Ascendant as the ego instead of the Sun.
Actions
STRENGTH: The guided individual, the altruist. Seismographic sensing of outer impressions and inner knowing about the right point in time. Is
inclined more toward strongly instinctive, passive reactions than active,
resolute actions. Understands the art of “being able to let things happen.”
Willing to help, self-sacrificing, selfless.
PROBLEM AREA: The eternal victim. Constantly makes oneself into the
pitiable victim. Flight into illness and depression. Manipulates others
with helplessness. Charming facade which can conceal a contradictory
personality that behaves in a vicious and cruel manner. Chameleon-like
feigned accommodation, instability, and vulnerability to seduction that
borders on being controlled by others. In danger of becoming addicted.
Thoughts
STRENGTH: The intuitive person. Good antenna and unerring sense of
correlations are the qualities of a great creative fantasy, the insights of
which often cannot be substantiated. Strives for insight and wisdom.
PROBLEM AREA: The vague thinker. Airy-fairy, mysterious, inconstant, and
insincere. Incapable of assuming a clear, objective standpoint for more
than a moment. Delusions and vague opinions.
Feelings
STRENGTH: The sensitive person. Selfless love, willing to make sacrifices. Boundless empathy, enormous ability for devotion, and deep
understanding. Longing to become one and merge. Enchanting and
bewitching, seductive, emotional, sense of delicacy, and allencompassing love.
PROBLEM AREA: Someone who is easy to seduce. Can't set limits.
Oversensitive, highly vulnerable, slightly depressive, but also capable of
developing extreme harshness and coldness. Masochistic tendencies.
Longing for death. Professions that demand sympathy,
spirituality, and willingness to help or to sacrifice, such as spiritual
advising or charitable tasks. The world of fantasy and imaginary reality,
like the circus, theater, and film business. Art, and above all, music,
poetry, and painting. Occupations that demand a strong instinct, tasks in
subtle areas, such as the work of a medium, naturopath, or homeopath.
Activities with or in water: shipping, fishing, and diving. The
pharmaceutical industry.
TYPICAL OCCUPATIONAL AREAS: The MOON and the PLANETS
in the SIGNS Moon in Aries The Amazon AS A CHILD: The little berserker. Lively, demanding, willful, loud,
courageous, impetuous. The state of being small is felt to be an offense.
Early development of motor skills; needs sufficient freedom of movement.
Low threshold of frustration. Seeks lively confrontation with the mother.
Feelings are expressed spontaneously, directly, without disguise. Attempts
to break the childish obstinacy results in catastrophes. Easy detachment
from the parents.
INNER MOTHER IMAGE: proud,
woman. unbending, The strong, DIFFICULT LESSONS TO LEARN:
courageous Patience and consideration for
others. AS A MOTHER: The vigorous individual. Brings up her child to be self- reliant and independent. Teaches her child to assert itself. Resists
emotional ties. A dependent, cuddly child will not receive just rewards
from her.
IMAGE OF THE WOMAN: The wild woman. Impulsive, direct, and impatient. Loves everything uncomplicated and direct. Emotionally approachable
and irritable. Fiery, hefty, passionate requirements. Great need for
independence and self-responsibility. Always feels exactly what she
wants. In partnership: chummy, tom-boyish, autonomous, always ready to
argue. Incapable of devotion. Likes to conquer, but not let herself be
conquered. Always out to satisfy her own needs.
SHADOW: The virago.
STRENGTH: The adventuress. Strong feelings and spontaneous reactions. Open, direct, inwardly restless, likes to be on the road. Lifelong youthful
feeling, open-minded, always ready for the new, the inspiring, and the exciting. Loves thrills and suspense. Does not put up with nonsense.
Ready to take risks and engage in conflict.
PROBLEM AREA: The quarrelsome soul. Highly sensitive to (perceived) discrimination. Constant inner irritability mixed with anger and
frustration. Inconsiderate and nervous when it comes to one's own
advantage. Has difficulty tuning in to others, listening, or just being there.
Highly impatient, sensitive to criticism, and arrogant. Little sense of selfcriticism. Might misunderstand gentleness to be weakness.
KEY PRINCIPLE: Don't anything.
Moon in Taurus put up with STYLE OF LIVING: A nomad's
tent.
The Sociable Soul Exaltation AS A CHILD: Little Miss or Mister Sunshine. Very sensual, calm, soulful, contented, and quite oral. Fully contented, or contented when full. Needs
an especially intense and constant physical relationship with the mother,
especially in the first years. Tends to be a late bloomer, needs leisure and
time to mature. Leaving mother and home is difficult.
INNER MOTHER IMAGE: The warm, DIFFICULT LESSONS TO LEARN:
nourishing, protecting woman.
Departures, courage to change.
AS A MOTHER: The good-natured woman. The practical, down-to-earth, protective, and caring mother. Devotes herself to her child with patience
and care, gives a deep feeling of security and safety, shows her child how
to easily manage daily routines. Has difficulty letting go of her child.
IMAGE OF THE WOMAN: The sensuous one. Very feminine. Erotic,
sensuous, physical, heartfelt, charming, seductive, steady, domestic, and
faithful. Seeks emotional security and stability. She can be lover, whore,
wife, and mother to her partner all in one.
SHADOW: The ponderous person. STRENGTH: The faithful heart. Pronounced need to be physically close to the partner: to sense, taste, and enjoy the other person. In spite of the sense
of stability, a slight hesitance when it comes to binding and making a
commitment because once the decision is made, it's forever. Separation,
change, and new starts feel like uprooting and are therefore feared. Loves
security in a circle of trusted people. Good-natured, content, inner
serenity, patience, and love of peace. A collector, sedentary, and very
fertile.
PROBLEM AREA: The hedonist. A tendency toward being thick-skinned and ponderous. Lazy, stubborn, immovable, stuck in old habits, coarse, boring,
and gluttonous.
KEY PRINCIPLE: I have what I have. Moon in Gemini STYLE OF LIVING: The farmhouse. The Inquisitive Individual AS A CHILD: The bookworm. Restless, spirited, smart, curious, interested in everything. Learns to speak and read early. Reads a lot (at the same time).
Experiences an over-caring, physical mother as a bother. Critically distant
on the emotional level, therefore emotionally independent at an early age.
Easy detachment from the parents.
INNER MOTHER IMAGE: The smart DIFFICULT LESSONS TO LEARN: mother or the
restless mother.
AS A MOTHER: cool, Making
busy, decisions and sticking to them; emotional
commitments. The clever woman. The carefree mother, without any
unnecessary worries. Light and sunny disposition. Finds clever and handy
solutions, is interested in her child and always ready to listen. Has an
answer for every question. Darkness and unpleasantness get shaken off.
On the cool side. IMAGE OE THE WOMAN: The intellectual. Clever, curious, emotionally on the superficial side, carefree, playful, extroverted, charming, social,
sunny, a coquette, creative, and unreliable. Ignores nagging personal
problems. Other people's problems can be discussed. Emotionally aloof
and hard to reach. Dislikes getting into deep relationships.
SHADOW: The fickle person.
STRENGTH: The intellectually curious individual. A very active intellect, interested in everything and communicative. Loves exchanging ideas,
arguing, discussing, is curious and vicarious. Skeptical rather than
gullible. The mind is the path to the heart: feelings are analyzed,
questioned, explored, and straightened out, if possible.
PROBLEM AREA: The doubting Thomas. Constantly changing feelings.
Sooner or later everything is torn apart by doubt. Nothing can be really
trusted. The mind always finds a way out, sometimes to its own
disadvantage. Egregious hair-splitting. Shallow feelings, mocking,
cynical, superficial, and skeptical. A tedious know-it-all. Avoids
confronting the darker sides of feelings.
KEY PRINCIPLE: STYLE OF LIVING: The airy, light apartment, editorial What's new? office, book store. Moon in Cancer The Helpful Person Dignity AS A CHILD: The nestling, Sensitive, rather shy, childlike, imaginative, dreamy, Needs a warm nest, a great deal of protection and security against
the harsh realities of life, Likes to retreat into a world of dreams and
fantasies. Pronounced sense of family. Childhood is often thought of as a
paradise. Often a great wish to be allowed to always remain a child.
Difficult detachment from the parents.
INNER MOTHER IMACE: The good, DIFFICULT LESSONS TO LEARN: To caring, nourishing mother. become independent and grown-up. AS A MOTHER: The mama. The ideal mother: loving, devoted, protective, considerate, and warm-hearted. Loves children. A mother-hen who
protects, takes care of, and tends her brood, who might not like it when
her children become independent and adult. Has trouble letting go
emotionally.
IMAGE OF THE WOMAN: The dreamy individual. The romantic woman.
Gentle, tender, affectionate, adaptable, very motherly, loving, careful,
hesitant, and very devoted in safe circumstances. Entertaining, but also
sensitive. Subject to strong emotional fluctuations and moody.
SHADOW: The mother-hen.
STRENGTH: The teller of fairy tales. Imaginative, dreamy, romantic, and entertaining. A vibrant spiritual life that is expressed in dreams or other
images. Deep spiritual sensitivity and empathy. Feelings change like the
phases of the Moon. Strong need for love, attention, and the sense of
being supported, Very good with children. Family-oriented and faithful.
PROBLEM AREA: The moody woman. Extreme mood fluctuations. A great demand for constant security makes her dependent or lacking in selfreliance, and prevents her from growing up. Affection and attention are
often extorted with moodiness as a threat. Childish and easily insulted,
with long periods of sulking. Kitschy.
KEY PRINCIPLE: I love being close STYLE OF LIVING: The nest, the fairytale to you. castle.
Moon in Leo The Classy Woman AS A CHILD: The little queen. The sunny, cheerful, beaming child, full of high spirits, carefree, and natural. Expresses feelings in a direct and clear
manner. Needs much attention and admiration, always wants to be the
first, and has difficulty accepting defeats. Easily hurt when she isn't “the
biggest.” The detachment from the parents causes no particular
difficulties.
The DIFFICULT
magnificent, supremely confident Tolerating
mother.
modesty.
INNER MOTHER IMAGE: LESSONS justified TO LEARN: criticism, AS A MOTHER: The generous individual. Benevolent, hearty, natural, and very proud of her child. Likes to sun herself in the mirror of her own
generosity. Supports her child through praise and encouragement.
Conveys great self-reliance. Can let her child “go out into the world.”
IMAGE OF THE WOMAN: The elegant woman, the queen of drama. Proud, demanding, and hungry for life. Is naturally at the center of attention.
Spreads a warm atmosphere, optimism, joy of living, and brings
momentum into everyday life. Enjoys being pampered. Can dramatically
put herself into the limelight.
SHADOW: The luxury-craving individual.
STRENGTH: The woman who loves life. Catchy, life-affirming, optimistic basic attitude. Sunny disposition. Enjoys feeling like someone special.
Loves luxury, pleasure, and grand gestures. Very proud. Considerable
leaning toward showmanship with a great need of recognition.
PROBLEM AREA: The prima donna. Jealous, sensitive to criticism,
overbearing, and a delicate sense of self-worth. Always high-strung in
order not to miss anything in life. Tendency toward irate, impulsive,
exaggerated reactions and overestimation of her own capabilities. Finds
even her own weakness to be worth admiration. KEY PRINCIPLE: living. Life is worth STYLE OF LIVING: The villa or luxury
apartment. Moon in Virgo The Sensible Person AS A CHILD: The conscientious one. Careful, critically observant, somewhat reserved, and smart. Would like to do everything right, be useful and
helpful. Seeks recognition by helping others and conscientiously fulfilling
assigned tasks. Tends to be reserved and self-denying. Clean.
INNER MOTHER IMAGE: The reliable, DIFFICULT competent, diligent mother. LESSONS TO LEARN: Spontaneity, tolerance, magnanimity. AS A MOTHER: The competent mom. Skillful, quick, conscientious,
reasonable, in control, and clean. Very concerned with healthy food and
healthy lifestyle. Teaches her child to be fit and master everyday tasks
effortlessly. Sometimes too anxious.
IMAGE OF THE WOMAN: The clever, diligent lady of the house. Reliable, practical, understanding, sometimes a little aloof, severe, and reserved.
Fear of chaos and chaotic feelings. Therefore has the tendency to put
everything in order, carefully organize or analyze so that she can at least
think everything is under control.
SHADOW: The stickler.
STRENGTH: The orderly person. Inner compulsion to live reasonably,
healthfully, and rather modestly. Accepts what is necessary and willing to
adapt. Tends to criticize others and self. Loves order, cleanliness, and
hygiene. Great need for security. Exceptionally reliable.
PROBLEM AREA: The hyper-perfectionist. Exaggerated striving for order, perfection, health, combined with an addiction to criticism. Very intolerant. Blocked, withered feelings, sexual hang-ups, and a
pigeonholing mentality.
KEY PRINCIPLE: Foresight is better STYLE OF LIVING: The house built on
ecological principles. than hindsight.
Moon in Libra The Esthete AS A CHILD: The ballerina. The nice, sweet, smart, and charming child. The coquette. Starts flirting at an early age. Needs much attention and
admiration. Very adaptable out of tear of discord and dread of being
deserted. In extreme cases, there are difficulties in developing opinions
and a consciousness of personal identity.
The DIFFICULT LESSONS TO LEARN: Willingness to
carefree, peaceable mother.
engage in conflict, decisiveness.
INNER MOTHER IMAGE: AS A MOTHER: The conciliatory person. Mediating, always concerned with fairness. Strives for harmony and peace as the uppermost commandment
in the family. Promotes the artistic capabilities in her child.
IMAGE OF THE WOMAN: The graceful one. Charming, friendly, sensitive, stylish, and diplomatic. Tends to have thin skin and is easily insulted.
Enchanting, enticing, and great at flirting. Orients toward whoever he or
she is involved with, but without opening up on a deep emotional level.
Good companion.
SHADOW: The noncommittal individual.
STRENGTH: The diplomat Understands how to assert wishes with charm. Highly tasteful and esthetic sensibilities. Esthetic, artistic, and cultural
interests. Needs to have a peaceful, refined, and stylish environment. Very
partner-oriented. Seeks love, attention, sympathy, harmony, high spirits,
and variety. Always ready to make a compromise. Has a talent for
presenting himself or herself in the right light (fishing for compliments). PROBLEM AREA: The eternally indecisive person. Emotionally unstable. Great fluctuations in the realm of the emotions. Unrealistic, addicted to
relationships and harmony, and often incapable of making decisions for
this reason. Too much concerned with the external form, style, or a good
reputation.
KEY PRINCIPLE: Always be STYLE OF LIVING: The high-style apartment, the quite friendly.
Moon in Scorpio social meeting place.
The Sorceress Fall AS A CHILD: The mysterious one. Need for an intensive relationship with the mother. Seeks conflicts with, provokes, and wants to feel the mother
with intensity. Sharp sense of the moods within the family and for the
relationship between the parents. Early and strong attraction to anything
forbidden, mysterious, all taboos, the subconscious world, and sexuality.
That is often the challenge for the mother. There is an urge to explore.
May deal with a state of rage that leads to destructiveness. Cutting the
umbilical cord is a life-long task.
INNER MOTHER IMAGE: Strong, fascinating, DIFFICULT LESSONS TO LEARN: powerful mother, and/or the horrible, evil Not to destroy every toy right
witch.
away.
AS A MOTHER: The dark, fairy. Emotionally very bound and committed to her child. Wants to know everything about her child, and therefore leaves
it no secrets. Can be challenging, but also annihilating. Tends to keep her
child in a state of emotional dependency. When it comes to principles, she
is ruthless and uncompromising.
IMAGE OF THE WOMAN: The black Madonna. The serpent woman, the spider woman, and the uncanny seductress. Emphasis on feelings. Fascinating, mysterious, thorough, and passionate. Able to totally charm others.
Possessive, devouring, infamous, and irresistible.
SHADOW: The wicked witch.
STRENGTH: The healer. Strong instinctive nature combined with an almost eerie power to makes wishes come true. Can resist the temptation of
power and use spiritual strength to heal. Overcoming of the self.
Unflagging mobilization of new powers. Irresistibly attracted to all taboos.
PROBLEM AREA: The power maniac. Wants to conquer other souls and create dependencies. Extremely jealous, unforgiving, vengeful, reckless,
and obsessed by power. Demands unconditional devotion from her
partner. Often caught up in a depressive, melancholic mood. Overly
secretive. Addicted to the feeling of control. Strong destructive powers
that can even destroy what she actually loves. A shot of poison.
KEY PRINCIPLE: I would love to know STYLE OF LIVING: A bewitched
what's in or at the bottom of that. Or: Just magic castle or the home of
don't let up.
Dracula.
Moon in Sagittarius The Noble-Minded Person AS A CHILD: The good (pious) child. Pronounced feeling of being special. Inner urge to be good: morally, spiritually, or in terms of achievements.
Dislikes disappointing others. Longs to be loved, admired, and
recognized. The mother cannot be narrow-minded. She must allow her
child a great deal of space, support the child, provide new impulses, and
show the way. Injustice is unbearable and difficult to overcome.
INNER MOTHER IMAGE: The ideal DIFFICULT LESSONS TO LEARN: Learning to and/or the pious mother. lose and emotional sincerity. AS A MOTHER: The jovial woman. Supportive, well-meaning, optimistic, and idealistic attitude toward the child. Can always arouse new optimism.
Wants to be the ideal mother. However, major domestic responsibilities
put a great strain on joy and enthusiasm.
IMAGE OF THE WOMAN: The cosmopolite, the globe-trotter. Humorous,
impulsive, easy enthusiasm, an open mind, restless, and independent.
Enjoys international contacts. Loves to be praised. Often concerned with
religious questions or the meaning of life, sometimes a bit
sanctimoniously. Sacrifices sensuality to dogmatic moral ideas.
SHADOW: The arrogant individual.
STRENGTH: The enthusiast. Bubbling, idealistic, enthusiastic feelings,
grand gestures, high goals, and easily motivated. Freedom-loving. A
traveler at home anywhere on the globe. Well-developed feeling for
justice. High opinion of herself, but less prepared to hear criticism.
Positive attitude toward life. Great need to make sense of things.
PROBLEM AREA: The self-righteous person. Exaggerated cultivation of the self, overbearing, arrogant, conceited, extremely sensitive to criticism. An
unpleasant know-it-all. Condescending, unreliable, and inconsistent. Too
good for almost everything.
KEY PRINCIPLE: The human being is STYLE OF LIVING: noble, refined, and good.
Moon in Capricorn High ceilings, the
top-floor apartment, the shrine. The Reliable Person Detriment AS A CHILD: The little adult (or the serious child). Zealous, well-behaved, serious, reserved, and able at an early age to take on tasks with a sense of
responsibility. Draws sell-security from this and the feeling of being
valuable, loved, and needed. Rarely demands what he or she wants or
needs. Can also be unbelievably willful, stubborn, and develop obstinate sides, especially when put on the spot. Not as childlike as other children.
Affectionate, causing problems with detachment.
The DIFFICULT LESSONS TO LEARN: Showing
conscientious, reliable, but also one's feelings and expressing one's own
austere mother.
needs.
INNER MOTHER IMAGE: AS A MOTHER: The strict mom. The conscientious, down-to-earth, caring, rather conventional mother, who offers her child a solid framework and
clear structures. Hard-working, reliable, responsible. Tends to forget the
childish, playful element.
IMAGH OF THE WOMAN: The reserved individual. Affection, feelings, and emotions are dosed, held back, and controlled. They cannot flow
spontaneously. The fear of injury means this person is slow in warming
up to others. Deep inside he or she remains closed to self and others for a
long time, even forever. The reliable, strong woman who offers support
and security. Very hard-working.
SHADOW: The embittered person.
STRENGTH: The uncomplicated woman. Serious basic feelings. Inner urge to take on responsibilities, to be there for someone else, to support and
offer a safe space and security. Eager, conscientious, ready to achieve,
self-controlled, and modest. Basically happy with self. Finds refuge in
work in times of crisis. Dignified modesty and independence even at an
advanced age. Likes clear, severe, and simple forms. Holds back on
emotional issues.
PROBLEM AREA: The responsibility addict. Takes on far too many tasks and responsibilities, causing frequent pressure. Tends to be envious and have
guilt feelings. Constant fear of being rejected and unloved. Distrusting,
pessimistic, and lacking in feelings. KEY PRINCIPLE: Every individual is alone. Moon in Aquarius STYLE OF LIVING: Zen style. The Individualist AS A CHILD: The little prince or princess. Flees the nest and makes his or her own way in the world at an early age. Feels a stranger in the world, but
also as something very special. Cannot stand being compared to someone
else. Often feels he or she does not belong to the family (or to the world).
No problem with detachment.
The DIFFICULT LESSONS TO LEARN: To be
(overly) independent, unreliable normal, to adapt, to get emotionally
mother.
involved.
INNER MOTHER IMAGE: AS A MOTHER: The freedom-lover. Constant conflict between the duties of a mother and the claim to freedom and self-development. Gives the child
(too) much space. Sees her child as a good conversation or discussion
partner. Brings her child up to be independent at an early age.
IMAGE OF THE WOMAN: The cool lady. Always needs contact, inspiration, and activity. Loves freedom in a big way, always out for independence.
More a companion than a lover. Ultimately aloof and spiritually
inaccessible. Separates easily.
SHADOW: The loner.
STRENGTH: The independent person. Original, creative, and self-sufficient. Gives the feeling he or she doesn't really need anyone. Too much
closeness seems oppressive. Can only be in a place where all doors and
windows are wide open. Only acts on own free will. When put on the spot,
or under pressure, this person rebels. Likes floating on higher planes and
basically disdains getting involved with this world. Loves to experiment. PROBLEM AREA: The contract-breaker. Restless, fickle, and explosive
temperament. Always takes the liberty to unilaterally revoke an
agreement. Superficial, lonely, without any warm, protective, and
emotional contacts. Feels at home nowhere, is constantly on the road. A
victim of own compulsive idea of freedom.
KEY PRINCIPLE: Gotta go! STYLE OF LIVING: A loft, utopia, cloudland. Moon in Pisces The Medium AS A CHILD: The anxious or shy child. Dreamy, full of fantasy, creative, and affectionate. Very sensitive, therefore inclined to poor health. Would like
to get rid of the border separating mother and child. Senses clearly what is
going on in others. Has trouble finding own standpoint. Learns late how to
say “I.”
INNER MOTHER IMAGE: highly
sensitive,
sacrificing mother. The DIFFICULT LESSONS TO LEARN: Establishing
self- limits, cutting the umbilical cord, standing on
one's own two feet. AS A MOTHER: The self-sacrificer. Gentle, protective, and tolerant. Senses very clearly what her child needs and makes sacrifices to fulfill those
needs. Cannot establish limits and easily becomes a martyr who accepts
everything with patience. Subtly maintains a grip on her child. Conveys
guilt feelings.
The nymph. Particularly empathetic.
Unfathomable, thin-skinned, and sensitive. Senses the hidden wishes and
abilities in others. Is sometimes a little ephemeral. Easily seduced. Tends
to become a victim or fall into dependency.
SHADOW: The shaky individual.
IMAGE OF THE WOMAN: STRENGTH: The mysterious person. Very devoted, with a longing to merge with the partner. Instinctive urge for transcendental experiences. Limitless
empathy. Longs for redemption. Medial, profound, sensitive, intuitive,
imaginative, adaptable, subjective, and forgiving.
PROBLEM AREA: The helpless one. Inclined to play the victim's role,
become involved in tragic entanglements, and be helplessly open. Cannot
establish limits. Tendency to flee from reality and to go to seed. Moody,
unstable, melancholic, unsteady, and easily seduced. Problems with
addiction.
KEY PRINCIPLE: Only those who are familiar STYLE OF LIVING: An old
with longing know what I suffer.
house by the sea. Mercury in Aries The Argumentative Type STRENGTH: Snappy thinking. Subjective and combative thinking, loves
discussions. Gives an opinion spontaneously, articulately, openly,
honestly, directly, in a committed fashion, and with sarcasm. Willful
thinking process.
PROBLEM AREA: Arbitrary thinking. Impatient thinker, quarrelsome,
inclined to being opinionated. Exaggerates and delivers verbal knock-out
punches. Quick but often rash judgments. Loud argumentation. Always
thinks of self first.
STYLE: MAKES NARRATIVE Exciting, adventurous. DECISIONS: BETWEEN: I want this and I Spontaneously. Mercury in Taurus don't want that. The Patient Listener STRENGTH: Down-to-earth thinking. Healthy common sense. Deliberate, sometimes slow, but thorough, logical, and persevering perceptive faculty.
Realistically, materialistically, and sensually oriented. Practical rather than
abstract intelligence. Thinks in tried and true lines and concepts. Avoids
versatility, preferring to build on a single foundation.
PROBLEM AREA: Simplistic thinking. Narrow-minded, dogmatic, stubborn, immovable, inflexible, incorrigibly rigid, and conservative. Suspicious of
all theories and new ideas.
NARRATIVE STYLE: Relaxed, sensual. MAKES Deliberately,
irrevocably. Mercury in Gemini
STRENGTH: DECISIONS: but BETWEEN: Valuable and
worthless (financially). The Quick Thinker Dignity Discriminating thinking, A master of argument and
counterattack, Loves punch lines and puns, discriminating thinking, and deliberation. Developed talent as a negotiator arid mediator. Enjoys
discussions with self. Multifaceted, curious, and nimble. Intellectually and
rhetorically versatile, humorous, sharp, articulate, and brilliant, Often
intellectual.
Superficial thinking. Inclined toward hasty, rash
conclusions. Pseudo-intellectual, Phony, underhanded, cheating,
distracted, and talkative.
PROBLEM NARRATIVE AREA: STYLE: ironic, brilliant. Humorous, MAKES DECISIONS: BETWEEN:
Quickly.
and stupid. Mercury in Cancer Clever The Poet STRENGTH: Imaginative thinking. Expressiveness that is full of feeling, flowery, and rich in images. A good storyteller and poet. Empathetic, and
with a talent to sense correlations and the thoughts of others. Good
memory. Thinks for the benefit of others.
PROBLEM AREA: Wishful thinking. Desires and longings transform
perception and memory into a “comfortable” truth. Easily influenced,
sensitive, moody, and inconsistent thinking. Arbitrary use of words.
NARRATIVE STYLE: MAKES Fairytale-like, imaginative. Carefully, emotionally.
Mercury in Leo Pleasant
and unpleasant. DECISIONS: BETWEEN: The Official Speaker STRENGTH: Self-confident thinking. Likes to think and plan on a large scale, prefers to leave the details to others (which is a good idea). Vivid and
graphic in terms of expression. Knows how to motivate others for ideas.
Creative, strongly expressive, convincing, optimistic, and circumspect.
Good organizational talent.
PROBLEM AREA: Self-complacent thinking. Overbearing, without an eye for the details. Allergic to any type of criticism. Uncomprehending,
presumptuous attitude of infallibility, and false sense of intellectual superiority. All thoughts are too self-centered. Theatrical, sometimes
vociferous and terribly complicated manner. Speculative, highly
subjective thinking.
NARRATIVE STYLE: expressive,
dramatic. Strongly MAKES DECISIONS: With BETWEEN:
graphic, supreme
confidence Wonderful and
(infallible).
dull. Mercury in Virgo The Precise Person Dignity & Exaltation STRENGTH: Methodic thinking. Analytical understanding that realistically, instinctively, and incorruptibly decides between what is practical and
impractical, useful and useless, purposeful and a waste of time. Clear,
concise, sober, methodical, and smart. Loves dealing fastidiously with
details. Very precise written and oral expression. Businesslike and
scientific thinking.
PROBLEM AREA: Categorical thinking. Attention to detail causes loss of oversight. Parochial, timorous, narrow-mindedness wrapped In prejudice.
Opportunistic, nagging, envious, dissatisfied, and inclined to constant
criticism.
NARRAT1VE STYLE: From MAKES DECISIONS: With a sober BETWEEN: Useful and spicy to dry. Mercury in Libra attitude. useless. The Diplomat STRENGTH: Esthetic thinking. Balanced thinking aimed at harmony. Loves complex, but developed and balanced thought constructions and
strategies. Elegant rhetorical style. Plays with words. Friendly, charming,
and diplomatic means of expression. Even criticism never sounds
insulting.
PROBLEM AREA: Fickle thinking Hesitant, difficult decision-making. Fear of conflict leads to opportunistic accommodation to others' opinions. Holierthan-thou, unrealistic theorizing. NARRATIVE STYLE: Elegant, charming, MAKES BETWEEN: conversational, with a sense of style. Balanced
imbalanced. DECISIONS: Hesitantly.
Mercury in Scorpio and The Revealer STRENGTH: Thorough thinking. Sharp mind, decisive, persistent, and
ambitious. Questions everything down to the last detail, likes to reveal
mysteries, and is always curious to get to the bottom of taboos and
prohibitions. Mercilessly open, passionate, and—if need be—injurious
language. But can also be very quiet.
Obsessive thinking. Pessimistic, distrusting, and
fanatically caught up in fixed ideas. Sharp, cynical, cutting, insulting
expression, and provocative pinpricks. Underhanded and poisonous. Likes
intrigues and exaggerated mystification. Sniffs around in the private life of
others. Overwhelms listeners with long-windedness.
PROBLEM NARRATIVE AREA: STYLE: MAKES DECISIONS: BETWEEN: Suspenseful, mysterious, in Reliably
whispers.
absolutely.
Mercury in Sagittarius Extremes
and (everything
or
nothing). The Convincer Detriment STRENGTH: Candid thinking. Cosmopolitan, open, and with a wide range of interests. Seeks ideals, strong (religious) convictions, and further
education. Great power to believe and convince. Strong optimism that can
build up others and restore their faith. Articulate.
PROBLEM AREA: Arrogant thinking. Gullible, arrogantly conceited, and with a missionary know-it-all attitude. Superficial, uncritical, self-complacent,
and dogmatic. Sentimental, condescending style of expression.
Hypocritical moralist.
In BETWEEN: Valuable and
Epic,
rousing, a
self-assured worthless (ideals), fair and
sermonizing.
fashion.
unfair.
NARRATIVE STYLE: MAKES DECISIONS: Mercury in Capricorn The Straightforward Individual STRENGTH: Logical thinking. Persistent, sober, strictly methodical thinking, with a great deal of concentration and perseverance. Incorruptibly sharp,
always keeps the essentials in mind, even with the most complex thought
processes. Very realistic, serious, and without delusions. Precise in written
and spoken word. Fine rhetorician.
Narrow-minded thinking. Unimaginative, bone-dry,
inflexible, humorless, hard, cold, and monosyllabic. Thinks in norms and
empty forms. A pessimist who always says no. Monotonous.
PROBLEM AREA: NARRATIVE STYLE: and vigorous. Dry MAKES DECISIONS: In a no- BETWEEN: Correct
nonsense way.
and wrong. Mercury in Aquarius The Imaginative Person STRENGTH: Creative thinking. Thirsty for knowledge, progressive, open to whatever is new and original, open-minded and objective. An excellent
abstract thinker, with the ability to synthesize intellectually. Bursting with
ideas, and very inventive. Excellent spontaneous thoughts and flashes of
brilliance. Tolerant thinker, with a liberal and humanitarian attitude.
Pronounced intuition.
PROBLEM AREA: Smart-alecky thinking. Overly intellectual, lost in an
abstract labyrinth of thought, erratic, distracted, arrogant, and illusory. An
obnoxious know-it-all.
NARRATIVE STYLE: Light MAKES DECISIONS: On the BETWEEN: and original.
Mercury in Pisces basis of theory.
The Emotional Thinker New and
old-fashioned.
Detriment & Fall STRENGTH: Intuitive thinking. Lively fantasy and accurate, intuitive ideas. First-class ability to empathize. Can guess very well. Expresses in images.
Good sense of correlations and meaning. Telepathic disposition. PROBLEM AREAS: Illusory thinking. The mind is flooded with fantasies. Easily influenced, uncritical, over-sensitive, dishonest, and quirky.
NARRATIVE STYLE: MAKES DECISIONS: BETWEEN: What feels right Imaginative, “tells yarns.” Intuitively. and what's fishy. Venus in Aries Love at First Sight Detriment STRENGTH: The love affair. Strong projection of the self, great ability for enthusiasm, and hefty—sometimes short-lived—passion. Attraction is
expressed spontaneously, directly, and impulsively.
PROBLEM AREA: Egotistic love. Incapable of developing bonds, extremely self-centered, and cannot give of self. Demanding love.
IMAGE OF THE YOUNG WOMAN: The direct individual, the tough girl.
Courageous, strong, impulsive, self-assured, and honest. A lively,
adventurous woman who would rather (or more quickly) seduce than be
seduced, and with whom one can go through hell and high water.
SHADOW: The radical feminist.
EROTICISM: Demanding, loves touch and STYLE OF ART: go situations.
Venus in Taurus Action painting, happenings.
Intimate Love Dignity STRENGTH: Sensual love. Natural sensuality, strong capacity for devotion, capable of enjoyment, content, attractive, and faithful. Loves sensual,
physical closeness. Artistic potential. Likes to work with natural materials,
art, and restoration.
PROBLEM AREA: Monopolizing love. Possessive and jealous. Seeks pleasure and enjoyment. Exaggerated need for security in love.
IMAGE OF THE YOUNG WOMAN: The milkmaid. The feminine, very erotic woman who is close to nature and shows strongly physical emphasis. She
seeks a solid bond in a relationship.
SHADOW: The indolent woman.
EROTICISM: Sensual and warm. STYLE OF ART: Baroque. Venus in Gemini Playful Sensuality STRENGTH: Happy-go-lucky love. Charming, entertaining, sociable, but
with no claim to durability. Multifaceted contacts and friendships. Loves
flirting. Reflects carefully on matters of the heart.
PROBLEM AREA: Fickle love. A dazzling butterfly, capricious, unreliable, calculating, dislikes making a commitment, and suppresses feelings.
IMAGE OF THE YOUNG WOMAN: The cool lady, the talkative one. A modern, intelligent woman, smart, well-read, and capable. Multifaceted. Enjoys
being in love now and again, but ultimately aloof and inaccessible in the
depths of her heart.
SHADOW: The icicle.
EROTICISM: Slightly animated, yet always on the cool STYLE OF ART: side. Likes change.
Venus in Cancer Art Nouveau.
Complete Love STRENGTH: Romantic love. Dreamy, full of longing, very impressionable. Profound desire for harmony, unification, and spiritual and physical
exchange.
PROBLEM AREA: Delusional love. Forever in love with Prince Charming or the Dream Woman. Therefore always the victim of own delusions.
Illusory, indiscriminate, unpredictable, and depressed as a result of
countless disappointments.
IMAGE OF THE YOUNG WOMAN: The cuddly kitten. The empathetic, tender, romantic woman, looking for and capable of providing a warm nest, with
strong feelings and devotion.
SHADOW: The eternal daughter.
EROTICISM: Gentle and cuddly, very passionate in a STYLE safe place. OF Romanticism. ART: Venus in Leo Lively Desire and Passion STRENGTH: Magnificent love. Loves the kind of love one can be proud of. Intense love of life. Warmhearted, generous, self-confident, and very
erotic. The endless game of love. Artistic talent.
PROBLEM AREA: Superficial love. Artificial, fake feelings, demonstrated for the sake of effect. Can be very costly.
IMAGE OF THE YOUNG WOMAN: The star, the lady of luxury. The zestful, self- confident, proud, extravagant woman who likes to be put on display,
pampered, and admired. Also, the superb artist.
SHADOW: The playgirl.
EROTICISM: A combination of pride, passion, and STYLE feline agility. ART: OF High Renaissance. Venus in Virgo Shy Sensuality Fall STRENGTH: Practical love. Expresses her love best with practical gestures, such as cooking or a massage. Reliable, faithful, modest, and very helpful.
PROBLEM AREA: Love for a purpose. Calculating feelings, fake adaptability, prim, standoffish, dull, overly critical, and austere. Inhibited feelings of
shame; prudish and dry.
IMAGE OF THE YOUNG WOMAN: The pure woman. The decent, responsible, disciplined, reliable, and competent woman who likes to do her part.
SHADOW: The prude.
EROTICISM: On the considerate and STYLE OF ART: Biedermeier. reserved side. Thaws rather slowly.
Venus in Libra Harmonious Love Dignity STRENGTH: Egalitarian love. Loves loving and flirting. Seeks contact with an equal partner. Very intent upon harmony, proper style, and good manners. Great love of art.
PROBLEM AREA: Non-committal love. Always undecided and generally
superficial, Emotionally remote and inaccessible.
IMAGE OF THE YOUNG WOMAN: The angel The charming, feminine, elegant, cultivated woman, sociable, well groomed, and very interested in art and
culture. A classic beauty, alluring, but always a bit cool and distant.
SHADOW: The doll.
EROTICISM: Charming attraction. STYLE OF ART: Classicism.
Playful, graceful eroticism.
Venus in Scorpio The Uncanny Powers of Seduction Detriment STRENGTH: Deep passion. Pronounced power of fascination, highly
emotional, passionate, very intense, sensual, free of taboos, and
unforgettable. Loves the thrill of the morbid and uncanny beauty. Love
spell.
PROBLEM AREA: Passionate entanglements. Mentally cruel and sadistic. Creates emotional or sexual addiction. Likes to manipulate. Obsessed with
sex, perverted.
IMAGE OF THE YOUNG WOMAN: Circe. The dark, irresistible, sexually
attractive woman, intense, passionate, and seductive. Sin incarnate.
SHADOW: The poisonous snake.
EROTICISM: Irresistible temptation, STYLE OF ART: Surrealism.
unfathomable passion.
Venus in Sagittarius Flaming Love STRENGTH: Holy love. A particularly honorable and idealistic concept of love. Upright and direct. Inclined toward international or exotic
relationships. PROBLEM AREA: Phony love. Inconstant in her feelings and fickle in
relationships. Tendency to flee. Illusionary affairs. Uninhibited and
foolhardy.
The noblewoman. The optimistic,
independent, and proud woman, who knows in the depths of her heart that
she will always remain single. Elegant, sincere, and educated.
SHADOW: The hypocrite.
IMAGE OF THE YOUNG WOMAN: EROTICISM: Easily kindled. Exotic. Venus in Capricorn STYLE OF ART: International Gothic. Profound. Serious Love STRENGTH: Enduring love. Love is never a game but always and
immediately serious. Hardly flirts, is reserved, careful, and warms up
rather slowly but then lastingly. Reliable, responsible, and faithful.
PROBLEM AREA: Hardened love. Loaded with complexes, inhibited,
morose, and cold. Considerable age differences in relationships. Love
grown cold and relationships that continue in form only. Will even
dispense with love.
IMAGE OF THE YOUNG WOMAN: The dutiful woman, the controlled
individual. The responsible, consistent, and reliable individual, offering
support and security. Always keeps a cool head and never loses control.
Serious, tends to be uncomplicated, and sometimes austere.
SHADOW: The reserved person.
EROTICISM: Strong sexual energies, STYLE OF ART: Romanesque, Zen art.
which can nevertheless be controlled
without difficulty during long
periods of ascetic abstention.
Venus in Aquarius Companionable Love STRENGTH: Unconventional love. Free, original, and independent love. Is faithful of her own free will but cannot be forced into anything. Needs the liberty to leave or stay whenever she wants. Values fairness and equal
rights in a relationship.
PROBLEM AREA: Love without passion. Changes superficial relationships quickly and often. Indifferent and lacking in feelings. Eccentric and totally
unreliable.
The companion. The interesting,
unconventional, and independent woman. Can be faithful to the “right”
partner, A better friend, companion, and comrade than lover.
SHADOW: The cold woman.
IMAGE OF THE YOUNG WOMAN: EROTICISM: Aloof, little charisma, STYLE OF ART: Constructivism, as
but enjoys experimenting.
well as everything modern and
abstract.
Venus in Pisces Boundless, Divine Love Exaltation STRENGTH: All-embracing love. Endless devotion, selfless, helpful, tender, affectionate, sensitive, and self-sacrificing. Longing for what is
fathomless.
PROBLEM AREA: Disappointed love. Loses herself in wishful thinking and illusions. Has difficulty setting borders, Easily exploited, always a victim.
Melancholic and plaintive.
IMAGE OF THE YOUNG WOMAN: The nymph. Seducible, devoted, loving, mysterious woman and muse who senses the hidden talents of her partner
and loves them out into the open.
SHADOW: The woman lost in dreams.
EROTICISM: Mysterious, seductive, STYLE OF ART: Early Gothic.
and unifying. Mars in Aries The Fighter Dignity STRENGTH: Impulsivity. Spontaneous energy, courage, and well-developed spirit of enterprise. Heads straight for the goal. Can ram his head through
the wall. Pronounced sense of competition. Subjective standpoint
influences the process of negotiation.
PROBLEM AREA: Belligerence. Takes either/or stance. Compelled to
demonstrate his (sexual) potency. Arbitrary, arrogant, egotistical, and
reckless. Easily excitable. Acts on the basis of excessive impatience.
IMAGE OF THE YOUNG MAN: The hothead. The energetic, wild, hot-blooded lover. Active, self-confident, and roguish. A hunter, hero, and conqueror.
An adventurer, macho, or ruffian. Direct, spontaneous, hefty, and quickly
aroused. Ready for an affair in even the most impossible situations.
SHADOW: The brute.
RESOLUTION: Spontaneous, pronounced willpower when it comes to
following a momentary impulse, but not necessarily enduring. Many
flashes in the pan.
AGGRESSION: Always unreflecting, spontaneous, self-evident.
OUTLETS FOR AGGRESSION: Boxing, soccer (offense), rifle practice, fast driving.
WAY OF FIGHTING: The daredevil—direct, aggressive, barbaric, impulsive, but short-lived.
SEXUALITY: Spontaneous, conquering, hot-blooded, quick, intense,
egotistic, sometimes like a competition.
Mars in Taurus The Defender Detriment STRENGTH: The diesel engine. Warms up slowly. Once this person gets going, he or she runs a long time. Sufficient (financial) incentive keeps
this individual persevering at work with great diligence. Is in top form
when it comes to resisting or defending something.
PROBLEM AREA: The time-bomb. Considerable pent-up aggression that
builds up over a long period and can become increased by sexual
frustration. An explosion (caused by a red cloth) can result in devastation.
IMAGE OF THE YOUNG MAN: The lord of the manor. The solid, strong, and sensual person who offers material security. The epicure and provider,
gentle lover and protector.
SHADOW: The bottomless barrel.
RESOLUTION: Slow, deliberate, and irreversible. Endless stamina. Stubborn.
AGGRESSION: Slow build-up of aggression, the discharge is then violent, frequently emotional.
OUTLETS FOR AGGRESSION: Wherever something gets soundly hit: tennis, squash, drumming, chopping wood, or beating carpets. Playing soccer as a
goalkeeper or in defensive position.
WAY OF FIGHTING: Defensive but emphatic, stubborn and with full weight. Staunch defiance. Increases pressure a little each day. Cannot be subdued.
Tough as nails.
SEXUALITY: Strong sexual energy, very sensual, and possessive. Relaxed at the start, very passionate thereafter. Very unforgiving if frustrated.
Mars in Gemini The Critic STRENGTH: Smartness. Sharp-tongued, articulate, clever, facile, quick, and agile. Can pursue many aims simultaneously. A keen tactician.
PROBLEM AREA: Distraction. Tendency to go off on too many tangents. Cynical, sarcastic, with no resilience. Ice-cold. Much ado about nothing. IMAGE OF THE YOUNG MAN: The eloquent speaker. The charming but often flighty lover. The rogue and the flatterer. Bright, entertaining, lively,
smart, creative, but emotionally unreliable. The eternal adolescent.
SHADOW: The windbag.
RESOLUTION: Quick, smart, and skillful. All aims are made relative and adjusted to suit new ideas. Intentions are often left hanging in mid-air.
AGGRESSION: Easily aroused, but with no staying power. Generally
expressed verbally.
OUTLETS FOR AGGRESSION: Quick and lively types of sports such as
sprinting, squash, but also fencing and chess.
WAY OF FIGHTING: Talks the other person to death. Skillful tactician, very agile, articulate, cynical, and ice cold. Biting ridicule and profoundly
injurious malice. First confuses with a hail of words, and then delivers the
KO punch.
SEXUALITY: Not very impulsive, interest is more theoretical. Verbal
eroticism. Likes diversity and experimentation. Seeks “refined” eroticism.
Mars in Cancer The Emotional Individual. Fall STRENGTH: indirect action. Imaginative and creative. Pursues interests
independently and ambitiously, but not directly. Vacillating, changing
moods and goals.
PROBLEM AREA: Sulking. Highly sensitive, moody, and easily insulted.
Tortures himself or herself. Wishes rather than acts. Is capable of dragging
others into his or her guilt or pain.
IMAGE OE THE YOUNG MAN: The admirer, the poet. The sensitive,
imaginative, and dreamy lover, Ideal image of the gentle, romantic, caring,
emotional, and devoted man.
SHADOW: The moody man. RESOLUTION: Emotional, yet generally stemming from an inclination or a mood. Uses lots of inconsequential detours.
AGGRESSION: Indirect. Little ability to express aggression outright, At first pretends to adapt but with subliminal reproaches that lead to extremely
agitated feelings.
OUTLETS FOR AGGRESSION: Dancing, enjoying and making music. Doing handicrafts or working at a hobby.
WAY OF FIGHTING: Accuses. Gives others a bad conscience. Emotional pressure through bad mood, sulking, and acting insulted.
SEXUALITY: Shy at first. Develops great devotion, emotion, and fantasy in a familiar situation.
Mars in Leo The Optimist STRENGTH: Superior style. Optimistic, self-confident, and imperial manner with grand gestures. Life-affirming and spirited when carrying out plans.
PROBLEM AREA: The lord und master. Egoistic, presumptuous, and arrogant behavior. Choleric and theatrical. Extremely sensitive to criticism.
IMAGE OF THE YOUNG MAN: The victor, the star. The carefree, self-confident, and magnificent lover. Vital, generous, optimistic, and full of a lust for
life. Sunnyboy or playboy.
SHADOW: The domineering stag.
RESOLUTION: Self-confident and self-assured. Would like to achieve plans in the least complicated and most lasting manner possible, with a direct
approach in the long run and showing a great deal of style.
AGGRESSION: Can become irritated, particularly through criticism. Tensions are reduced quickly and easily.
OUTLETS FOR AGGRESSION: Driving a car, elite types of sports. WAY OF FIGHTING: Direct and certain of victory. Loud, dramatic scenes. Barking at the other person and “beating” him through dignity and might.
SEXUALITY: Self-confident, with a strong sex drive and desire. Sometimes also performance-oriented.
Mars in Virgo The Energy-Saver STRENGTH: The right dosage. Methodical, critically careful, and above all precise approach, Optimal expenditure of energy and means to reach a
goal. Loves details and fastidious precision. Avoids everything that's
damaging, above all the useless expenditure of energy.
PROBLEM AREA: The fussy fool. Pedantic, overscrupulous, too critical, dull, and apathetic. Slave of a fearful routine.
IMAGE OF THE YOUNG MAN: The skilled worker. The reliable, clean lover. Diligent, caring, faithful, dependable, and controlled. Has a practical
disposition.
SHADOW: The perfect bore.
RESOLUTION: After critical examination, skillful, steadfast, precise, very economical, and enduring.
AGGRESSION: Very controlled, rarely “blows a fuse.”
OUTLETS FOR AGGRESSION: Jogging, handicrafts, cleaning, fitness training.
WAY OF FIGHTING: Sharp or incisive criticism, obstinate nagging, and
blatant catechizing. Nerve-wracking pedantry (the bureaucrat's approach
to nastiness).
SEXUALITY: Medium-strong sensuality, but well-controlled. More clean than passionate. Sometimes on the prudish side.
Mars in Libra The Diplomat Detriment STRENGTH: The chess-player. Uses charm and friendliness to achieve goals. A clever strategist who always considers the other person's move. Perfect
on the theoretical end, but somewhat wanting in practice.
PROBLEM AREA: The appeaser. Lack of willingness to engage in conflict leads to indecision and compromise. Problems with aggression. Plans
often do not progress beyond that stage.
IMAGE OF THE YOUNG MAN: The charming, elegant, and stylish lover. The respectable, considerate, neat, gallant seducer with class.
SHADOW: The halfhearted individual.
RESOLUTION: Makes decisions for others rather than self. Decides very hesitantly, and usually in theory only. In addition, it's easy to change his or
her mind.
AGGRESSION: Avoids aggressive discussions. On the other hand, is always ready to compromise.
OUTLETS FOR AGGRESSION: Dancing, fencing.
WAY OF FIGHTING: With style. Never direct or unbuttoned. Makes the effort to remain fair and avoid hurting his or her opposite. When the “fuse
blows,” ice-cold and rejecting.
SEXUALITY: Partner-oriented, sensitive, not very impulsive, but cultivated, elegant, refined, and with style.
Mars in Scorpio The Passionate Man Dignity STRENGTH: The effective person. Can mobilize great amounts of spiritual power to achieve envisioned goals. Ambitious, persevering, consistent,
and extremely single-minded. Very tough stamina.
PROBLEM AREA: The destroyer. Strives to develop personal power by
skillful, and sometimes reckless, exploitation of others. Inclined toward manipulation and blackmail. Can become completely obsessed with a
specific plan. Destructive drive that is sometimes self-destructive.
IMAGE OF THE YOUNG MAN: The irresistible individual, the black knight. The passionate, dark and mysterious, unfathomable, erotic lover and hunter—
charismatic, intense, fascinating, but also dangerous. The man one falls for
hook, line, and sinker, who takes possession of the soul and creates an
addiction.
SHADOW: The sadist, the hangman.
RESOLUTION: Spiritually important decisions are made emotionally, They are reliable and lasting, sometimes extreme.
AGGRESSION: Subtle, accurate, unforgiving, profoundly
Explosive in an emotional situation. Throws poisoned darts.
OUTLETS FOR AGGRESSION: injurious. Knife-throwing, archery, deep-sea diving, fishing with a harpoon, sex.
WAY OF FIGHTING: Dangerous, very effective, but mean, nasty, and
underhanded, The poisoned needle that constantly pricks and spreads bad
blood.
SEXUALITY: Strong sexual impulse. Very passionate and without taboos. Mars in Sagittarius The Noble-Minded Person STRENGTH: Enthusiasm. Great enthusiasm and a buoyant manner when it comes to achieving goals. Can motivate and sweep others along as well.
Impulse to travel.
PROBLEM AREA: The crusader. Militant and missionary tendencies. Inclined toward exaggeration and overestimating self.
IMAGE OF THE YOUNG MAN: The noble knight. The grand, full-fledged lover. The cultivated man of the world. The respectable man you can “be seen
with,” for whom love and sexuality are something special, perhaps even sacred.
SHADOW: The arrogant jackass.
RESOLUTION: Decisions are made spontaneously. If they deal with superior convictions, sacred feelings, or a righteous issue, they cannot be changed.
AGGRESSION: Grows out of a sacred anger or hurt sense of justice.
OUTLETS FOR AGGRESSION: Hunting, riding, golf.
WAY OF FIGHTING: Holy anger. Disarms, makes derogatory judgments
about, or morally annihilates the opposition.
SEXUALITY: Spontaneously aroused desire. With noble, virtuous, or
sometimes immoderate tendencies.
Mars in Capricorn The Marathon Runner Exaltation STRENGTH: Perseverance, Concentrated energy that grows when resisted, Uncompromising, reliable, patient, disciplined, and persistent. Obstinate
and unbending when pursuing a set goal. Life force that resiliently renews
itself.
PROBLEM AREA: ‘Hardening, Merciless, reckless use of strength. Can also be rigid, inhibited, or hung-up. Cannot be persuaded.
IMAGE OF THE YOUNG MAN: The unbending person. The reliable (sexually) powerful lover. The responsible, persistent, faithful, and fatherly man,
who provides a strong shoulder.
SHADOW: The grump.
RESOLUTION: Decisions are made carefully and thoughtfully. Then they are irrevocable and carried out even in the face of massive opposition.
AGGRESSION: Linder control, sometimes in forced manner, difficult to
arouse, but can then be very strong, cold, unforgiving, and irreconcilable. Trekking, mountain climbing, marathon
running, cross-country skiing, ice hockey, survival training.
OUTLETS FOR AGGRESSION: WAY OF FIGHTING: Always has more breath to spare and greater stamina. Cold anger can be mercilessly annihilating.
SEXLIALITY: The long-distance runner. Very strong sexuality, which can nevertheless be easily controlled in periods of abstention. Here, too,
inclined to engage in “marathons” and performance thinking.
Mars in Aquarius The Willful Individual STRENGTH: The urge to discover. Unusual, eccentric approach to pursuing a goal. Sometimes purely theoretical and abstract, without any thought on
practical matters. Willful, independent, and unconventional.
PROBLEM AREA: The shadowboxer. Crazy, revolutionary, unpredictable,
with an ice-cold approach. Uncompromising. Forces opinions onto others.
IMAGE OF THE YOUNG MAN: The individualist. The ingenious, creative,
independent man, more comrade than lover. Intellectual, imaginative,
crazy, and hardly able to commit to relationships.
SHADOW: The lone wolf.
RESOLUTION: Makes binding decisions in theory, but sometimes not related to practice. Little urge to turn decisions into actions.
AGGRESSION: Is not easily provoked. Tensions that do arise disappear quickly.
OUTLETS FOR AGGRESSION: Parasailing, kite-flying, parachuting.
WAY OF FIGHTING: Well-considered, unusual, strategically clever, and cold. Looks down on opponents.
SEXUALITY: Little impulse, more theoretical interest. Likes to experiment. Loves sex outside the norm. Mars in Pisces Fights for Peace STRENGTH: The spiritual warrior (Samurai). Unusual, intuitive accuracy. Powerful spiritual forces lead—unpredictable when seen from the outside
—to the achievement of higher, greater goals. Wins through apparent
yielding.
PROBLEM AREA: Misfire. Very fluctuating, unpredictable energies that often burn out with no effect. Extremely sensitive to pain. Very dependent on
moods.
IMAGE OF THE YOUNG MAN: The dreamer. The sensitive, mysterious,
devoted lover who gives wings to fantasies. The charming man with a
thousand faces, capable of slipping into any desired role.
SHADOW: The bamboozler.
RESOLUTION: Dependent on mood. Decides intuitively. Acts on instinct without pressure based on deep inclination.
AGGRESSION: Frequently only seen indirectly—but vehemently when under the influence of alcohol.
OUTLETS FOR AGGRESSION: Swimming, deep-sea diving, listening to music, enjoyment of art.
WAY OF FIGHTING: Creates chaos, confuses. Uses helplessness as a weapon, giving his opposite a bad conscience: Flow can you do this to me?—the
eternal victim.
SEXUALITY: The love trip. Strong impulse, particularly in conjunction with an altered state (Tantra, trances, and drugs). Very sensitive and easily
seduced. Jupiter in Aries
IDEAL: Personal freedom and self-assertion STRENGTH: The advocate of the faith. Values those who won't put up with anything and stand up for themselves. Is courageous and committed in
championing values and ideals of freedom. Distinct feeling for personal
dignity. Natural leader. PROBLEM AREA: The intolerant individual. Inclines toward hubris and
highhandedness. Is intolerant and endures no contradictions. Asserts will
and convictions, with violence, if necessary. Wastes energy. RELIGION/PHILOSOPHY: Islam. A religion without mysticism, which
challenges a person to fight for holy convictions. Jupiter in Taurus
IDEAL: Growth, abundance, enjoyment of life. STRENGTH: The guardian. Sense for care and defense of everything that grows and has been tested by time. Knows how to value outer happiness,
prosperity, sociability, and sensuality. Satisfied with what he or she has.
Proud modesty. The braggart. Extravagant, pleasure-seeking, and
conceited. Looks down on other people's possessions and flaunts what he
PROBLEM AREA: or she has. Insolent attitude of expectation. RELIGION/PHILOSOPHY: Epicureans of ancient Greece. Sensual happiness in life within a circle of good friends is the highest goal in life.
Jupiter in Gemini Detriment IDEAL: Critical common sense. STRENGTH: The priest of doubt. Values common sense and praises
skepticism as a virtue which, through constant questioning and doubting,
can lead to ultimate, true perception beyond all contradiction. Interested in
philosophy, resourceful, and an enemy of any type of gullibility. PROBLEM AREA: The cynic. Superficial, contradictory, and in conflict
regarding concepts of values and convictions. Gets involved in other
people's affairs without being asked to do so, posing as the judge of the
situation. Bitter cynicism disturbs others in their beliefs and satisfaction
with life.
RELIGION/PHILOSOPHY: Encyclopedist and the philosophy of Descartes.
Question everything that you can question, and only believe in what
remains afterward.
Jupiter in Cancer Exaltation IDEAL: Helpfulness and loving care. STRENGTH: The protector. Places great value on deep feelings, indulgence, love, and forgiveness. Always endeavors to repay evil with good and
protect the weak and helpless. Vast sympathy and a good antenna for the emotional needs of human beings. Sense of domesticity, family, and
rootedness in one's own homeland.
PROBLEM AREA: Moral indifference. Goes to such extremes of indulgence, sympathy, and forgiveness that everything is ultimately forgiven without
any differentiation. Very inconsequential and irresponsible in this respect,
above all when this bighearted sense of forgiveness is directed at self. RELIGION/PHILOSOPHY: The Romantic (Novalis, Clemens von Brentano). Nostalgia and the worship of the feminine—particularly as the Great
Mother in nature and as Mary in Catholicism.
Jupiter in Leo
IDEAL: Grandeur and kindness. STRENGTH: The patron. Values whatever shines, is dignified and
magnificent, as well as luxury and the sense of comfort. Has a feeling of
benevolent superiority. Warmhearted, kind, indulgent, and optimistic. Lets
others participate in his or her happiness. Supports and promotes other
people.
PROBLEM AREA: The superficial person. Constantly avoids the shadow
sides and problems of life. Replaces the lack of depth and seriousness with
superficial pathos and dramatic exaggerations. RELIGION/PHILOSOPHY: Sun religions of the Incas or of Akhenaton. Life philosophy. Nietzsche's teaching of the superman. Jupiter in Virgo Detriment IDEAL: Virtue and reliability. STRENGTH: A sense of order. Values what is exact, perfect, and visible at a glance. Needs an explicable image of the world that holds up to critical
attacks. Takes action for the general good. Practices orderliness, modesty,
and dependability. Has a sense for everything that is methodical, useful,
and practical.
PROBLEM AREA: The embittered teacher. Dogged, fainthearted ambition, intellectual narrow-mindedness, and vehement feelings of envy lead to
embittered fault-finding, a nasal know-it-all attitude, obtrusive patronage,
and a misanthropic basic attitude.
RELIGION/PHILOSOPHY: Confucianism. The teaching of ordered circumstances. Jupiter in Libra
IDEAL: Peace and justice. STRENGTH: The peace-loving person. Sense of balance, fairness, and
equality. Very much knows how to value harmony, beauty, and esthetics.
Companion of equality, justice, and peace. Interested in philosophy and
art. PROBLEM AREA: The noncommittal individual. Never wants to commit in decisions, relationships, or in moral, ethical matters. Unwarranted claims
to happiness and high expectations without even wanting to do anything to
achieve them. Envious and morose because other people (supposedly)
have it better. RELIGION/PHILOSOPHY: Greek classicism. The completely harmoniously
balanced conception of life as viewed by the ancient philosophers. Jupiter in Scorpio
IDEAL: Magic and power. STRENGTH: The occultist. Sense of the enigmatic, the concealed, farreaching changes, and the development of the emotional powers. High
degree of self-confidence in connection with the powers of suggestion can
have a beneficial effect on others. Also is aware of the transforming
powers of sexuality. PROBLEM AREA: The power-driven person. Misuses the powers of his soul to dominate and use others, make them dependent on him, or enslave
them. Irresponsible and inconsiderate. Inclined toward mental cruelty. RELIGION/PHILOSOPHY: Machiavellianism—esotericism—shamanism. Exploration and application of the archaic powers of the unconscious
mind.
Jupiter in Sagittarius Dignity IDEAL: Justice, noble-mindedness, and exalted virtues. STRENGTH: The sublime. Sense of exalted ethical and moral values, for a religious view of the world, for a high level of education, and a nobleminded, virtuous lifestyle. Trust in a higher guidance gives the feeling of
always being protected. Optimism in life also inspires other people and
creates a positive mood. Sense of justice. PROBLEM AREA: The overly-emotional person. Complacent, pompous,
passionate dogmatist and know-it-all with guru mannerisms. Obtrusive
fanatic right-winger. Likes to speak—or only speaks—”ex cathedra.”
Inexorable attainment of personal—supposedly more lofty—ideals. RELIGION/PHILOSOPHY: All high religions. Jupiter in Capricorn Fall IDEAL: Sense of duty, law and order. STRENGTH: The conservative. Sense of responsibility, reliability,
performance of one's duties, and clear rules and limitations. Keeper of
law, order, and tradition. Very much values straightforwardness, sincerity,
seriousness, simplicity, discipline, and inner strength. Willing to assume a
great deal of responsibility (governmental assignments). PROBLEM AREA: The dark cloud. Extremely strict with self and others. Lack of trust in the flow of life. Loss of spontaneity, cautious, fearful, rigid,
depressive. Terrible glorification of normality and the ultraconservative.
Miserly, petty, and pedantic. RELIGION/PHILOSOPHY: Zen Buddhism. Strict, austere, resolute, and impressively simple.
Jupiter in Aquarius
IDEAL: Equality, liberty, brotherhood. STRENGTH: The free spirit. Values what is modern and trend-setting. Strives for utopia, for overcoming old barriers and class distinctions. Glorifies
individual freedom and the right of self-determination for every person.
Champions human rights. Enlightened mind in search of wisdom and the
ability to judge everything from a higher, more-than-personal standpoint.
Sense of solitude and detached contemplativeness.
PROBLEM AREA: The eccentric. Lost in abstract intellectual edifices and models meant to explain the world. One-sided glorification of the intellect
and know-it-all demystification (= cheaply explaining away everything)
related to transcendental or numinous experiences. Embarrassing
superficiality and complacent refusal to examine the advocated theories
for their suitability in the practice. RELIGION/PHILOSOPHY: Enlightenment/atheism. The glorification of the mind.
Jupiter in Pisces Dignity IDEAL: Selflessness and brotherly love. STRENGTH: The spiritual advisor. Sense of helpfulness, kindness,
indulgence, and forgiveness. Great willingness to make sacrifices. Deep
understanding for all who are in need and suffer from emotional
oppression. Can give comfort and hope as a spiritual advisor and
confessor, Able to help the stricken get back on their feet. Feels drawn to
mysticism, trances, and spiritual teachings of redemption.
PROBLEM AREA: The daydreamer, Uncritical absorption of trashy pseudo- esoteric foolishness. Gullible, false, and vacillates between self-pity and
self-admiration. RELIGION/PHILOSOPHY: Early Christianity, The teaching of true brotherly love. Or Taoism: the paradoxical face of the truth. Saturn in Aries Fall PROHIBITION OR DISDAIN OF: Aggression, strife, egotism, spontaneity. Fear
of
difficulties in assertion.
THRESHOLD: defeat, COMPULSION: Self-assertion at any
cost,
exaggerated
demands.
Merciless, cruel, violent. LIBERATION: Self-confidence, inner strength, personal initiative, dynamics, healthy aggression.
Saturn in Taurus
PROHIBITION OR DISDAIN OF: Enjoyment in life, laziness, sensuality, faithfulness.
THRESHOLD: Fear of losing security, COMPULSION: Striving for security or fear of ruin, fear of privations, and enjoyment at any cost. Compulsive
other fears of loss.
about faithfulness. Satisfied modesty, healthy consciousness of reality,
appropriate striving for security, balanced ability to enjoy. Clear sense of
LIBERATION: self-worth.
Saturn in Gemini
PROHIBITION OR DISDAIN OF: Versatility, intellectual doubt, curiosity. Fear
of
losing COMPULSION:
Cynical
thinking,
intellectual freedom, being dense or embittered and sarcastic, entangled
at a loss for words.
in extremes and contradictions.
THRESHOLD: Concentrated, serious, consequential thinking. Always
prepared to consider the other side and letting it have its say.
LIBERATION: Saturn in Cancer Detriment PROHIBITION OR DISDAIN OF: Deep feelings, sentimentality, motherliness, family, romanticism, a feeling of being rooted in the homeland.
Fear of the depths of COMPULSION: Sentimental emotional
feelings, of emotional attachments, exhibitionism instead of expressing
of the confines of the family. Fear of deep, true feelings. Feeling oneself
being “eaten up” by the feminine at the mercy of heavy, negative
element.
feelings and depressive moods.
Starting a family for compulsive
reasons.
THRESHOLD: Taking one's own feelings seriously, healthy self-control
without frustrating suppression. Inner peace, feeling of emotional safety
and security without fear of dependency.
LIBERATION: Saturn in Leo Detriment PROHIBITION OR DISDAIN OF: Luxury, showmanship, pompousness. The fear of not being COMPULSION: Having to be generous
respected, admired, and loved. The and magnificent at any cost. The
fear of being insignificant, but also oppressive duty of having to find life
the fear of having to be at the focus exciting and wonderful every day.
of attention. Fear of authorities.
THRESHOLD: Dignified modesty, humble superior style, mature selfconfidence, willingness to take responsibility, and healthy self-criticism.
Free expression of personal uniqueness.
LIBERATION: Saturn in Virgo
PROHIBITION OR DISDAIN OF: Domesticity, precision, flexibility. Fear of tests. Fear of COMPULSION:
Obtrusive
being
useless,
awkward, perfectionism,
exaggerated
maladjusted, or inappropriate. Fear organization, pedanticism, and faultof illness.
finding that criticizes everything.
Fanaticism for what is utilitarian.
Fitness addiction. Extreme modesty.
THRESHOLD: LIBERATION: Awareness of social responsibility, sensible love of order, stable health. Synthesis of mind and body.
Saturn in Libra Exaltation Grace, charm, aesthetic, willingness to
compromise, peacemaking, art, playfulness.
PROHIBITION OR DISDAIN OF: THRESHOLD: The fear of having to be COMPULSION: Forcing oneself into a considerate or becoming dependent partnership or entering into too
on another person.
many social obligations. LIBERATION: Seriousness and maturing in relationships with other people. Commitment and responsibility in one's partnership. Clear discernment
and distinct sense of justice.
Saturn in Scorpio
PROHIBITION OR DISDAIN OF: Taboos, borderline areas, minorities, sexuality, power, esoteric study.
THRESHOLD: The fear of destructive COMPULSION: Feeling
oneself
forces, of emotional commitment, attracted to what is dark and
sexual devotion, the depth and forbidden. Dogged striving for passion of one's own feelings. Fear power. Sexual collecting mania.
of emotional entanglements and Being obsessed by occult or sexual
dependencies. Fear of death.
topics. Compulsively overstepping
taboos. Mature, chastened treatment of power. Overcoming the
fantasies of dependency and helplessness. Growing trust and willingness
to be devoted in the partnership, Deep sexual satisfaction.
LIBERATION: Saturn in Sagittarius
PROHIBITION OR DISDAIN OF: Religiousness, faith, search for meaning, moral values, everything foreign and strange, distant journeys.
The fear of being COMPULSION: Hard, rigid, dogmatic
thwarted by questions of faith, by ideas about faith or dogged atheism.
hopelessness, or the absurdities of Prudish moral strictness. Moral selflife. Fear of infiltration with foreign righteousness. Overly organized
elements and fear of one's own lack trips where nothing happens.
of significance. Fear of distant
journeys.
THRESHOLD: Tolerance, wise perception and discovery of meaning.
Extended and lively inner and outer journeys.
LIBERATION: Saturn in Capricorn Dignity PROHIBITION OR DISDAIN OF: Ambition, awareness of one's duty, reliability, willingness to take responsibility. THRESHOLD: Fear of failing. Fear of COMPULSION: Dogged
career
being controlled, limited, or planning. Rigid strictness with
repressed by others. Fear of being oneself and others. Enslaving
bound to do something.
oneself. LIBERATION: Healthy self-discipline and willingness to take responsibility. Far-sighted and prudent determination. Matured authority. Sober clarity
and down-to-earth view of the world.
Saturn in Aquarius Dignity PROHIBITION OR DISDAIN OF: Freedom, extravagance, individuality, progress, Utopia.
THRESHOLD: The fear of loneliness, COMPULSION: Pathological obstinacy of being deserted, of being inferior and constant, stubborn insistence on
to someone else, or of developing always having special treatment.
individual
peculiarities
and Doing crazy things in order to be
becoming an outsider who doesn't something special. Obsessed by
belong anywhere as a result. Fear of ideas of reform.
innovations. LIBERATION: Mature and relaxed manner of living out independence and peculiar characteristics. Sober attitude toward all experiments and
innovations. Inventor and developer of truly useful innovations. Saturn in Pisces
Devotion, selflessness, chaos, mystic
tendencies, and mediumistic abilities.
PROHIBITION OR DISDAIN OF: The fear of losing COMPULSION: Self-sacrifice at any
oneself in chaos, in the inexplicable, cost. Deep feelings of guilt and
or in what cannot be seen at a experiences of pain. Extreme
glance. Fear of deep emotions and interest in mystic or mediumistic
sympathy. Fear of becoming helpless topics to the point of craziness.
and a slave to others or of being
used by other people.
THRESHOLD: LIBERATION: True brotherly love, deep sensitivity, selfless love, mature trust in the Higher Self, and the honest willingness to pardon and forgive. Uranus, Neptune, and Pluto
The three outer planets move extremely slowly. This means that Uranus
spends an average of seven years in each sign of the zodiac. Neptune
takes fourteen years and Pluto twenty-one years. As a result, aspects
from these planets to each other often remain in orb for years. The
respective position of the sign the slow moving planet is in therefore
makes a statement about the generation coming into the world during this
period of time. The individual significance of such an aspect can only be
read from the house position in the personal horoscope and by crosslinking it with the aspects to the personal planets.
For this reason, the following tables only show the themes typical for
the sign that are characteristic for the respective generation.
Uranus in
Aries Taurus
FALL
Gemini
Cancer Leo
DETRIMENT
Virgo Strengths/Advocacy for
Freedom of the will,
freedom to conquer new
territory.
Freedom to enjoy life
according to your own
tastes; freedom of
possessions.
Freedom of opinion,
thought, and speech.
Freedom of the homeland,
the free development of
children and the soul.
Free development of
personality; for the
individual happiness in life.
Freedom of science and
teaching; freedom in
education. Problems
Inconsiderate individualism. Becoming a burden for
others instead of securing
the foundation of your own
life.
Heartless intellectualism.
Fleeing the nest; the rigorous
bursting of family ties and
structures.
Development of own
happiness in life at the cost
of others.
Feeling superior to
necessities of everyday life,
obsessively non-conformist. Libra Free choice of partner and
Inability to commit to a
freedom within the
relationship.
partnership; freedom of the
arts.
Freedom to research, break Massive suppressed desires,
Scorpio
uncontrolled overstepping of
EXALTATION taboos, undertake occult
studies; sexual freedom.
all prohibitions.
Sagittarius Religious freedom, freedom Idolatrous glorification of
of opinion, freedom of
individuality.
movement.
Capricorn Freedom to choose your own Freedom from laws, norms,
duries and responsibilities. and any type of
responsibility.
Aquarius Freedom for everyone,
The isolated loner, solipsist.
DIGNITY
freedom of opinion, and
freedom of development.
Pisces
Freedom to take your own Chaotic tendencies; “selfpath of redemption; freedom redemption” through
to follow your own vision. intoxicants.
Neptune in
Dissolution of
Aries
Old images of the enemy.
1861/62-1872/75
Taurus Encrusted property
1874/75-1887/88 structures, traditional
values.
Gemini Old thought patterns and
1888/89-1901/02 habits of thought.
Cancer Family structures and
1901/02-1914/15 rootedness in the
EXALTATION homeland.
Leo
Superficial splendor.
1914/15-1928/29 Idealization of
The fighting spirit,
freedom of will.
Tradition, spiritual security,
sensuality.
Inspired perceptions,
harmonious connection of
fantasy and intellect.
Motherhood, family
warmth, romanticism.
Examples, luxury,
snobbishness, or the superman.
Virgo
Old methods of working
Order, striving for
1928/29-1942/43 and teaching; social
practicality, utilitarian
EXILE
differences between the
thinking, health
classes.
consciousness.
Libra
Old forms of relationships; Peacefulness, love, and art.
1942/43-1956/57 the previous understanding
of art.
Scorpio Old fixations and power
Archaic powers, magic,
1956/57-1970/71 structures.
and sexuality.
Dogmas and old concepts Noble-mindedness,
Sagittarius of faith.
religious striving, ethical
1970/71-1984/85
consciousness of values.
Hierarchies and laws.
Law, order, duty,
Capricorn
awareness of responsibility.
1984/85-1998/99
FALL
Aquarius Individualism and striving Equality, freedom,
1998/99-2011/12 for independence.
brotherhood of all human
beings.
Pisces
Old dream images and
Willingness to sacrifice;
2011/12-2024/25 concepts of redemption.
brotherly love, mysticism.
DIGNITY
Lack of Self-Discipline
Weakening
Boundless inconsideration.
Weak ego, lack of assertiveness.
Getting off the track in area of
Weak ability to set limits, weak
sensuality.
feeling of security.
Dishonesty, boundless doubt, or
Limited intellectual abilities;
transfiguration of the intellect.
nebulous, unrealistic thinking.
Fantasies that get out of hand;
Weak feeling of being safe and
blurring of boundary between fiction secure; weak trust in one's own
and reality.
emotional world.
Narcissism, self-glorification that
Weakness of ego; lack of self-worth. gets out of hand, megalomania.
Spineless, exaggerated conformity, Diminished sense of order; weak
narrow-mindedness, and uncritical ability to differentiate.
belief in science.
Boundless emotional freedom,
Limited ability to commit to a
independence, and unfaithfulness.
relationship; lack of good taste.
Outgrowths of perverse striving for Shallow expression of passion;
power; extreme sexual excesses.
weakening of power.
Outgrowths of arrogant
Reduced ability to have faith and
sectarianism, fundamentalist
nebulous search for meaning.
excesses.
Uncontrolled authoritarian and
Irresponsibility.
reactionary tendencies.
Untenable utopias, unrealistic
Clouding of individual
egalitarianism, and eccentricity.
consciousness.
Consumption of intoxicants,
Blurred sense of reality.
vulnerability to seduction; airy-fairy
concept of the world.
Pluto in
Aries
1823-1852 and
2068-2096 Taurus
1852-1884 and
2096-2128
DETRIMENT Gemini
1640-1669 and Themes of
Experiences Power &
Transformation
Helplessness Through
The power and courage to Arbitrariness.
take truly new, unfamiliar,
as well as revolutionary
paths, and overcome the
past.
Experiences of radical
Money and possessions.
change in connection with
possessions and money;
fundamental transformation
of traditional concepts of
values.
Breakthrough and new
Intellectual superiority.
perceptions in research and 1884-1914 Cancer
1669-1694 and
1914-1939 Leo
1694-1711 and
1939-1957
EXALTATION
Virgo
1711-1726 and
1957-1972 Libra
1726-1737 and
1972-1984 Scorpio
1737-1749 and
1984-1995
DIGNITY science, uncompromising
translation of new insights,
ideas, and thoughts.
Complete destruction and Emotional ties and
transformation of current solidarity of the clan.
attitude toward family,
keeping family, homeland,
the people of one's nation,
and one's own origins
together.
Deep-reaching
Development of self.
transformation in the selfimage of human beings and
their possibilities of selfdevelopment.
Deep-reaching changes and Necessity of integration
radical challenges in the
and conformity to society.
scope of working
conditions, through
questions regarding health,
and as a result of ecological
problems.
Deep-reaching
Marriage and other forms
transformation of previous of partnership.
forms and concepts of
relationships, as well as
changes in the area of art.
Things that have been
Outward and inward
blocked, believed to be
striving for power.
lost, and concealed come to
light; knowledge that has
been kept secret, rituals
that have been passed
clown, and original healing
powers experience new
valuation. Fundamental radical
Religious concepts and
Sagittarius changes and transformation questions of finding
1749-1762 and regarding religious and
meaning.
1995-2008
moral values, as well as in
the area of search for
meaning and discovery of
meaning.
Capricorn Deep-reaching
Laws and norms.
1762-1777 and transformation of the social
2008-2023
order, hierarchies, and
laws, as well as in the area
of personal responsibility,
fulfillment of duties, and
general understanding of
destiny.
Aquarius Deep-reaching
Intellectual superiority.
1777-1799 and transformation in the
2023-2044
valuation of freedom and
FALL
independence, as well as in
the individual possibilities
of development for each
human being.
Pisces
Understanding of the world Power of the unconscious
1799-1823 and of the unconscious and the mind.
2044-2068
inexplicable, above all in
the areas of mediumism,
mysticism, and trance. The
CARDINAL AXIS The Rising Sign or Ascendant
The Ascendant (AC) is the sign of the zodiac that was rising on the
eastern horizon at the time of birth. The time and place of birth determine
which sign this is. Because of the apparent rotation of the ecliptic around
the Earth in a period of 24 hours, a new sign of the zodiac rises on the
eastern horizon on an average of every two hours, which means that the
Ascendant changes every two hours in purely mathematical terms.
However, based on the slanted position of the ecliptic, the signs rise at
various speeds when seen from Earth. Pisces is the quickest sign in the
northern hemisphere, rising in about 30 minutes, while Virgo is the
slowest to rise, with a time of more than three hours. In accordance with
this, the Pisces Ascendant is relatively rare in the northern hemisphere,
while the Virgo Ascendant is quite widespread. This ratio is reversed in
the southern hemisphere.
The sign of the Ascendant represents the way in which you
spontaneously approach your surrounding world, and the basic mood and
manner with which you start something new. It also describes the
experience that you had with your birth. This can be a fighting nature
(Aries-Mars) or reserved and hesitant (Capricorn-Saturn). In the truest
sense of the word, this could be a matter of life and death (Scorpio-Pluto)
or a liberating experience (Aquarius-Uranus). This first impression of life,
embodied by the Ascendant, is taken on the path through life and reexperienced in every new beginning. In the following portrayal, the
attitude that results from it will be described under IMAGE, FEELING TOWARD
LIFE, and APHORISM.
As the basic mood of life and the feeling of self, the Ascendant also
shows the ATTITUDE TOWARD MARRIAGE AND PARTNERSHIP, the individual
themes expressed by the Descendant.
The Ascendant stands for the image of the personality that the
surrounding world often experiences as the initial impression of the
individual. Of all the horoscope factors, the Ascendant has the greatest
significance for the appearance of an individual. This is why the typical
characteristics of a sign are listed under the heading of EXTERNAL
APPEARANCE in the following chapter. Appearance is not just dependent on
one individual factor, but is also influenced by other important configurations, such as planets in the 1st house, the Sun, or—in the female
horoscope—by the Moon. In this respect, the signature listed here is only
typical of the sign and should not be understood as compulsory of the
Ascendant. The entire horoscope is ultimately expressed through the
various aspects of the body.
When considering the Ascendant, it is important to analyze the
corresponding ruling planets, their signs and house positions, as well as
the aspects of the Ascendant and the ruling planets. The position of the
Ascendant ruler shows where and in which manner the original energy of
the Ascendant can best be expressed. One example of this, depicted in a
simplified manner, is that someone with a Gemini Ascendant and Mercury
in Virgo in the 3rd house encounters life with curiosity and interest
(Gemini Ascendant), is capable of analytical, critical thinking (Virgo), and
desires to establish contact with her surrounding world using talents
relating to the spoken and written word, and enjoys presenting herself or
himself (3rd house).
Planets close to the Ascendant—in the 1st or 12th house—complement
and highlight the qualities of the Ascendant. But they can also mean
conflicts when their themes are in contradiction to those of the Ascendant.
Because many horoscope factors are reflected in a person's appearance,
the characteristics listed on the following pages for the various signs are
not to be found in every person with that particular Ascendant. However,
the signature specific to each sign does permit the conclusion that people
with the appearance described by the sign will have a strong emphasis on
that sign's energy in the horoscope. Aries Ascendant
ELEMENT: Fire TEMPERAMENT: Choleric (quick-tempered) The Fighter
RULER: THEME: Leadership, initiative, activity.
STRENGTH: The go-getter. Doesn't give up and doesn't resign (“never-say- die”). Very lively, active, direct, and creative. Goes his or her own way
(above all, takes new paths) and asserts himself or herself. Courageous,
proud, energetic, strong-willed, enterprising, and passionate. PROBLEM AREA: The inconsiderate person. Aggressive, egotistical, hurried, inconsiderate—above all, rude and destructive, even personally. Tolerates
no frustrations. No ability to compromise, but a blunt either-or conduct.
Tends to be arbitrary, violent, misuse power, or show off. Wants to go at
everything head first.
FEELING TOWARD LIFE: Here I come! IMAGE: I am the first. And: Let's get going! APHORISM: Nothing ventured, nothing gained. ATTITUDE TOWARD MARRIAGE AND PARTNERSHIP: Tends to experience a
committed life partnership as confinement and imprisonment. Seeks the
element of tranquillity in the relationship, but cannot enjoy it. Needs a
serene and understanding partner to whom one can always return after
excursions.
EXTERNAL APPEARANCE: Lean, muscular body. Thick, straight, sometimes jagged eyebrows. Prominent facial features. “Butting bumps” on the
forehead. Decisive, intense movements. Goose-step.
Note: see also pages 106–107.
Taurus Ascendant
ELEMENT: Earth TEMPERAMENT: Melancholic The Connoisseur
RULER: THEME: Receiving, preserving, and enjoying. STRENGTH: The comfortable individual. Loves what is familiar and lasting. Distinct taste and highly developed sense of forms. Artistic disposition.
Lets things have the time they need to develop. Needs emotional and
material security. Leisurely, persistent, relaxed, calm and stable, practical,
full of feeling, and very sensual. PROBLEM AREA: The incorrigible creature of habit. Tends to fall back into old habits despite an awareness of them and the desire to change.
Uncomprehending stubbornness. Clings tightly to everything that is old
and defiantly defends against any innovation. Greedy, excessive, lazy,
self-indulgent, ponderous, and indolent.
IMAGE: I am good-natured FEELING TOWARD LIFE: If things would just
and stable.
stay as they are.
APHORISM: Rome wasn't built in a day. Or: What the farmer doesn't know, he doesn't try.
Seeks and offers
faithfulness and stability, therefore willing to commit to a relationship at a
young age. Often difficult to tolerate since there is no express tendency to
keep agreements that have been made. Frequent power struggles. Needs a
strong partner who knows what the person wants, is willing to engage in
conflicts, and makes life more exciting.
ATTITUDE TOWARD MARRIAGE AND PARTNERSHIP: EXTERNAL APPEARANCE: Large, round eyes (“cow eyes”), warm or “violet” glance, sensual mouth with thick lips. Often pyknic figure with round
nape of neck and round shoulders. Men have an inclination toward
crescent-shaped balding.
Note: see also pages 106–107.
Gemini Ascendant
ELEMENT: Air The Changeable Individual TEMPERAMENT: Sanguine (optimistic) RULER: THEME: Searching, finding, searching again, finding something new. STRENGTH: The intellectual. Eternally en route, constantly searching,
without exactly knowing what one's looking for. Curious, versatile, able to
make friends easily, mentally flexible, adaptable, always well-informed and ready to converse. A butterfly that flies everywhere but only lands for
a little while. Rhetorically skilled and never at a loss for words.
PROBLEM AREA: The absentminded professor. Always creates total
confusion and appears to feel good when no one else knows what's going
on. Nervous, restless, lack of concentration, talkative, unstable, sly,
cynical, and double-dealing. Nasty manipulation of words.
IMAGE: I
everything! know FEELING TOWARD LIFE: What I don't know bothers the
hell out of me. APHORISM: Ah, two souls live in my breast! ATTITUDE TOWARD MARRIAGE AND PARTNERSHIP: Longs for a partnership as the liberating element of tranquillity. Resigned to fate in the belief in a
higher guidance that will bring one together with a partner. Yet, remains
independent in one's innermost heart and shows curiosity and interest in a
variety of contacts.
EXTERNAL APPEARANCE: Slender, delicately boned, sometimes ungraceful figure. Sharp, interested, observant glance. Wide forehead, straight
eyebrows, small bridge of the nose. May also have narrow “greyhound”
face.
Note: see also pages 106–107.
Cancer Ascendant
ELEMENT: Water TEMPERAMENT: Melancholic The Motherly person
RULER: THEME: Helpfulness, security, instinct. STRENGTH: The caring individual. Sensitive, delicate, tends to be fearful but tough, persevering, and ambitious. Reacts and acts with emotion on
the basis of strong instincts. Seeks and gives a feeling of safety and security within the circle of friends and family. Empathizing, romantic,
and dreamy.
PROBLEM AREA: The childlike person. Refuses to grow up and hides behind a mask of childlike innocence. Shy, fickle, fearful, very moody, sulky, and
inferiority, Emotionally tyrannical. Melancholy and run of self-pity.
IMAGE: I am willing to help. FEELING TOWARD LIFE: Anything, except taking a straight path. APHORISM: There's no place like home. Or: Why roam a field when good things are so dose at hand?
ATTITUDE TOWARD MARRIAGE AND PARTNERSHIP: Not easily capable of living alone. Therefore, very willing to commit to a relationship or even hungry
to do so. Searches for security, lasting protection, and safety with a rooted,
imperturbable, and completely serious person who makes sure he or she
has a way out (hermit crab). Once such a partner has been found, he or she
feels liberated, open and willing to explore the entire world. Once entered
into a relationship, he or she keeps it going as long as this is m any way
possible.
EXTERNAL APPEARANCE: “Moon face,” pale skin, dreamy glance, and round body forms. Sometimes timid, uncertain expression and startled look. Men
have an inclination toward balding.
Note: see also pages 106–107.
Leo Ascendant
ELEMENT: Fire The Person Who is Confident of Victory TEMPERAMENT: Slightly choleric RULER: THEME: Self-confidence, showmanship, joy in living, being hard to please STRENGTH: The privileged individual. Self-confident, proud, warmhearted, and a generous, natural type of authority. An optimist with the feeling of
being a privileged individual and a child of fortune. Creative, very expressive, and successful. Full of momentum and rousing, exuberant joy
in life.
PROBLEM AREA: The braggart. Overbearing, haughty, condescending,
presumptuous, and power-hungry. Crude show-off and conceited bluffer.
Tends toward silly, dramatic scenes.
IMAGE: I am wonderful! FEELING TOWARD LIFE: Life is worth living. APHORISM: Why settle for less?
ATTITUDE TOWARD MARRIAGE AND PARTNERSHIP: Maintains a high degree of freedom and independence in the life partnership. Allows the partner the
same degree of freedom.
EXTERNAL APPEARANCE: Often very attractive. Well-built body—sometimes also very portly—with broad shoulders and a self-confident way of
walking. Decorative, high, and wide forehead. Arched eyebrows and an
open glance. Eyes appear to be set close together. Lion's mane.
Note: see also pages 106–107.
Virgo Ascendant
ELEMENT: Earth The Careful Individual TEMPERAMENT: Slightly melancholic RULER: THEME: A clear eye for details, quick ability to differentiate, sense of what is practical, skillful at adapting.
STRENGTH: The tidy person. Concerned with health and inner and outer cleanliness. Able to adapt when life circumstances make it appear
advisable and practical, With a sure instinct, one differentiates between
what is useful and worthless, beneficial and harmful in the physical and
emotional realm. Loves what can be comprehended at a glance.
Systematic, methodical, critical, and down-to-earth.
PROBLEM AREA: The perfectionist. Overly cautious, obsessed with details and afraid of life, unfeeling, eternally finding fault, sly, upright, inhibited, prudish, narrow-minded, colorless, and endlessly pedantic, boring, and
bureaucratic. With exaggerated fear, one avoids everything that could
possibly be harmful, Very dependent on pure formalities.
IMAGE: I am critical. FEELING TOWARD LIFE: Practice makes perfect. APHORISM: It's better to be safe than sorry.
ATTITUDE TOWARD MARRIAGE AND PARTNERSHIP: Very critical attitude toward marriage, which above all means dividing the rights and doubling the
obligations.2 Often does not marry until late in life. However, one is then
very concerned with sustaining the marriage—at least the outer
semblance.
EXTERNAL APPEARANCE: Slender, well-formed body, often youthful
appearance until old age, then very wrinkled. Tends to have knockknees.
Trustworthy forehead. Frequently has straight eyebrows. Usually small
eyes with a firm, critical look. Always has clean fingernails.
Note: see also pages 106–107
Libra Ascendant
ELEMENT: Air TEMPERAMENT: Sanguine (optimistic) The Esthete
RULER: THEME: Balance, peace, and beauty.
STRENGTH: The diplomat. Cheerful, calm, sensible, and well-groomed.
Concerned with harmony and justice. Good eye for aesthetic forms.
Diplomatic skills. Makes friends easily and is very oriented toward other
people. More than others, one seeks and needs the encounter with others
in order to be able to be reflected in them and find one's own standpoint.
Able to make compromises, charming, and sociable.
PROBLEM AREA: The conflict-avoider. Often has great difficulties making decisions. Extremely exaggerated willingness to make compromises for
the sake of peace. Lack of endurance and ability to assert oneself Pleasure-seeker. Detached within ones innermost heart. Has only apparent
interest in the superficially beautiful illusion.
IMAGE: I am charming. FEELING TOWARD LIFE: The main thing is to do it with style! APHORISM: It is not good for a person to be alone.
ATTITUDE TOWARD MARRIAGE AND PARTNERSHIP: Very much oriented toward a partner, cannot live well alone. However, one won't let oneself be driven
out of one's mind by matters of love. Tends toward a relationship that is
both a marriage of convenience and one of love. Very willing to
compromise as long as independence is not threatened.
Fine, delicate build. Graceful appearance.
Sensitive skin. Usually has very straight eyebrows. Friendly but somewhat
distant personality. In men, an inclination toward very wide balding
(tonsure).
Note: see also pages 106–107.
EXTERNAL APPEARANCE: Scorpio Ascendant
ELEMENT: Water TEMPERAMENT: Melancholic The Mysterious Person
RULER: and THEME: Secrecy, power of fascination, passion.
STRENGTH: The hypnotist. Strong powers of suggestion, strength of will, endurance, and determination. Extreme feelings of love and hate.
Excellent observational powers. At the same time, mistrusting, clever, and
capable of deep insights. Can also remain externally calm and restrained
while very agitated inwardly. Healthy willingness to engage in conflict.
Reserved and secretive. Understands how to draw other people out of their
reserve. Sharp eye for weak spots.
The omnipotent charlatan. Hunger for power,
overestimation of one's own capabilities, and feelings of omnipotence.
Dependent on recognition and homage, therefore also very reliant upon
PROBLEM AREA: surroundings, which one strongly manipulates. Ceaseless alternating
between nasty needling (which leads to conflicts and rejection time and
again) followed with an intense solicitation of sympathy. Vindictive,
hateful, and maliciousness. Uncontrolled, vicious, and destructive.
Extreme problems with sex drive and a tendency toward deep depressions.
Bloodsucker, fake, and charlatan.
IMAGE: I am irresistible. FEELING TOWARD LIFE: All or nothing! APHORISM: The deeper, the better.
ATTITUDE TOWARD MARRIAGE AND PARTNERSHIP: Seeks a partner who does not permit himself or herself to be twisted around a finger and knows how
to set clear limits. Secretly longs for a person who will show the (brutal)
truth and can make one face the facts.
EXTERNAL APPEARANCE: Poker face. Very attractive or very ugly. Quite frequently a pyknic figure. Deep-set eyes with a sharp, piercing, and
penetrating gaze (Mephistopheles), often with a prominent nose (hawk
face), Women frequently have a seductive glance, Sturdy, sometimes
disheveled hair with a low hairline.
Note: see also pages 106–107.
Sagittarius Ascendant
ELEMENT: Fire TEMPERAMENT: Nervous-choleric The Optimist
RULER: THEME: Idealism, freedom, justice.
STRENGTH: The jovial person. Cosmopolitan, enjoys travel, optimistic,
liberal, enthusiastic, generous, and charitable. Striving for higher things
(ideals, religion, education, professional and social position, etc.),
religious, very concerned with justice and freedom. Exemplary.
PROBLEM AREA: The arrogant preacher. Overwrought zealot and obtrusive know-it-all. Self-righteous, unbearable arrogant and condescending,
sensitive to criticism, presumptuous, conceited, and superficial. Without stability and pathetically moralizing. Slightly agitated because he or she
always has to be good.
IMAGE: I am good (morality FEELING TOWARD LIFE: Things will turn out
and qualitatively).
okay (trust in God).
APHORISM: If you do your best, you will be redeemed.
ATTITUDE TOWARD MARRIAGE AND PARTNERSHIP: Vacillates between freedom and commitment. As a result, postpones the decision for a lasting
relationship as long as possible. Has greatest difficulties in deciding to
marry because of fear of losing one's freedom. Ultimately always remains
a bachelor at heart.
EXTERNAL APPEARANCE: Large, powerful, athletic body. High forehead and square chin. Cosmopolitan look and noble features. Inclined to have bald
spots at the temples.
Note: see also pages 106–107.
Capricorn Ascendant
ELEMENT: Earth The Dutiful person TEMPERAMENT: Melancholic RULER: THEME: Discipline, stability, willingness to take responsibility.
STRENGTH: The steadfast individual. Tenacious, respectable, practical,
thorough, patient, and ascetic, when necessary. Needs and creates clear
structures. Very concentrated. Does not give up. Difficulties and obstacles
only spur one on to more achievement. Skeptical to mistrusting.
PROBLEM AREA: The naysayer: The joyless careerist who is constantly subject to an inner pressure of having to do something. Pessimistic, denies
everything, depressive, often conscious of guilt feeling, reserved, coldhearted, hard, miserly, lacking in humor, and embittered.
IMAGE: I am reliable and competent. FEELING TOWARD LIFE: There's no free lunch. APHORISM: If you want to go to Rome, you shouldn't get caught up in the carnival in venice.
ATTITUDE TOWARD MARRIAGE AND PARTNERSHIP: Experiences the life
partnership as a non-terminable contract with clear rights and obligations.
Does his Dr her best to faithfully fulfill obligations and make every
necessary sacrifice for the sake of adapting in order to maintain the
relationship.
EXTERNAL APPEARANCE: Slender or lean figure. Sometimes deep wrinkles in the face. Serious look. Long nose. Sometimes very beautiful, clearly
profiled face, but frequently also an appearance that has the effect of being
scarred. Large hands and feet.
Note: See also pages 106–107.
Aquarius Ascendant
ELEMENT: Air The Eccentric, the Extraordinary Individual TEMPERAMENT: Sanguine RULER: and THEME: Originality, individualism, independence.
STRENGTH: The free spirit. Objective, independent, friendly, and open, while always remaining distant at the same rime. Intellectual and practical
abilities. Imaginative and inventive. Good judge of human nature. Does
not even consider raking the normal path of development and enters
through a side door instead.
PROBLEM AREA: The eccentric. Nonchalantly and arrogantly puts oneself above the general rules of the game. Full of scorn for the conformists
(which is everyone else). Cold, isolated, distanced, and friendless.
Reclusive and presumptuous. Torn by inner conflict and without
endurance. Suffers because of one's state of being unusual, which only
consists of not being able to consider oneself normal.
IMAGE: I am really something FEELING TOWARD LIFE: quire special. there's more freedom)! Let's go (where APHORISM: Above the clouds…
ATTITUDE TOWARD MARRIAGE AND PARTNERSHIP: Very carefully approaches a possible partnership and rakes a long time to examine the possibility. Even
in a long-lasting life partnership, experiences oneself with certain feelings
of distance, strangeness, or unfamiliarity. Needs and expects warmth and
momentum in life from the partner. Seeks an elite partner.
EXTERNAL APPEARANCE: Oval face, receding forehead, wide-awake eyes. Little erotic charisma, more of a “pal.”
Note: see also pages 106–107.
Pisces Ascendant
ELEMENT: Water The Medium, the Sleepwalker TEMPERAMENT: Phlegmatic RULER: and THEME: Inspiration, sensitivity, empathy.
STRENGTH: The seismograph Mobile sensitivity and uncanny sureness of instinct. Capable of devotion, intuitive, willing to help, flexible, and
adaptable. Idealistic and dreamy. Artistic disposition.
PROBLEM AREA: The overly sensitive. individual Extremely oversensitive, great difficulty with setting boundaries. Selflessness that borders on giving
oneself up. Starry-eyed, childish belief in miracles. Lives as in a trance
and definitely doesn't want to be awakened. Fearful, moody, and easily
impressed. Uncritical (esoteric) enthusiasm. Self-pity. Tends to play the
role of the victim.
IMAGE: still waters deep. run FEELING TOWARD LIFE: Everything is I a
dream. APHORISM: The essential things are invisible to the eye. Or: You wrangle your way through it all.
ATTITUDE TOWARD MARRIAGE AND PARTNERSHIP: Encounters the other person as if in a trance and suddenly finds oneself in a relationship (or just as easily on the other side of the door). Longs for a partner who will take
care of the burdensome things of everyday life so that he or she can devote
time to a personal dreamworld.
EXTERNAL APPEARANCE: Usually delicately boned and tall. Can also be fleshy and bloated. Indistinct facial features. Dreamy or deep glance.
Often has slanted eyes (“fish eyes”).
Note: see also pages 106–107. The Lowest Heavens or Imum Coeli
The Imum Coeli (IC) is the axis at the beginning of the 4th house, the
lowest point (midnight) in the horoscope. It shows the home in the spatial
sense (dwelling) and emotional sense (security). It also represents
homeland and origins. The IC is the most mediumistic point in the
horoscope. Planets in its vicinity (up to a distance of 5°) can make
corresponding statements about mediumistic talents. The image of the
mother has traditionally been associated with the IC and the adjacent 4th
house. However, a newer interpretation primarily sees the image of the
father, his role, and the process of coming to terms with him here.
The (partially unconscious) attitude toward security, deep feelings, and
how one takes root emotionally, physically, and—in the figurative sense—
also spatially (house, apartment, etc.) is shown in the table on page 122.
IC in
Aries
Taurus Gemini
Cancer Leo Virgo Libra Unconscious Attitude
Rebellion and opposition, emotional dependence, constant
chomping at the bit; in search for new shores.
Strong emotional need for security. Knows how to value
the appeal of what has developed through the years, what is
familiar and lasting. Needs solid ground under his or her
feet.
Curious and restless. A nomad who can quickly pack the
tents. Problems in coming to terms with deep feelings.
Longing for peace, security, and tranquillity. Strong
attachment to the family. Great sensitivity and depth of
emotion. Intensive dreams.
The feeling of security combines with feeling grand. Firm
belief in one's own talents. When deep feelings are
expressed, it is done with intensity.
Great need for security. Also satisfied with a modest scope,
as long as he or she feels secure. Sober to critical way of
dealing with deep emotions.
Seeks a harmonious and stylish home. Peaceable down to
the bone. Esthetic, sometimes artistic expression of feelings.
Scorpio
The secretive home. Enormous inner depths that are not
accessible to others.
Sagittarius Cosmopolitan and very agile in the innermost heart.
Willing to move far away. Deep, religious feelings.
Capricorn Depths of feeling to which it is difficult to find access.
Inner toughness, great ability to see things through, need
for emotional security. Needs constancy.
Aquarius Inner independence, eccentric feelings, unusual forms of
security.
Pisces
Extraordinary depth of feeling, strong inner emotion.
Search for spiritual or mystical feelings of security. The Descending Sign or Descendant
The Descendant (DC) is the sign that sets (Latin = descendere) on the
western horizon at the time of birth. As a result, it is always the sign
opposite the Ascendant. While the Ascendant represents the feeling of
oneself and of self-expression, the Descendant reflects the experience in
conjunction with the other person, which makes it an essential aspect of
the partnership theme. The qualities of the signs and planets on the
Descendant are frequently first activated and made conscious by life in a
relationship. Because this is always the complementary opposite pole to
the feeling of oneself that is embodied in the Ascendant, it is quite
acceptable to use the common phrase “better half” to describe the
Descendant.
Although the forms of relationships listed in the following chart are an
important aspect of the partnership theme, it is just one aspect of the
overall theme, which is usually quite complex. Further aspects result; for
example, from the distribution of the elements and the position of the
masculine (Sun, Mars) and feminine (Moon, Venus) lights and planets, as
well as the planets in the 7th house.
Descendant Partnership Themes Matching
Ascendant Aries The conflict relationship. Libra Taurus The sensual relationship. Scorpio Gemini Diversity of relationships. Sagittarius Cancer Family warmth. Capricorn Leo The luxury relationship. Aquarius Virgo The orderly relationship. Pisces Libra The egalitarian relationship. Aries Scorpio The pact (the magical relationship). Taurus The holy relationship. Gemini Capricorn The solid, eternal relationship. Cancer Sagittarius Aquarius The
original,
relationship. modern, Pisces The dream relationship. free Leo
Virgo Theme of the Descendant Finds “Better Half' in the Form of
Peaceableness,
indecision,
Willingness to engage in conflict, impulsive
“cultivated
paleness,”
spontaneity, vitality, originality.
refinement.
Profound
feelings
of
Realism, clear boundaries, serenity, goodomnipotence;
naturedness.
destructiveness, mistrust.
Unctuous
holiness,
Irony and wit, nagging doubt, critical
gullibility, smugness, onescrutiny, diversity.
sidedness.
Strictness and resolution,
Softness, indulgence, safety and security,
maintains
boundaries,
communion, sense of family, depth of
loneliness, sobriety, and
feeling, dreaminess.
toughness.
Eccentricity,
bloodless Being at the center of attention, effusive rationalism, cool detachment. vitality, momentum in life.
Mediumism,
chaos,
Sobriety, order, science, perfection.
spirituality, improvisation.
Egocentric, go-getter attitude,
Focusing on the partner, clever strategies,
wildness and coarseness,
esthetics and style, pronounced fairness.
inconsideration.
Earthiness,
gullibility,
Depths, slyness, extreme sensuality,
stubbornness,
carefree
provocation.
sensuality.
Doubt/despair,
inner
Strong convictions, “in”-sight.
conflicts.
Fickleness,
need
for Straightforwardness, feeling of security,
protection, dependency on discipline, resolution, willingness to take
moods, naiveté.
responsibility.
Showmanship, complacency. Team spirit, exposure.
Sobriety,
fastidiousness, Dream and intoxication, creative chaos,
clarity.
boundlessness. The Midheaven or Medium Coeli
The Medium Coeli (MC) is the axis at the beginning of the 10th house, the
highest point (midday) in the horoscope. Above all, it shows the themes,
qualities, and tendencies that become increasingly important during the
course of a lifetime and should be developed. In addition, it stands for
occupation and calling, and can also describe the content as well as the
type of professional work. The MC and adjacent 10th house traditionally
have been associated with the image of the father. According to the newer
interpretation, the image of the mother, her role, and the process of
coming to terms with her is primarily depicted here. The following chart
describes only the factors that become increasingly important in the life of
the individual, both in general and professional terms. To find out what
professions these themes relate to, look up same sign where it appears as
the Sun sign. MC in
Aries Taurus Gemini Cancer Themes
that
Become Development
Increasingly Important
Self-assertion,
personal Development of fighting
authority, conquest of new spirit and spontaneity.
areas, willingness to engage
in
conflict,
derring-do,
accepting challenges and
growing through them.
Patience, stamina, security, Development of sensual
tradition, enjoyment of life, pleasures and stability.
sensuality,
solidarity,
developing an awareness of
value.
Diversity, variety, intellectual Development of curiosity
curiosity, communication and and diversity.
information, establishing and
mediating contacts.
Willingness
to
help, Development of femininity compassion, loving care, and depth of emotion.
safety and security, home,
homeland and family.
MC in
Leo Good Themes
Development
Equanimity, success, recognition, Development
of
generosity, grandness, leadership sense of self-worth
role, being at the center of attention, and generosity.
power.
Virgo
Economy, methodology, precision, Development
of
reliability, ability to be critical, precise powers of
thoroughness,
health,
easy discernment and love
adaptability
to
whatever
is of detail.
necessary.
Esthetics, equilibrium, harmony, Development
of
Libra
peace, art, elegance, refined style.
sense of beauty and
peaceableness.
Everything
enigmatic
and Development of inner
Scorpio
unfathomable, concealed truths, strength, powers of
taboos and their transgression, healing
and
depths and abysses, secret powers suggestion.
(the gray eminence), comprehensive
changes in favor of a deeper-lying
truth.
Sagittarius High ideals, noble-mindedness, high Development of wide
level of education, justice, strong horizons and a deep
convictions,
international feeling for relevance.
connections.
Capricorn Perseverance,
resoluteness, Development
of
structure,
reliability,
authority, resoluteness
and
performance of duty.
willingness to take
responsibility.
of
Aquarius Independence, originality, joy of Development
experimentation, overcoming the old individuality
and
utopias. Pisces and bringing something new into the
world.
Spirituality, transcendent experience, Development
of
all-embracing love, resolution of mediumistic ability
solid structures.
and true brotherly
love. The SUN, MOON, and PLANETS
in the HOUSES The Energy of the Houses
Sun
The house where the Sun stands is the area of life involved with the central
development of the self. It should never be neglected. The Sun imparts the
greatest experience of happiness and feelings of deep fulfillment. Whenever
life appears to be empty and meaningless, or the question as to the task in
life is posed, the range of topics inherent to this house contain the essential
answer.
Moon
The Moon house covers that area into which a person feels instinctively
prompted, where his or her wish for a feeling of security and other deep
longings lie. However, since the Moon is also an expression of adaptability
and permanent responsiveness, this house also contains themes to which the
person is open at all times.
Mercury
The house position of Mercury shows where the individual prefers to use
the mind, intellectual agility and skill, and in which direction curiosity
moves him or her. It also shows what he or she grapples with intellectually,
and in what areas he or she is always willing to learn something new.
Venus
The position of Venus’ house allows us to perceive where the need for
harmony, peaceableness, and good taste are expressed, where the wish for
community predominates, and where flirtation, eroticism, and seduction
play a role. The Venus house indicates where important acquaintances are
made and, in many cases, where the encounter with the life partner takes
place.
Mars
The Mars house represents the area of life that requires the greatest
expenditure of energy. It is the area that must be conquered, where the
greatest willingness to engage in conflict is expressed, where the use of
force can achieve great things, but also where conflict and destructive
frenzy can destroy everything again.
Jupiter
Jupiter's house shows where one feels rich and independent of all outside
factors. These are the areas one enters with full trust, where one is given help (or allows help), where one knows how to master problems in a natural
and easy manner, and where one grows and confidently looks to the future.
Saturn
Saturn's house represents those areas in life where one feels impoverished,
which one initially faces with a critical, suspicious, and mistrusting attitude,
or which one would prefer to completely banish from life. But the tasks that
no one can avoid are located at precisely this spot. Each individual—to
varying degrees—clashes with the themes of the Saturn house; but these
themes are simultaneously the greatest opportunities for growth. If they are
recognized and made use of, experience has shown that development takes
place in the following steps:
1. INHIBITION: Rejection and contempt for the themes, which are usually
recognized and perceived only in other people at the start.
2. COMPULSION: Radical turnabout and compulsive living out (at any
price) of the interrelated topics that had been despised before, whereby
an expansion of the previous boundaries always occurs because new
ground is being broken.
3. RESOLUTION: Relaxed and serene way of dealing with the previous
problem area and its complete integration into the personality.
Uranus
The house of Uranus reveals the themes which a person would like to be
independent of, where he or she develops a free spirit, as well as a certain
uniqueness, where striving for freedom causes fickleness or, when it comes
to opinions, even a “traitor” who—much to his or her own surprise—breaks
a promise or a solid agreement. The Uranus house is full of surprises,
upheavals, lunacies, as well as being the area of great independence,
ingenious solutions, and eccentric ways of life.
Neptune
The Neptune house represents the areas in which a person develops the
finest feelers, sure of instincts and inspirations, possessing “cosmic
antennae.” This is the area in which he or she is guided, where all the
important things come, or happen apparently without any effort of his or her
own. However, unpleasant Neptune constellations can also indicate
confusion, chaos, illusion, or addiction.
Pluto The Pluto house is primarily concerned with experiences of power and
helplessness, dependencies and entanglements, as well as total
transformations on the basis of experiences—usually difficult ones—from
which the person emerges changed to the core.
Moon's Nodes
The house in which the North Node (Ascending Moon's Node)
is
positioned shows the way to one's goal and the major points in life. In
contrast, the Descending Moon's Node in the opposite house represents
the ideas, manners of behavior, and qualities that are to be resolved. 1st House: I Am Ascendant (AC)
ANALOGY: RULER: EXALTATION DETRIMIENT: FALL: ELEMENT: QUALITY: GENDER: Fire Cardinal Masculine GENERAL: The Appearance. The basic mood in life, outer appearance, type, personality, vital energy, awareness of life, physical constitution, vitality,
expression of self, temperament, power of assertion, independence, and
way of approaching other people and plans.
POLARITY: The feeling for oneself in contrast to the experience of the other person in the 7th house.
Sun in the 1st House Being at the Center of Attention Exaltation THE CENTRAL THEME OF DEVELOPMENT OF THE SELF is the expression, the assertion, and affirmation of one's own personality. Tends to be masculine,
frequently warm and generous personality.
STRENGTH: THE Showman. Full of vital energy, active and initiating. Shapes his or her own life and is always willing to approach something new.
Experiences self as the natural focal point of the environment. Egocentric
rather than egotistical. Strong-willed, open, cocky, free, direct, vigorous,
independent, and convinced of self.
The Obtrusive Attention-Seeker. Overestimates
capabilities; self-adulation; unpleasant self-centeredness. Constantly needs
attention, which is either grabbed impudently or not taken directly; gets
attention indirectly through trickery. Places self at the center of attention
by being complicated, long-winded or uses illness and other afflictions.
Sensitive to criticism and unable to criticize self, but has a distinct
tendency to dish it out to others. Narcissistic, uncomprehending, naive,
attention-craving, boastful, and tyrannical.
PROBLEM AREA: BEHAVIOR: Supreme style. Moon in the 1st House Willingness to Adapt The Empathetic Person. Distinct sense of the surrounding
world's expectations, connected with a willingness to accommodate and a
preference for reacting instead of being active. Easy to talk to. Intuitive,
sensitive, and possessing a sure instinct. Reacts strongly to impressions of
the surrounding world, high level of emotional impressionability, great
intuitive understanding and willingness to adapt. Often has a feminine
aura.
STRENGTH: PROBLEM AREA: The Remote-Controlled Individual. Lack of courage to trust Sun and develop its theme. Conforming attitude and lack of
independence, uneven temper and moodiness, unstable, easily distracted,
restless, susceptible and easily influenced by others. Dependent on fashion
trends. Cowardly character. Inconsistent person who always takes sides
with someone who is stronger.
BEHAVIOR: Careful, intuitive, willing to adapt. Mercury in the 1st House Tactics STRENGTH: The Clever One. Talented and clever in the way he or she presents self, looks after personal affairs and asserts self. Crafty, sharp as a
tack, sociable, and quick to act. Tactically skilled and ready to adapt, if
necessary. Well-pondered conduct. Intellectual behavior. Precocious
thinker. PROBLEM AREA: The Calculating Mind. Wily, sly, knows all the tricks of the trade, is cold as ice when it comes to own advantages; opportunistic, and too talkative. Phony and cunning. Never makes a mistake! Always
claims to already have said what he or she just heard. BEHAVIOR: Smart, experienced, agile. Venus in the 1st House Charm Detriment STRENGTH: The Lovable Individual. Friendly, gracious, likable, feminine aura and a winning, charming nature. Attractive appearance, often also
striking beauty. Optimistic attitude toward life. Uninhibited, peaceable,
able to adapt, diplomatic, and sociable. Is always popular and welcome
everywhere. Often has artistic ambitions.
PROBLEM AREA: The Beautiful Vacuum. Nice at all costs and nothing more. Has little to offer except a well-behaved, beautiful facade. Greedily strives
for attention, smug, vain, indolent, untruthful, and sensitive to criticism.
Infantile innocent conscience.
BEHAVIOR: Charming, gracious. Mars in the 1st House Power of Assertion Dignity STRENGTH: The Lightning-Bolt. Knows no hesitation, immediately gets down to business. Is quick, direct, appropriately aggressive and willing to
engage in conflict when it comes to asserting, achieving, or conquering
something. Vigorous, audacious, spontaneous, strong. Masculine aura. The Braggart. Will go to any lengths to quarrel.
Inconsiderate, egotistical, sometimes brutal and violent. Lack of ability to
adapt and be level-headed. Starts fights easily. Hurts others without
noticing it. Nasty troublemaker.
PROBLEM AREA: BEHAVIOR: Direct, impulsive, willing to engage in conflicts. Jupiter in the 1st House Trust STRENGTH: The Confidant, Is trusting and (therefore) wins the confidence of others. Noble nature, dignified aura, convinced of self and
achievements. Cheerful, benevolent, jovial, and optimistic attitude toward
life that rubs off on others. Charismatic behavior. Respectable appearance. PROBLEM AREA: The Reverend, Condescending and intolerably arrogant, very high opinion of self, vain and lazy. Unable to criticize self or even
admit errors. Smug guru who enjoys playing the illuminated one. BEHAVIOR: Dignified, respectable, superior. Saturn in the 1st House Mistrust Fall OBJECTIVE: Development of a positive sense of self-assertion.
INHIBITION: The Reserved Individual, The Misanthrope, Fear of being hurt. Deep sensitivity concealed behind a facade of self-control and apparent
toughness. Or fear of conflicts causes person to appear selfless. Very little
self-assurance, but mistrusting and skeptical about life. Suffers because of
self and constantly sees self surrounded by a pack of wolves. Difficulties
in getting started asserting self. Lifeless, dry, pessimistic, slow, without
spirit and élan, joyless, depressed, serious, gloomy, shy, resigned. Often a
loner. Constantly worrying. Twists things around until they become
impossible to solve. COMPULSION: The Stiff Person, Tries to forcibly overcome inhibitions, but gives the impression of being awkward, clumsy, rough, stiff, and
sometimes even aggressive in the process. Being lively becomes a duty.
Offense is considered the best defense.
RESOLUTION: The Great Thaw, Sober and realistic attitude toward life. Willing to open up to new things after taking a critical, clever look at
them. Then consistent, self-controlled, tough, responsible, straightforward,
reliable, discreet.
BEHAVIOR: Inhibited, mistrustful, rigid. Uranus in the 1st House Uniqueness STRENGTH: The Free Spirit. Lives and loves freedom and uniqueness.
Unconventional, original, quick to make decisions, full of ideas, and
always open to everything new. Tolerates no constriction or imposed
duties. Completely convinced of own uniqueness and importance. Only
acts in accordance with own free will. The Troublemaker. Cool, impenetrable, incalculable,
impatient, erratic, and shows little willingness to integrate or even
subordinate within a system. Seditious, rebellious, superficial, reclusive.
Exaggerated need for freedom and extravagant sense of self-worth lead to
blatant unreliability and the breaking of agreements, contracts, and
commitments.
PROBLEM AREA: BEHAVIOR: Eccentric, alert, restless. Neptune in the 1st House Sensitivity STRENGTH: The Guided Soul. Mediumistic ability for sensing things that go beyond one's own identity and experiencing the border between self and
non-self to be fluid. Sensitive intuitive understanding. Open to influences
from the outside. Artistic, dreamy, enigmatic. Takes the right path with a
sure instinct—as if remote-controlled. PROBLEM AREA: The Day-Dreamer. Seducible, airy-fairy, and incapable of having a (self-)critical view of the world. Personality that is completely
dazzling, but not predictable, with the tendency toward blind selfdeception, as well as deluding others. Quickly becomes the victim of
stronger personalities. Can easily become addicted, dependent, or
enslaved to other people. Sometimes makes an absent-minded and
incomprehensible impression, but often cannot be fathomed either. Tends
to show the world the face that it wants to see. Severe identity problems.
Ultimately does not know who he or she is. BEHAVIOR: Sensitive, dreamy, entranced. Pluto in the 1st House Magnetism The Fascinator. Strong charisma, captivating glance, and
intensive, irresistible, magical power of attraction. Strong-willed,
powerful, and influential. Self-determined, concentrated, and always
willing to personally become involved in deep experiences or accompany
others in such phases. At the same time, this person has a practically
inexhaustible inner strength and an energy that overwhelms everything.
STRENGTH: PROBLEM AREA: The Power-Hungry Person. Wants to control everyone else and make others dependent out of fear of being defeated or deserted.
Inconsiderate and cruel assertion of will. Extremely headstrong, inflexible,
and compulsive. Dark, somber, and impenetrable. BEHAVIOR: Intensive, decisive, overwhelming. North Node in the 1st House
THEME: Conflict between development of self and striving for harmony, equilibrium, and accommodation in relationships. Tension between giving
and taking. TASK: independence. Developing the courage to emerge from relationship dependencies, create a true relationship to yourself, and do what you
personally find to be best for yourself. The development of selfsufficiency, self-confidence, and joy in your own power and strength. Also
the willingness to face conflicts and fears of loss in encounters and
relationships. DANGER: Self-Abnegation, Being overly adapted; the tendency to always and immediately offer assistance to others, even if this is in contradiction
to own needs. Becoming too reliant on other people, too little personal
initiative, and always being dependent on confirmation from the outside. 2nd House: I Have
ANALOGY: RULER: EXALTATION: DETRIMENT: and
FALL: ELEMENT: QUALITY: GENDER: Earth Fixed Feminine GENERAL: Assets. Assets in both senses of the word as the foundation of material, intellectual, and emotional security. Wealth and possessions,
finances, social background, money-making and dealing with money,
income and expenses, profit and loss, talents, abilities, physical
awareness.
POLARITY: The tangible values in contrast to the subtle values in the 8th house.
Sun in the 2nd House Security THE CENTRAL THEME OF DEVELOPMENT OF THE SELF is security, which—in accordance with the background—is sought in material, intellectual,
emotional, or spiritual areas. The development and expansion of assets in
both senses, as property and talent, is vital here.
STRENGTH: The Rich Man. Person needs solid support ground; concerned with things that give security. Loves clear boundaries and staked-out
territory. Likes to display satisfaction with life to the outside world.
Realistic, practical, content, generous, epicurean. Not to be considered
poor is, itself, a question of prestige.
PROBLEM AREA: The Fanatic for Security. Inner insecurity concealed by inappropriate means. Immoderate hoarding, greed and miserliness, as well
as pretentiousness: showing off and spending money in a big way,
squandering and dissipating everything. WAY OF DEALING WITH MONEY: Supremely confident. Moon in the 2nd House Need for Security Exaltation STRENGTH: Financial Intuition. Intuitive striving for possessions and
stability. Sure instinct in dealing with things of value and a deep-rooted
feeling of security. Emotional need to lavish care on and “mother” things
that are cherished. Outside recognition and admiration of one's talents
strengthen the feeling of self-worth and security considerably.
PROBLEM AREA: Fluctuating Finances, Great need for security together with very emotional way of approaching money. As a result—in
accordance with the Moon sign—strongly fluctuating financial situation
(ebb and flow). Existential fears and generous moods alternate with each
other. Unstable feeling of self-worth. Leaving options open and not
wanting to make commitments. Vanity that demands constant admiration.
WAY OF DEALING WITH MONEY: Emotional. Mercury in the 2nd House Business Acumen The Resourceful Person. Wealth of ideas and skill in
developing and dealing with everything that means security. Practical,
economic way of thinking and a good sense of economic fluctuations.
Feeling secure thanks to clever mind. Resourceful, experienced, and sharp
in dealing with property assets.
STRENGTH: PROBLEM AREA: The Trickster. Dubious, shady tricks in money-making. Coldblooded, nasty, untruthful business practices. Financial trap-setter, as
well as reckless and incautious approach to money. Losses as a result of
presumptuous overestimation of one's own shrewdness. WAY OE DEALING WITII MONEY: Clever. Venus in the 2nd
House Goldfinger Dignity STRENGTH: The Lovely One. Confidence in one's own taste as talent.
Business acumen in dealing with art, jewelry, and everything that is
beautiful, or that makes a person beautiful. Joy in comfortable
surroundings and possessions. Seeks and loves emotional and material
security. Likes to adorn herself and joyfully shows what she has.
Equilibrium and prudence in dealing with money.
PROBLEM AREA: The Vain Squanderer. Egotistical, smug satisfying of one's own needs. Intemperance. Believes that one must measure love in dollars
and cents or that one can buy love.
WAY OF DEALING WITH MONEY: Erotic attitude toward money. Mars in the 2nd House The Struggle for Money Detriment STRENGTH: The Money-Maker. Conflict readiness and the will to assert self, as well as pure muscle power as basic disposition that signifies security.
Struggles and works offensively at full power for the development of
financial security since money means power and strength. PROBLEM AREA: The Speculator. Arbitrary, self-righteous way of dealing with money. Would rather take a gamble than carefully weigh matters.
Engages in foolish financial risks (test of courage!). Rivalry and fighting
about money resulting in financial losses. Impulsive expenditures, which
are ruinous in extreme cases. WAY OF DEALING WITH MONEY: Spontaneous, arbitrary. Jupiter in the 2nd House Consciousness of Wealth STRENGTH: The Money-Spinner. Great trust in personal security and assets in the sense of ability and possessions. Feels rich—independent of actual
bank balance, lucky hand in money matters. Carefree, content, and full of
trust in God that nothing will go wrong. Gives support to others and likes
to let them share in his or her own wealth.
PROBLEM AREA: The Self-Satisfied Person. Lazy. Finds it natural to demand things without providing (an appropriate) service in return, Resting on
one's presumed laurels. Conceit. Squanders and wastes money and
property.
WAY OF DEALING WITH MONEY: Jovial. Saturn in the 2nd House Consciousness of Poverty OBJECTIVE: Development of a true feeling of self-worth.
INHIBITION: The Short-Changed Person. Fear of poverty; distinct mistrust of everything that could offer security. Feels impoverished—regardless of
bank balance (Uncle Scrooge McDuck syndrome). Even with enormous assets, always concerned everything could be lost, stolen, dispossessed,
destroyed, or eaten away by inflation. Insecure regarding personal value
and abilities. Sells self for sake of security. Mistrustingly fearful and
inhibited, allows self and others nothing. Envy, penny-pinching, stinginess
(materially and intellectually) or exactly the opposite: vehement rejection
of material values.
COMPULSION: The Pseudo-Generous Individual. Acts like he or she doesn't worry about money. Forces self to be generous, but gives impression of
being clumsy and artificial (shakes when signing the check). Gets
involved in risks and speculations in order to not be seen as stiff,
fossilized, or antiquated.
The Value-Conscious Person. Realistic attitude toward
everything that embodies security. Responsible, healthy, sober way of
handling assets. Understands how to view talents and abilities as lasting
values and inner possessions that are to be developed and cared for.
Thorough, matter-of-fact, careful, conscientious, and prudent, confident,
rich, emotionally free.
RESOLUTION: WAY OF DEALING WITH MONEY: Fearful, reserved, circumspect. Uranus in the 2nd House Financial Surprises Fall The Financially-Independent Individual. Imaginative and
inventive in money matters. Strong urge for financial independence.
Uncommon ways of making (and spending) money. Courage and joy in
trying out and exploring unfamiliar things and new areas. Unusual talents.
Strong and rapidly fluctuating bank balance. Financial fireworks.
STRENGTH: PROBLEM AREA: The Unpredictable Person. Eccentric way of dealing with money. Blatantly disregards prevailing norms. Too special to have to earn
money like everyone else, which frequently causes financial problems. Love of freedom is more important than reliability. Result is often breach
of contract.
WAY OF DEALING WITH MONEY: Unconventional to crazy. Neptune in the 2nd House Spiritual Security The Sustained One. Inexplicable feeling of self-worth and
security, regardless of outside factors. Deep consciousness of being
sustained, being well looked-after and therefore withstanding all life's
difficulties. Properly evaluating talents and abilities. Earning money
through spiritual or mediumistic gifts. Having a sure instinct for financial
matters and a good nose for lucrative transactions, but sometimes
difficulties in approaching things systematically. Money-lending
transactions.
STRENGTH: The Anti-Business Person. Vacillating, untrustworthy,
unpredictable basis. Nebulous security. No feeling of self-worth and very
dependent on other people's appraisals. Easy to encourage or discourage.
No—or just a dull—feeling for financial matters. Irresponsible. Tendency
toward secrecy, never showing others what he or she really possesses
(materially, intellectually, psychologically). Obscure money transactions.
Swindle and fraud.
PROBLEM AREAS: WAY OF DEALING WITH MONEY: Visionary/illusionary or nebulous. Pluto in the 2nd House The Power of Money Detriment STRENGTH: Inner Wealth, Deep-reaching transformations through financial crises or experiences of dependency. Earning money with spiritual powers (hypnosis, healing powers). Building on the basis of inner wealth. Feeling
of deepest security.
PROBLEM AREA: Financial Dependency, Succumbing to the fascination of money. Making other people (financially) dependent on yourself or
personally experiencing yourself to be helplessly dependent on money.
Shamelessly demonstrating the power of money. “Buying” other people,
opinions, and “love.” Compulsively chasing after money. Greedy, stingy,
petty, avaricious, and with a compulsive need to control when it comes to
material things.
WAY OF DEALING WITH MONEY: Fascinated or obsessed. North Node in the 2nd House
Conflict between holding on tight and wanting to preserve
something on the one hand and the forces of transformation and necessity
to leave the old behind yourself on the other.
THEME: TASK: Intrinsic Value. Must accept the need for security, closeness, trust and intimacy, confidence and physicality. Recognizing own value,
experiencing self as important, discovering possibilities and abilities,
valuing self, and loving self. Development of talents and everything that
means security; material security, inner security, and self-assurance. DANGER: Compulsive Need to Control. Wanting to control everything as a result of great fears of loss. Seeking security, as well as confirmation that
he or she deserves love and is important, through the questionable creation
of dependencies. Abuses of sexuality and eroticism as instruments of
power. 3rd House: I Think
ANALOGY: RULER: EXALTATION: DETRIMENT: —
FALL: ELEMENT: QUALITY: GENDER: — Air Mutable Masculine GENERAL: The Mind. Healthy common sense. Learning, communicating, thinking, perceiving, differentiating. Exchange of thoughts,
correspondence, everyday contacts, everyday experiences, intellectual
abilities and the capacity to learn, logic, power of expression, business
acumen—particularly trade, brokerage business, business trips, and short
journeys.
POLARITY: Prosaic thought and the kind of newspaper reality valid for just one day in contrast to higher thinking and the true convictions in the 9th
house.
Sun in the 3rd House The Eternal Student THE CENTRAL THEME OF DEVELOPMENT OF THE SELF is found in Studying, communicating, absorbing knowledge and information and imparting it to
others, as well as constantly exploring and learning something new.
STRENGTH: The Knowledge-Sponge. Enjoyment of learning that doesn't abate with age. Curiosity about everything with which the surrounding
world is concerned. Desire to read and exchange thoughts with others.
Mentally flexible, able to change and adapt. Sociable, thirsty for
knowledge, full of ideas. Often quick-witted and intelligent. A good
teacher and speaker. PROBLEM AREA: The Overly Intellectual. Intellectual snobbishness. Feels (without reason) superior to others and tries to force the world to accept
ideas. Condescending, chatty, and know-it-all. Contradictory. SPEAKING STYLE: Personal, powerful, showman-like. Moon in the 3rd House The Curious One The Talkative Person, The need to have a say and to
communicate thoughts. Open, very talkative, eloquent, empathizing in
conversations. Likes to hear himself or herself talk, and knows how to
have a say everywhere. At the same time, does well at imitating others and
talks with each person in his own language. A talent for appropriately
stealing the spotlight in greatly differing social groups and at every
opportunity. Tendency to record everyday life (in journals). Vivid manner
of expression. Desire to learn to show others the knowledge gained.
STRENGTH: The Chatterbox. Superficial in word and thought.
Influenced by moods. Problems are intellectualized and talked to death.
Plays the talented person, easily assumes other people's thoughts and
considers them to be his or her own. Constantly changing interests.
PROBLEM AREA: SPEAKING STYLE: Emotional, vivid, relies very much on the listeners Mercury in the 3rd House The Inquisitive Individual STRENGTH: The Articulate One. Skillful in negotiations and discussions. Quickly and adroitly speaks the language of the person he or she is talking
to. May easily persuade other people. Ability to show interest in the
mental habits of another and beating him at his own game or coolly letting
him trap himself. Never at a loss for arguments. Often has a special
intellectual talent. Constant studiousness. PROBLEM AREA: The Sophist. Hair-splitter for whom the discussion is of more significance than the content. More interested in rhetorical
superiority than the truth. Superficial, flighty, and loquacious. Premature
judgments. SPEAKING STYLE: Objective, witty, lively. Venus in the 3rd House Beautiful Words STRENGTH: Ms. or Mr. Popularity. Lovely verbal expression. Spreads a cheerful, harmonious atmosphere. Is witty, optimistic, and very charming.
Knows how to flatter and seduce with beautiful words. Maintains many
contacts and has good relationships with siblings and the immediate
environment. Is good at stealing the spotlight. Has a good understanding
of how to mediate and settle conflicts.
PROBLEM AREA: Beautiful Empty Phrases. Melodic, magical words without any substance. Graceful, but horribly shallow. Superficial, trivial, and
opportunistic contacts lacking in depth. Likes to play games with other
people.
SPEAKING STYLE: Charming, winning, stylish. Mars in the 3rd House Sharp Wit STRENGTH: The Talkmaster. Can express strongly both verbally and in writing. Tends to sharply criticize the surrounding world and
inconsiderately expose everything that is wrong, phony, or somehow inconsistent. Has the courage to stand up for self and show true colors,
even at the risk of looking like a fool. Strong, but vacillating application
of energy in learning. PROBLEM AREA: The Cantankerous Person. Great gift (and desire) for
making self unpopular. Is always looking for a fight. Constantly disgraces
self without even noticing it. SPEAKING STYLE: Offensive, quarrelsome, commanding. Jupiter in the 3rd House Wealth of Ideas Detriment STRENGTH : The Scholar. Great intellectual grasp, likes to talk a lot and does it convincingly, Loves big words and epic embellishments. Brilliant,
well-informed entertainer. Educated, popular, and respected. Learns
quickly and easily and is good at imparting what has been learned.
PROBLEM AREA: The High and Mighty. Lazy about learning (would rather be a teacher than a student). Fear of looking like a fool. Is embarrassed
about not knowing something and therefore secretly studies and skillfully
bluffs with immature, superficial knowledge. Loud, disrespectful,
presumptuous, self-righteous, Considers himself or herself to be better
than others. Likes to play the judge, even if no one has asked him or her to
do so, Getting his or her due is more important than being right. SPEAKING STYLE: Exalted, didactic, convincing. Saturn in the 3rd House Methodical Thinking OBJECTIVE: Concentrated, consistent, profound thinking.
INHIBITION: The Ponderous Person. Slow and dense in conversations, as well as when reading and studying. Clings to each letter. Hangs on too
tightly to everything, which also causes speech defects and expressive
disorders (stuttering). Tends to be mistrustful and reserved in everyday life
and in contacts with surroundings, initially at least. Strong doubt about
own intellectual abilities and verbal skills. Inflexible thinking. The
Cinderella of the family. Finds no open doors. Must constantly wait longer
than other people (who are allowed to go first) wherever he or she is
COMPULSION: The Wind-Bag, Communication at any price. The obtrusive person who always talks without having anything to say and who believes
he or she knows everything. The phrase-monger who always just
mechanically repeats everything he or she hears.
SOLUTION: The Experienced Speaker, The ability to think in a careful, profound, concentrated, objective, and serious manner without losing the
red thread. Clear and practiced in verbal expression. Demosthenes
symptom.3
SPEAKING STYLE: Structured, chronological, sober. Uranus in the 3rd House The (Unrecognized) Genius STRENGTH: The Self-Taught Person. Original, imaginative, but completely erratic thinking that is frequently a step ahead of its time or other people.
Sudden ideas, perceptions, and inventions (Eureka effect4). A free-thinker.
The impromptu speaker who doesn't follow any type of speaking concept.
An autodidact who quickly comprehends and learns in accordance with a personal—mostly unusual—manner. Spreads a lively atmosphere. Eternal
desire to learn.
PROBLEM AREA: The Recluse. An eccentric, even among siblings. Isolated, mysterious, unappreciated, which frequently results in tormenting sellcriticism. Crazy, high-flown thinking that often disregards all the norms.
Suffers strongly under the customary school system that imposes too
many standards, demands too many restrictions, and progresses much too
slowly. Not concentrated, restless, has too many irons in the fire (tries to
think several thoughts at the same time).
SPEAKING STYLE: Spontaneous, original, lively, capricious. Neptune in the 3rd House Knowledge from the Depths STRENGTE: The Seer. Thinking inspired from the depths. Imaginative, vivid in manner of expression. Led from within when thinking, writing,
speaking, and lecturing, and therefore often does not even know where
words will take him or her. The same applies to the way in which her or
she learns. Empathy and identification with immediate environment.
Quickly finds the way anywhere. Good at slipping into various roles.
Master of the art of persuasion; actor. Writes anonymously, under a
pseudonym, as a ghostwriter.
The Illusionist. Boundless, hazy thinking and unclear
manner of expression. Constantly goes off on a tangent. Loses self in a
fictitious reality. Already incomprehensible to siblings during childhood.
Problems with the truth, becomes victim of untruths or spreads tall tales
and daydreams which are considered to be true. Often has difficulty in
differentiating between personal thoughts and opinions and those of other
people. Distracted and confused.
PROBLEM AREA: SPEAKING STYLE: Inspired, imaginative, pictorial, seductive. Pluto in the 3rd House The Penetrating Mind The Spirit of Research, Profound thinking and search for
background reasons without compromise. Can be fascinated by a thought
and nearly get completely embroiled in an idea. Strong power of
expression and persuasion. Understands the power of thoughts and knows
how to use them effectively.
STRENGTH: The Demagogue, Wants absolutely to assert personal
viewpoints and opinions. Misuses the suggestive power of words in order
to win over other people. One-track thinking, fixed ideas, and compulsion
to talk. Difficult, dark, destructive train of thought.
PROBLEM AREA: SPEAKING STYLE: Overwhelming, insistent, suggestive, demagogic. Ascending Moon's Node in the 3rd House
THEME: Conflict between the search for objectivity, broad knowledge,
lively communication and exchange of information, as well as the
insistence on a strongly subjective view of things and retreat into an elitist,
intellectual world with solidly anchored standpoints and extremely
prejudicial convictions and commandments.
TASK: Interpreting, Expressing complex correlations, lofty convictions,
and great thoughts in the everyday language. Translating spiritual
knowledge into practical living and conveying it to the immediate
environment in a generally understandable manner. Making clear the
relationship between noble perceptions, philosophical ideas, as well as
ethical and religious values, in everyday life. Imparting practical
knowledge through writing and speaking. Looking after immediate
matters. DANGER: Dogmatism, Getting stuck in rigid patterns, convictions, and
prejudices. Maintains a fundamentalist attitude in a myopic and stubborn
manner, Doesn't budge an inch from acquired convictions or personal
view of the world. 4th House: I Feel Imum Coeli (IC)
ANALOGY: RULER: EXALTATION: DETRIMENT: and
FALL: ELEMENT: QUALITY: GENDER: Water Cardinal Feminine GENERAL: The Soul. The depths of the soul, premonitions and dreams, the origins, the home, the need for a feeling of security, well-being, homeland
and homesickness, the evening of life, family roots, the image of the
father, tradition, the way of living
POLARITY: The origin in contrast to the goal in life in the 10th house. Sun in the 4th House Depths of the Soul THE CENTRAL THEME OF THE DEVELOPMENT OF THE SELF is the home, the family, the homeland, as well as the experience of the inner world, the
depths of one's own soul.
STRENGTH: Emotional Strength. Creative confrontation with the images of the unconscious as psychologist, interpreter of dreams, or artist. Strives
for a harmonious connection between the inner world and the outer
environment. Rooted in native soil, home-loving. Deeply rooted in family
tradition and proud of family heritage. The responsible patriarch as
dignified bearer of the family name. Intuitive. Intensive feelings and
frequently introverted. Mediumistic gifts if the Sun is located close to the
IC (up to 5°).
PROBLEM AREA: The House Tyrant. Does not manage to detach from the family and the home grounds, or has difficulty in doing so. Remains in the
parental house or quickly establishes own family. Develops nasty patriarchal airs and forces own—usually—narrow-minded formulas for
explaining the world upon environment. Fearful, sentimental, reserved,
egotistical, tyrannical, dependent on others, depressive. Relates everything
to self.
IMAGE OF THE FATHER: Self-confident, exemplary, strong. Moon in the 4th House Attachment to One's Native Land Dignity
STRENGTH: Emotional Wanderlust. Instinctive search for emotional security and intimacy. Needs a clear feeling of belonging, a genuine home, yet is
still quite mobile and likes to travel like a rolling stone. However, can
adapt to a strange environment with astonishing ease. Strong relationship
to the unconscious mind, the past, and origins. Fine intuitive sense of
other people's needs and feelings. Imaginative, creative, artistic talent.
Mediumistic gifts if the Moon is located close to the IC (up to 5°).
PROBLEM AREA: The Person Without a Home. Cannot develop any feelings of inner belonging. Restless, constantly on the road. Remains emotionally
infantile, dependent on other people, and self-destructive.
IMAGE OF THE FATHER: Protective-emotional, the father in the role of the mother, or possibly unstable, moody, and unreliable.
Mercury in the 4th House Thinking Along Familiar Lines STRENGTH: Sensitive Thought. Deep understanding of the image language of the soul. Good interpreter of dreams, fairy tales, and symbols.
Imaginative storyteller. Likes to work at home. Mediumistic gifts if Mercury is located close to the IC (up to 5°). The Intellectually Retarded. Uncritically assumes the
thought patterns and conceptual world of the family. Aversion to outside
ideas. Narrow-minded, old-fashioned, unimaginative way of thinking.
PROBLEM AREA: IMAGE OF THE FATHER: Clever, smart, skillful. Venus in the 4th House Peace of Mind STRENGTH: The Beautiful Home. Makes sure there is peace and a pleasant atmosphere in the domestic area. Builds a love nest there. Great emotional
romanticism. Deep sensual and motherly tendencies. Has great emotional
powers and strives for inner peace. Love of homeland.
PROBLEM AREA: The Little Woman. Too emotionally attached to parental home. Doesn't develop a sense of independence. Gets stuck on the parent
of the opposite sex as the searching image. Imitates the parents' marriage.
IMAGE OE THE FATHER: Loving, attractive. Mars in the 4th House Emotional Uproar Fall STRENGTH: The Watchdog. Is alert and ready to fight at any time when it comes to sheltering or protecting the home, the family, or the parents
against attacks. Early and distinct striving for independence. If Mars is
located close to the IC (up to 5°), this means a distinctly good feeling for emotional energies and a talent for working with spiritual energies. PROBLEM AREA: The Center of Unrest. Rebellion, strife, and opposition in the parental home, particularly against the father. Humiliations, restriction
of freedom, and experiences of helplessness usually lead to an early
detachment from the parental home. Pent-up aggression and deep-seated,
concealed, paralyzing rage lead to greater inner unrest with considerable
emotional tensions that are difficult to bring to the surface and integrate.
Frequent fights at home. IMAGE OF THE FATHER: Strong and powerful or aggressive and hot- tempered. Jupiter in the 4th House The Good, Splendid Home Exaltation STRENGTH: The Aristocrat, Proud of own descent. Strong trust in roots. Feels self to be the high point of the line of ancestors. Enjoys living in
elegant, comfortable housing. Relatively simple to find a corresponding
residence even under difficult external conditions. Spiritual wealth.
Certain of, and trust in, being led by the inner voice. Mediumistic gifts if
Jupiter is located close to the IC (up to 5°).
Class Conceit Arrogance in dealing with people of
supposedly lower status. High-handed house tyrant.
PROBLEM AREA: IMAGE OF THE FATHER: Wonderful, dignified, good. Saturn in the 4th House The Meager or Cold Home Detriment OBJECTIVE: Development of inner stability and independence. INHIBITION: The Unwanted Individual, Difficult childhood, painful feelings of not being safe and secure, emotional injuries, rejection, repression, not
being loved, frustrations, and emotional insecurity. Being deeply stricken
by life. Wishes he or she had never been born. Fear of intimacy and
closeness. Difficulties in permitting and expressing feelings. Sees self as
being very weighty, serious, and important. Shifts the search for emotional
security to the outside world, such as through the acquisition of real estate
as a substitute. Has a hard time finding a place to live. Usually lives below
means, sometimes even spartanly (the eternal student's pad) or in cold,
impersonal, comfortable surroundings.
COMPULSION: Emotional Exhibitionism. Violent attempt to express feelings and permit closeness. Group experiences or other “training grounds” as a
mandatory program.
RESOLUTION: Genuine Inner Security, When inner inhibitions have been reduced and mistrust toward intimacy and closeness has melted away,
trust m one's own inner security gradually grows. The deeply understood
insight that only the person who deserts himself or herself has been
deserted by everyone leads to the grateful feeling of inner security without
outer support.
IMAGE OF THE FATHER: Strict, reserved, authoritarian, or absent. Uranus in the 4th House The Homeless or Stateless Individual STRENGTH: The Person With No Strings Attached. Leaves home at an early age and then goes own way completely. Needs the feeling of absolute freedom, particularly from family ties and obligations within the clan.
Only likes to join forces with kindred spirits on own accord. Lives in a
highly individualistic, original environment. Always mobile. Surprising
moves.
PROBLEM AREA: The Test-Tube Baby. As a child, often doubts whether parents are really his or her own. Distanced relationship to the family,
homeland, and tradition. Often feels like he or she doesn't belong, but is
rather an alien element. Therefore no feeling of obligation to parental
home or homeland. The family suddenly loses its hold. Without a
homeland, uprooted, completely alienated. Vagabond.
IMAGE OF THE FATHER: Original, but unreliable and unpredictable. Neptune in the 4th House Family Mists Exaltation STRENGTH: The Sensitive Person. Natural, intuitive access to the images of the unconscious mind. Sensitive and emotional. Instinctive understanding
of dreams and symbols. Can only slowly and passively detach from the
parental home. “Dreams” way out of it and looks for an environment in
which the vibrations are good (house on the ocean). Can also live alone in
a spiritualized manner, completely untouched by environment.
Mediumistic gifts if Neptune is located close to the IC (up to 5°).
PROBLEM AREA: Hazy Origins. Unclear origins, blurry family relationships. No chance of identifying with parents, family, or homeland. Constant
theme of dissolution. Feels driven, without solid ground or boundaries.
Feelings of homesickness without clear idea of where this longed-for
homeland should be. IMAGE OF THE FATHER: Idealized, unreachable or intangible, sometimes also absent.
Pluto in the 4th House Family Power Struggle STRENGTH: Clean Sweep. Radical and relentless renewal wherever it is seen as necessary. Willingness to cut off decaying roots and fundamentally
change oneself inside and out. Profound transformations often occur
through confrontations within the family or living conditions. Mediumistic
gifts if Pluto is located close to the IC (up to 5°). PROBLEM AREA: The Emotionally Shackled. Extremely strong, fated bonds to the family and/or the family heritage. Power struggles within the
family. Feels obligated or coerced into fulfilling the parent's expectations
instead of living own life. Vehement inner rage and aggression, but
greatest difficulties in freeing self and going own way.
IMAGE OE THE FATHER: Felt to be powerful, influential, decisive, controlling, and manipulative; frequently unconscious, erotic relationship.
North Node in the 4th House
THEME: Conflict between family and profession, home and public life, closeness and distance, inner experience and outer obligations.
TASK: Emotional Strength, Seeking and finding happiness and fulfillment in the home, the family, in your own inner life. Becoming involved with
your own origins, the clan, the nation, and the homeland. Turning to the
inner world, the images of the soul, your own feelings and emotional needs. Searching for possibilities of expressing your own solicitude: in the
family, as a physician, therapist, etc.
DANGER: The Rover. Keeping away from domestic life and occupation with the inner world through external, professional assignments and
obligations. Concentrating entire ambition on performance and outer
recognition instead of developing inner peace and emotional security. 5th House: I Show Myself
ANALOGY: RULER: EXALTATION: DETRIMENT: and
FALL: ELEMENT: QUALITY: GENDER: — Fire Fixed Masculine GENERAL: Self-Expression. The joy of showing who you are, what you have, and what you can do. You do everything for fun and not because it's
your duty. Self-expression and joy in life. The inner child. Play and
pleasure, from playing with children to gambling for money, acting, and
the game of love. Flirting, eroticism, sexuality, love affairs, children,
creative expression, speculation, hobbies.
Emphasis on self and self-expression in contrast to the
integration in a group in the 11th house.
POLARITY: Sun in the 5th House The Player Dignity THE CENTRAL THEME OE DEVELOPMENT OF THE SELF is the joy of one's own powers of creation and procreation, self-realization, showmanship, as well
as the playful depiction of what a person is capable of.
STRENGTH: Awareness of Personal Effect on Others. Likes to show what he or she can do in a heartfelt manner and of own accord. At the same time,
doesn't like to be bound to duty. Prefers to experience life and love as one
big game. Is always perfectly conscious of the effect made when he or she
appears on any type of stage. Great abilities in areas of creativity and
design that—above all in artists—can lead to true creative ecstasy. Stands
fully in the limelight. Independent, spontaneous, positive, cordial. The
eternally youthful, dynamic, sensual, creative person. PROBLEM AREA: Dependence on an Audience. Must constantly try out
effect on other people, particularly effect on the opposite sex. Dependent
on applause. Needs much recognition in order to cover up deep feelings of
inferiority.
ATTITUDE TOWARD CHILDREN: Fatherly, big-hearted, benevolent. Moon in the 5th House The Participant STRENGTH: The Playful Person. Instinctive urge to behave playfully in order to express feelings, emotions, and skills. Being willing to open up to
things that are playful, new, and exciting at any time and simply being a
part of things. Joy of life and enjoyment of playing, above all the eternally
new game of love. Loves the enjoyment of the moment: impulsive,
playful, creative, poetic, dramatic, passionate. Harmonious connection
between feelings and development of the self. Artistic and musical
disposition. Good teacher. Fond of children.
PROBLEM AREA: The Gambler. The game is important, but the fellow player or players can be replaced at any time. Gets involved in senseless risks in
the process. Too playful. “Plays away” life. Unstable, arrogant, insecure,
without self-assurance.
ATTITUDE TOWARD CHILDREN: Motherly, caring, fond of children. Mercury in the 5th House Playful Thinking STRENGTH: Creative Thoughts. Can easily be preoccupied with a number of things at the same time. Creative in thought and action. Likes to show
everything he or she knows. Quickly overcomes interim failures. Very clever at playing. Knows all the tricks of the trade, particularly in the
game of love. Physical and intellectual agility.
PROBLEM AREA: The Con Man. Unscrupulous gambler, shrewd, foolhardy, mean, arrogant. Skillful imitator of thought and action, but without
individuality.
ATTITUDE TOWARD CHILDREN: Promotes intellectual inclinations. Venus in the 5th House Enamored by Love STRENGTH: The Flirt. Great willingness to be happy. Deep gratitude for all the beauty in the world. Always prepared to overlook what is ugly for the
sake of beauty. Loves love and flirting. Knows how to place himself or
herself in the best light and make an enchanting impression. Can yield to
the intoxication of beauty from the bottom of his or her heart. Artistic
disposition. Fond of children.
The Playboy. Superficial, vain behavior. Calculating,
heartless playing of trumps. Can only live in very high spirits or states of
ecstasy. Undignified and foolish when older.
PROBLEM AREA: ATTITUDE TOWARD CHILDREN: Promotes abilities in the fine arts. Mars in the 5th House Game with High Stakes The Radiant Victor. Impetuous conqueror, valiant and
passionate lover. Loves competitive games, likes to get involved in high
wagers, and shows that he or she is the greatest, capable of doing
everything better. Wants to assert personal interests and wants to be
STRENGTH: autonomous and independent. Highest stakes in love and play. Joy of life,
zest for living, fiery, very passionate sexuality, and out to conquer. Natural
authority.
PROBLEM AREA: The Quarrelsome Gambler. Likes to place all the bets on one card and plays with risky stakes. Tends to grossly exaggerate.
Passionately loves to wager, but doesn't know how to lose. Always picks a
quarrel instead. Erotic ambition, narcissistic disposition, sadomasochistic,
violent, jealous, overbearing.
ATTITUDE TOWARD CHILDREN: Promotes interest in sports. Jupiter in the 5th House Lucky at Love and Play STRENGTH: Optimist. Enjoyment of life, love, and art. A fundamental trust in one's own abilities, conduct, and the idea that simply everything in life
can be achieved. Lucky at love and play. Strong attraction for others.
Good actor.
PROBLEM AREA: Vain Dilettante. Superficial, sensitive to criticism, smug, irresponsible. Likes to depend on others. Gambler personality, pleasureseeker, indolent. A Don Juan with countless love affairs and an easily
injured self-esteem.
ATTITUDE TOWARD CHILDREN: Good-natured, indulgent, supportive. Saturn in the 5th House Stage Fright or “Playing Prohibited!” OBJECTIVE: Trust in one's own self and one's own center. The willingness to put in an appearance and show oneself. INHIBITION: The Unlucky Devil. Always takes everything too hard, too seriously, and too tragically. Every game (and each flirt) immediately
turns into something serious and usually turns out badly. Secret feelings of
guilt and (unconscious) desire to be penitent. Keeps betting on the same
card even in hopeless cases and after the game is lost. Lack of recognition
and admiration. Believes one is not lovable or even likable. Fear of
showing oneself or making an appearance (stage fright). Unapproachable,
shy, reserved, strict, stiff, envious, petty, cold. Disappointments in love.
COMPULSION: Playing as a Duty. Tries with all one's might to come on strong I and not take life seriously. Frantically attempts to step
nonchalantly into the limelight or become a carefree, cheerful master of
the art of living and playing.
RESOLUTION: Sensible Behavior. Has learned to give in to the unpredictable turns of a game. Shows what he or she can do, but not without adequate
practice and preparation. Stands behind personal mistakes and doesn't
need to be perfect. Aware of personal uniquenness; likes to spontaneously
open up and express self in an uninhibited manner. Plays prudently—
instead of doggedly—with a high degree of endurance. Warm-hearted,
open, congenial. ATTITUDE TOWARD CHILDREN: Serious, responsible, or possibly fearful, disapproving, strict.
Uranus in the 5th House Personal Rules of the Game Detriment STRENGTH: The Fireworks of Love. Loves craziness, variety, and flirting, but above all personal freedom and personal rules in the game of love and
life. Always has something dazzling. Tends to make original, spontaneous
appearances, but can only participate if personally interested. As a result, tends to avoid routine and obligations of every sort. Experiences many
surprises.
PROBLEM AREA: The Disappointed One. Cannot stick to one thing faithfully or for a long time. Doesn't like to get completely involved with one person
or one plan. Never succumbs to intoxication to the point of being out of
control. Knows that sooner or later every experience results in
disappointment or separation. Maintains own inner independence and
distance toward everything and everyone. Leaves the other person or
people quickly, before being deserted (or thrown out). Mistrustful and
suspicious. Never completely trusts and loves. Ultimately always
disappointing, disappointed, and lonely.
ATTITUDE TOWARD CHILDREN: “Progressive” and changeable. Children are often also experienced as burdensome and restricting.
Neptune in the 5th House The Art of Seduction The Romantic Flame. Imaginative and entrancing when it
comes to flirting and seduction. Longing and willingness to let oneself be
transfigured and swept away by love. Deep intuitive understanding or
even identification with one's environment. Great talent for giving or
conveying to others what they secretly expect—up to the point of
selflessly surrendering the ego. Must lose him-or herself in another human
being or in love in order to find self. Artistic touch, creative potential,
connection of spirituality and eroticism (Tantric sex).
STRENGTH: PROBLEM AREA: The Cheater. Cannot adhere to the rules of the game because he or she keeps forgetting them. Extremely easy to seduce. Very
passive. Is drawn into a relationship or affair and then dreams his or her
way out of it. Afterward, doesn't really know what actually happened and
what just took place in dreams. Also victim of own deceptive images.
Eroticism stimulated through aphrodisiacs or drugs. ATTITUDE TOWARD CHILDREN: Vague, idealizing, nostalgic. Pluto in the 5th House Magical Power Games STRENGTH: The Fascinating Player. Charismatic personality and magnetic powers of attraction when in the limelight, but also an emotionally
compelling force in the game of life and love. Wins thanks to
extraordinary powers of suggestion. Strong sexual energy.
PROBLEM AREA: The Obsessive Gambier. Risks everything and loves to gamble for all or nothing. Misuses powers of suggestion and forces others
to participate in games that give them chills up and down their spines.
Also gets caught up in dependencies and becomes entangled in own
spicier web. Dangerous liaisons and passions. ATTITUDE TOWARD CHILDREN: Mutual dependence and (subtle) power games.
North Node in the 5th House
THEME: Conflict between passionate, sensual, erotic love, and the pure love of friendship, between ego-centered showmanship and the consciousness
of belonging to a group.
TASK: Creative Genius. Playfully and en joy ably providing a means of expression for your own creativity. Showing what you are capable of and
thereby making room for your hopes, wishes, dreams, and thoughts,
letting them become reality. Standing on stage or otherwise attracting attention and admiration for yourself, Understanding life to be a playful
challenge.
DANGER: The Peripheral Figure, Placing yourself at the edge instead of in the center, Remaining so rooted in group feeling that no clear feeling for
the self tan be created. Dissipating your energies. Wanting to have a say
everywhere, to provide assistance for everyone else and thereby squander
your own strength and initiative. Not wanting to prove yourself. 6th House: I Integrate Myself
ANALOGY: RULER: EXALTATION: DETRIMENT: and
FALL: ELEMENT: QUALITY: GENDER: Earth Mutable Feminine GENERAL: Health and Work. Physical health, the relationship between body and mind, consciousness of health, disposition to illness, traditional and
alternative medicine. Everyday working life, place of work, work
contents, way of working, working methods, and result of work. Classconsciousness. Social integration and adaptation.
POLARITY: The integration of the self in contrast to the self-sacrifice in the 12th house.
Sun in the 6th House Integration THE CENTRAL THEME OF DEVELOPMENT OF THE SELF is the smooth interplay of all components in an organism or community (human being, company,
or nation) of united organs as the necessary precondition for the health of
the whole.
STRENGTH: The Structurer. Is aware of the necessity of hierarchies and makes sure that every wheel in the mechanism functions. As a result,
looks after the health of the respective system and likes to integrate
oneself well. Brings order to the chaos. Creates clear, transparently
smooth structures. Promotes achievement and develops systems for
preventing damage. Practical, skillful, tenacious, concentrated,
independent. Work in the field of public health. PROBLEM AREA: The Prestige-Hungry Person. Always concerned with own prestige. Puts too much pressure on self (and subordinates) to produce
results. Fear of failure and inferiority complexes. Therefore conformist
and horribly normal. Hypochondriac self-observation because of
exaggerated fear of illness.
WORKING STYLE: Very personal, completely involved, leadership quality. Moon in the 6th House Professional Adaptation STRENGTH: The Indispensable Individual. Instinctive urge to work, live a healthy life, and remain fit. Knows how to integrate oneself into the area
of work in such a manner that existing gaps are filled, impulses are taken
up and translated into action so that sooner or later one becomes
indispensable. Needs and seeks work that offers variety. Constantly
concerned with doing everything correctly and well and improving it.
Good sense in matters of poor health.
PROBLEM AREA: The Opportunist. No backbone at all. Is burdened with every task and takes care of it with servility. Fear of rejection, injury, and
punishment. Moody, irritable, and unpredictable. Able to withstand little
strain, restless, shy, overly sensitive. Tends to have psychosomatic
disorders.
WORKING STYLE: Adaptable, imaginative, caring, intuitive. Mercury in the 6th House Cleverness at Work Dignity & Exaltation
STRENGTH: The Useful Person. Easily becomes familiar with any field of work and quickly makes oneself useful. Easily copes in all areas. Can also
move in a great variety of social circles without any effort, which often makes one an excellent advisor. Flexible mind that is always open and
cleverly analyzes. Finds skillful solutions, suggests astounding
improvements, and makes crystal-clear decisions.
PROBLEM AREA: The Man with a Price. (Quickly) betrays own principles. Lives according to the motto of: “I dance to the tune of the piper that pays
me!” Values and convictions are—if the money is good enough—adapted
to the respective environment in a flash. WORKING STYLE: Quick, clever, with business acumen, skilled at negotiations.
Venus in the 6th House Friendliness on the Job Fall STRENGTH: Ms. or Mr. Sunshine. Promotes harmony at the place of work. Friendly, cordial nature. Tactful and obliging. Good team spirit. Very
popular with fellow workers. Enjoys creating a beautiful design of things.
Social commitment (charity events). Fosters peace on the job.
PROBLEM AREA: The Life of the Party. The Love Affair. Sociableness is more important than the result of the work. Love affairs on the job.
Employs erotic charisma in a cold and calculating manner in order to
achieve success. Is always self-controlled. Only falls in love when it is
really clever to do so.
WORKING STYLE: Esthetic, cooperative, harmonious, peaceful, friendly. Mars in the 6th House Rivalry STRENGTH: Competition. Loves to compete against others professionally to be the best, the fastest, or the strongest. True zeal, considerable
perseverance, and clear powers of assertion. Brash, ambitious, decisive,
willing to engage in conflict, venturesome. Pushes ahead.
PROBLEM AREA: The Arguer. Doesn't fit into any team. Sees oneself just surrounded by enemies. Tends to take irresponsible risks. Rebels against
superiors, argues with colleagues, and tyrannizes subordinates. Incautious,
impatient, overly sensitive. May also be whiny. Tends to fight out conflicts
dealing with work on the level of the body. Vehement, acute health
disorders. Inconsiderate toward colleagues and others. Argumentative and
scheming.
WORKING STYLE: Powerful, quick, aggressive. Jupiter in the 6th House Success on the Job Detriment STRENGTH: The Respected Careerist. Self-assurance and a good deal of success in everyday working life, leadership qualities that sooner or later
lead to a leadership position. Exemplary, generous, dignified,
incorruptible, willing to help, and motivating. Respected and highly
esteemed. Good health. Excellent healer, doctor, or therapist.
PROBLEM AREA: The Prestige-Oriented Jerk. Has an overall feeling (but particularly in terms of the job) of being better than other people. Little
tendency to be concerned with details. Prefers to disdainfully and
condescendingly delegate them to others. By way of contrast, quite keen
on collecting objects of prestige, titles, and medals. Well-behaved
conformity and snobbish “government-official” mentality. Excesses
endanger health. WORKING STYLE: High standards, purposeful, successful. Saturn in the 6th House The Crisis at Work Developing true integrity and inner cheerfulness, even in
fulfilling “lowly” tasks as well (the happy street-sweeper).
OBJECTIVE: INHIBITION: The Drudge. Is always ordered to do the most difficult tasks, has to do work no one else wants to do, and is even assigned something
else when the others have long gone home. Has no sense of trust in one's
professional position. Fears that resistance would cause one to become
unemployed. Prefers to cling to the familiar misery, Joyless drudgery,
caught in routine and apathy. Escapes into illness. Resigned, subservient,
dissatisfied, dependent, as well as tyrannically controlling others. Fear of
inner chaos. Not a good boss.
COMPULSION: The Highflier. Works on career with a grim smile. Lets no one help and especially doesn't permit anyone to give anything. Is
merciless with self and hard on others. Represses and covers up signals of
poor health.
RESOLUTION: The Conscientious Worker. Accepts every task—no matter how much prestige value it has—reliably, with humor or inner
cheerfulness, Has a sense of work rituals and therefore doesn't shy away
from “boring” assignments. Tenacious, with an eye for detail.
Responsible, a good boss, incorrigible examiner, and experienced
specialist.
WORKING STYLE: Diligent, concentrated, tenacious. Uranus in the 6th House Innovation STRENGTH: The Creative Self-Motivator. Contributes original ideas and
problem solutions, but needs a great deal of space to do so. For this
reason, it is better if one works freelance. Develops new concepts, creates
progressive working conditions, and has a good antenna for the spirit of
the times and future trends. Can very purposively draw attention to human
and social grievances and put a finger on sore points.
PROBLEM AREA: The Squabbler. Just simply can't be like the others. Doesn't adhere to the rules of the job. Always needs something extra. Not able to
withstand any type of strain. Quickly irritated and rebellious. Unreliable.
WORKING STYLE: Intuitive, crazy, changeable, imaginative. Neptune in the 7th House Sensitive Work Detriment The Prophet. Has a good nose for future developments
(politics, art, culture, fashion, stock market) and lets this knowledge flow
into work. But also has a distinct sense for problems and needs of the
physical and psychological body. Thin-skinned, open, sensitive, and
permeable for outside influences. Can also work extremely well as a
healer in subtle areas. However, doesn't succeed in sticking to a solidly
structured framework. Delicate health. Vague symptoms.
STRENGTH: The Slob. Ranges from dreamy to drowsy, sloppy,
unpunctual, and unreliable at work. Easily becomes the “victim” of having
job rationalized out of existence. Physical and psychological instability.
Withdraws from the requirements of the surrounding world and lets self
drift. Avoids concrete, clear, and binding decisions. Mock conforming.
Open to bribery, corruption, or fraud in particularly difficult cases. Never
knows if he or she is healthy or ill. Imaginary diseases, vague health
disorders, or suffering from someone else's illness.
PROBLEM AREA: WORKING STYLE: Spiritualized, dreamy, mediumistic, or chaotic. Pluto in the 6th House Wealth of Influence STRENGTH: The Effective Individual. Develops great powers of persuasion and influence at the place of work. Doesn't give in and knows how to get
to the bottom of things. Is totally committed to a chosen task (the
obsessive scientist). Experiences health problems as basis of deepest
transformation. Healing abilities.
PROBLEM AREA: The Workaholic. Power politics and chicanery at the place of work. Playing on dependencies and fear of one's own dependency. Gets
stuck in a task like a fixed idea and then works oneself to death on it. Tries
to drag in others and patronize them in the process.
WORKING STYLE: Profound, passionate, obsessive, maniacal. North Node in the 6th House
THEME: Conflict between the rational and the irrational, between dream and reality, between adaptation of the self and self-sacrifice.
Integration. Becoming concrete. Confrontation with the daily
routine, reality, and the obligation to work. From imagination, withdrawal,
and introspection to activity and performance of duty in everyday life.
Expressing transcendent experiences in daily life. Taking leave of
(spiritual) seclusion and becoming an integrated, active member of
society.
TASK: DANGER: Forlornness Getting lost in boundlessness instead of contributing mediumistic abilities to society. Withdrawing from everything, not clearly
obeying obligations, being unreliable and forgetful, isolating self.
Withdrawing from the world in an airy-fairy or fanciful way. 7th House: I Commit Myself Descendant (DC)
ANALOGY: RULER: EXALTATION DETRIMENT: FALL: ELEMENT: QUALITY: GENDER: Air Cardinal Masculine GENERAL: The Partnership. The ability and willingness to commit,
marriage, lasting relationships, partnership (also professional), working
together, associates. Willingness to adapt within a partnership. Giving and
taking in interpersonal relationships. The other person as a surface for
projection. Conflict and reconciliation.
POLARITY: The “victim of accommodation” in contrast to unlimited
development of the self in the 1st house.
Sun in the 7th House Willingness to Commit Fall THE CENTRAL THEME OP DEVELOPMENT OF THE SELF is the encounter with the other person and becoming wrapped up in a partnership.
STRENGTH: The Suitor. Always ready to become involved in a relationship. Can't imagine life without an intimate partner. Needs the partner as the
focus of life and catalyst in order to discover, develop, and realize
potential. Likes to get married. Open, sociable, and concerned with
harmony.
PROBLEM AREA: The Freedom-Lover. High ideals of freedom despite all the willingness to commit to a relationship, which makes one unstable in
relationships or concerned with one-sided advantages and special rights.
However, afraid of being alone at the same time. Thoughtless. Short-sided
and fickle in willingness to commit.
IDEA OF PARTNERSHIP: “Solidarity in action,” or the relationship as a mirror. Moon in the 7th House Adaptation to the Partner STRENGTH: Someone Ready to Get Involved in a Relationship, Strong
desire for partnership and instinctive urge to commit to a relationship.
Experiences own feelings above all in contact with the intimate partner.
Feels deep happiness in truly being connected. Distinct sense for all
common interests. Always willing to become involved with the other
person, to take care of and be there for that person. Great willingness to
adapt and high level of intuitive understanding. Wishes the same from the
partner.
PROBLEM AREA: The Love-Starved Individual. Believes he or she can't live without a relationship, yet frequently is unable to really get involved in
one. Constantly changing, noncommittal, superficial relationships that are
all lived as if they were (now truly and finally) lasting. Great fear of
rejection. Excessive conformity.
IDEA OF PARTNERSHIP: The relationship as a nest. Mercury in the 7th House Relationship Talk STRENGTH: The Good Mixer. Can easily start relationships and knows how to discover the other person anew time and again. Experiences diversity in
the partner's many facets. Needs a lively intellectual exchange in the
partnership. Is also good at bringing other people together (matchmaking).
PROBLEM AREA: The Eternal Fiancée Likes to talk about relationships and think about the various forms they can take. But isn't in a hurry to go
beyond the intention to marry. Seeks variety through contacts to further
partners. Is coldly calculating, insincere, unfaithful, and commits breach
of contract in difficult cases.
IDEA OF PARTNERSHIP: The business relationship. Venus in the 7th House Lover's Bliss Dignity STRENGTH: Eager to Get Married. Great need for contact and exchange with an intimate partner. Always open for a loving encounter. Gladly willing to enter into a lively relationship, swear eternal faithfulness, and
marry. Romantic, optimistic, capable of devotion, willing to adapt, and
faithful.
PROBLEM AREA: Disenchanted. Too carefree in attitude toward a
relationship. Enters recklessly into a partnership and underestimates the
demands inherent in it. After the initial phase of being high, quickly
becomes sober, superficial, reckless, unstable, jealous, and critical.
Possibly also distinct material interests in the partnership.
IDEA OF PARTNERSHIP: The happy relationship. Mars in the 7th House Tension in the Relationship Detriment STRENGTH: Bundle of Energy. Brings much momentum and vivacity into the relationship. Takes a direct approach to the partner. Immediately
settles differences and provides a clarifying thunder storm. Full of go and
always ready to battle with the partner—both with or against. Much
conflict and much reconciliation. Lively, exciting, as well as strenuous
relationships.
PROBLEM AREA: The Rival. Sees the mate as a rival who must be
subjugated. No willingness to adapt whatsoever. Aggressive, destructive
conduct in interpersonal relationships. Tends to take rash actions. Likes to
put self in the foreground and drive the partner up against the wall. Tough,
inconsiderate, despotic, mistrustful, insulting, or feels insulted.
IDEA OF PARTNERSHIP: The competition. Jupiter in the 7th House Richness of Relationship STRENGTH: Rich in Relationships (Qualitatively). Experiences the deep wealth of a relationship. Encounters the partner full of trust and
generosity. Has high relationship ideals and is seriously willing to enter
into a committed, lively partnership of equal rank. Wants to be proud of
the relationship. PROBLEM AREA: Rich in Relationships (Quantitatively). A “wealth of
relationships” can be interpreted to be “more is better,” or, “If you are not
with the one you love…” This person is smug and much too comfortable
to assume duties and responsibilities of a relationship or adapt to it.
Separates when things get uncomfortable and goes into new, more
convenient relationships.
IDEA OF PARTNERSHIP: The grand relationship {to show off). Saturn in the 7th House The Serious Relationship Exaltation OBJECTIVE: Trust in a responsible, mature relationship.
INHIBITION; The Orphan. Lacking in contact; reserved and cautious in relationships for fear of closeness or being hurt; afraid of being lonely.
Strong mistrust of the other person. As a result, avoids relationships or
always comes a moment too late. Only falls in love in hopeless cases,
waits a long time in vain for the desired person, and quickly backs down if
the tide should actually turn in his or her favor. Can't believe he or she is
loved on own account. Searches for guarantees and proof of love. Will
unconditionally try to maintain the outer form even if the relationship has
long been dead in terms of emotions. Regiments and dominates the
partner.
COMPULSION: The Fake Don Juan. Breaks out of personal reserve and plays Don Juan. At the same time, is always in control, remains cold on
the inside, and only opens up to short encounters in which no true
closeness is created.
RESOLUTION: The Responsible Person. Sees through own avoidance
strategy that led to earlier disappointments. Carefully and slowly grows
into a relationship and continually gains deeper confidence in it.
Overcomes old fears and develops steadfastness. Is responsible, caring,
faithful, reliable, patient.
IDEA OF PARTNERSHIP: The solid relationship. Uranus in the 7th House The Free Relationship STRENGTH: The Bird of Paradise. Lives and loves an original partnership of own accord, without limiting obligations. Tolerates no chains or cages
for they would cause death like bird of paradise. Doesn't let self be
“enslaved” by saying “I do” and signing his or her name. Can stay in a
lasting relationship and remain faithful, as long as it is voluntary and all
the doors are open. Brings a great deal of liveliness, variety, and
excitement into any relationship.
PROBLEM AREA: The Island. Very difficult relationship problems. Unwilling and unable to commit to a relationship. Strives for complete
independence. Considers self something special and looks down on
conventional ideals of relationships, which are meant for the “broad
masses” at best. Always stays single, even within the scope of a possible
marriage. Immediately breaks all agreements and promises if feelings of
freedom are infringed on too much. Unreliable. Can't be held onto!
IDEA OF PARTNERSHIP: The single relationship; the companionable relationship.
Neptune in the 7th House The Dream Relationship STRENGTH: The Soul Mate. Highest relationship ideals. Deep intuitive
grasp of the partner, kindred souls, and inner harmony. Inexplicable
encounters. Is guided into the right relationship without any effort. Great
willingness to adapt and sacrifice. Also tends toward platonic
relationships.
PROBLEM AREA: The Disappointed Person. Extravagant, unrealistic ideals of relationship and partnership. Longing for redemption. Hunger for love
and desire to become one with the other person. Very easy to seduce.
Constant expectation without fulfillment. The other person is often not
tangible, disappears, “dissolves,” or becomes elusive. Bitter
disillusionment on the basis of unfulfilled expectations leads to
disappointed rejection of all concepts of a solid relationship in some cases. IDEA OF PARTNERSFIIP: Merging into one, mystical unity. Pluto in the 7th House The Extreme Relationship STRENGTH: The Powerhouse, Strong magnetism and a willingness to enter into an intensive, exclusive, and irrevocable relationship with a strong
person. Transformation and far-reaching profound change also in a
relationship through extreme feelings of helplessness and being at the
other person's mercy, of domination and subjugation.
PROBLEM AREA: The Cruel Heart, One-sided experiences of power and dependency that—in various relationships—can sometimes be
experienced as the victim and sometimes as the perpetrator. Compulsive
relationship with extremely painful experiences, emotional entanglements,
blackmail, physical threats, and sadomasochistic rituals.
IDEA OF PARTNERSHIP: The indissoluble pact. North Node in the 7th House
THEME: Conflict between striving for harmony, equilibrium, and
adaptation in the partnership, as well as consciousness of self and powers
of self-development.
TASK: Orientation toward the Partner. Becoming involved in a committed partnership. Opening up to the other person's needs. Developing devotion,
understanding, consideration, and sensitivity in a relationship. Cultivating
self-confident willingness to adapt instead of selfishly demanding the
sacrifice of conformity from the other person alone.
DANGER: Egocentrism. Being unable to go beyond your own selfcenteredness. The great fear of becoming lost in close commitments, not
being taken into account enough, or having to sacrifice personal
individuality and independence. 8th House: I Probe
ANALOGY: RULER: EXALTATION DETRIMENT: FALL: ELEMENT: QUALITY: GENDER: Water Fixed Feminine GENERAL: Life's Enigmas. All taboos and their transgression, borderline experiences, death and rebirth, deepest experiences of sexuality, orgasm as
the experience of death and birth, overcoming oneself, transformation, the
ability to regenerate, crises about the meaning of life and overcoming
them, everything that is cryptic and profound, inheritances, other people's
possessions and money.
POLARITY: The assets of the soul in contrast to the concrete assets in 2nd house.
Sun in the 8th House The Alchemist THE CENTRAL THEME OE DEVELOPMENT OE THE SELF is the exploration of life's secrets, everything that is enigmatic and concealed, as well as the
descent into one's own darkness.
STRENGTH: The Cellarman. Willing to descend down into (one's own) depths and become involved with the dark and difficult, tabooed or
ostracized aspects of life and one's own personality. Intensive
confrontation with psychoanalysis, death, shamanism, magic, sexuality.
The Faustian person. Can keep other people's secrets. As a result, often
advisor or administrator in the money matters of others. Can make money
out of “dirt.” Frequently late bloomer—introverted in youth, but
increasingly sociable with age.
PROBLEM AREA: The Unscrupulous Person or Air. Clean. Taboo-breaker who makes money from questionable deals without scruples. Coldblooded profiteer in times of crisis, earning money on other people's
losses. The little or big Mafioso, the profiteer in the red-light district, the dealer, as well as all the shady figures who misuse the money or
dependence of other people. But also the extreme repressor who fearfully
suppresses the dark side, then unconsciously lives it out in the worst way.
Chasing after stubborn notions.
IMAGE OF DEATH: The person who lives with death. Moon in the 8th House Magical Power Detriment STRENGTH: The Good Witch. Instinctive desire to air secrets, violate
taboos, explore everything forbidden, hidden, cryptic, and otherworldly,
and probe the dark depths of the soul. Early interest in the meaning of
death, as well as magical and esoteric themes, and shamanism. Can
develop strong powers of healing and suggestion. Premonitions of the
future. Need for great emotional security. Sexual response. Very good
nose for things and intensive dreams.
PROBLEM AREA: The Bewitched. Danger of losing self in the labyrinth of the esoteric and magical, or becoming entangled in power games. Extreme
forms of hatred, passion, and jealousy, as well as depression, confusion,
and longing for death. Must die many emotional deaths. Fascinated with
everything forbidden and dubious. The barmaid.
IMAGE OF DEATH: Death as the return home. Mercury in the 8th House Profound Thought STRENGTH: The Solver of the Mystery of the Universe. Inquiring mind and Faustian thinking. Loves to spy and discover what is concealed. Urge to
perceive and interpret images of the depths. Distinct intuition and sureness
of instinct. Ability to think in contradictions and express the profound in
paradoxes. Can give words a magical power.
PROBLEM AREA: The Pigheaded. Narrow-minded, dogmatic, compulsive thinking. Has a rigid notion of reality and tyrannizes everyone else with it.
Refuses to realize that reality is much more complex than the personal concept of it and the way other people look at things can be just as
justified and correct as one's own. Resentful, scheming, and mean.
IMAGE OF DEATH: Death as an object of curiosity, as a business, or as a teacher.
Venus in the 8th House Love Magic Detriment STRENGTH: Beautiful Sin. The attraction of what is forbidden, the beauty of the macabre, the faded, the morbid. The romanticism of what is broken,
and the temptation of the eerily beautiful. Often still sleepy during youth,
becomes increasingly pleasure-loving with time. Seductive erotic aura.
Passionate, intense interpersonal relationships. Fine feeling for the right
moment, hidden fantasies, and desires. The magic of love and the love
potion.
PROBLEM AREA: Dangerous Liaisons. Calculating, manipulative, playing on sexual charms. Perverse tendencies and depths of eroticism. Gaining
power and making money out of subjection and sexual dependence. The
business of “love.” Jealousy and greed. Self-deceptive.
IMAGE OF DEATH: The peaceful death or dying for love. Mars in the 8th House Danger Dignity STRENGTH: The Death-Defier. Goes into dangerous areas and borderline situations. Boldly fights against death, sometimes under life-endangering
conditions (doctor, rescuer). Iron will, fearless, total dedication of energy.
Enjoys taking risks that go all out. Strong sexuality and sense for
practicing sexual magic.
PROBLEM AREA: The Enemy of Life. Inconsiderate toward self and merciless with others. Criminal energies, such as the brutal use of violence, torture,
rape, and death threats. Playing with one's own life, as well as the lives of
others. Destructive inner tension. Misanthropy.
IMAGE OF DEATH: Death as the enemy. Jupiter in the 8th House Richness of the Depths STRENGTH: The Fisher of Souls, Successfully draws on inner images,
exploring concealed regions and taboo zones. Seeks the depths of the soul.
Eager to bring insights won in this manner into harmony with a higher
purpose. Doesn't lose self-respect. Remains proud and full of dignity, even
in times of bitter crisis and great poverty. Blessing in disguise.
PROBLEM AREA: The Shady Guru, Overextension of the ego, selfaggrandizement, and misuse of strong emotional powers. Creates
dependencies and, as a self-proclaimed healer, lives as an energetic and
material burden on followers.
IMAGE OF DEATH: Kind, dignified death and death as a friend. Saturn in the 8th House
OBJECTIVE: Fear of Death Overcoming the fear of death and developing emotional stability
INHIBITION: The Stick-in-the-Mud. Unable to really let go because of an (unconscious) fear of death. Fear of deep emotions and overwhelming,
uncontrollable (sexual) experiences, as well as the fear of failure. Inwardly
self-conscious, stiff, standoffish, inhibited, hardened, always unsatisfied,
and often awkward. Emotional coldness, impotence, or frigidity.
Increasing fear of inexplicable phenomenon and magical powers. Fear of
falling into a crisis about the meaning of life. Fear of poverty in old age
and loss of control. Incapable of simply letting important things happen.
COMPULSION: The “Perfect” Lover. The active player in the area of
sexuality. Perfect on the physical level, but cut off emotionally.
Compulsive erotic ideas and actions. Promiscuity as an obligation. Also
compulsive confrontation with previously avoided (but always tempting)
taboo areas.
RESOLUTION: Emotional Strength, Insight into reality. Overcomes the fear of death (through crises in life) to allow outer hardening to become an inner strength of character. Hits made peace with the imponderables of
life. Can open up and let go. Emotionally capable of devotion. Open, and
inwardly deeply willing to have overwhelming, ecstatic, spiritual, and/or
sexual experiences. At the same time, responsible, resolute, and
trustworthy.
IMAGE OF DEATH: Death as a bitter truth and ultimately a serene certainty. Uranus in the 8th House The License Exaltation STRENGTH: The Self-Liberator. Is intensively concerned with one's dark side in order to purposefully free self from unconscious compulsions and
the violence of one's own shadow. Struggles for autonomy from sexual
drives. Strong confrontation with death and very independent attitude
about this last, inevitable necessity. The alchemist's search for the elixir of
life. Very reserved and withdrawn in one's inner depths. Quickly comes to
the point of needing to retreat and permits no one admission to innermost
feelings or even one's soul.
PROBLEM AREA: The Immortal. Believes one has the license to do
everything. Feels completely independent and even freed of the most
fundamental conditions and necessities of life. Makes use of every sexual
freedom and recklessly disregards the threshold of all taboos. Also wants
to liberate self from the inevitability of death and only die through own
free will. In extreme cases, even considers oneself too special to even have
to die at all.
IMAGE OF DEATH: The sudden death and death as liberation. Neptune in the 8th House
STRENGTH: Trance The Spiritual Individual. Has mediumistic and clairvoyant
abilities. Strong powers of the soul that can be used as healing powers.
Longing for complete transformation. Deep certainty of being guided
along the path through inner abysses or external crises. Rich world of
dreams and good feeling for the language of dreams. Great deal of sexual
fantasy. Desires to merge with another and be redeemed. Strives for spiritual, ecstatic sexuality (Tantra, Tao, trance) or dissolution of sexual
energies. Very intuitive and good feeling for what is concealed and
unspoken. Mystification of death and only minimal fear of death.
The Intoxicated Person. Irresistible yearning for
overwhelming experience alternates with fear of dissolution and, above
all, fear of the irrational and invisible world. Tendency toward drugs or
intoxicants as substitute for true trance. “Transfigured” rejection of
sexuality or the opposite extreme of boundless debauchery. Easy to
seduce. Lacks in critical powers. Unfaithful. In danger of losing the self in
diffuse feelings and horror visions, as well as becoming crazy. Longing
for death.
PROBLEM AREA: IMAGE OF DEATH: Death as deliverance. Pluto in the 8th House Magic Dignity STRENGTH: The Magician, Extraordinary powers of the soul, hypnotic
abilities, healing powers, and enormous but totally subtle influence on
others. The urge to explore the secrets on the dark side of life. Fascinated
by everything that is taboo or forbidden. Deep experiences of
transformation. Strong sexuality that awakens at an early age, with radical
experiences of power and helplessness. Very willful, tenacious, ambitious,
and unyielding in following goals that have once been set. Understands
upheavals and crises as opportunities for renewal.
PROBLEM AREA: The Devil. Misuse of power for reasons of calculation or because of powerlessness in the face of strong, dark drives from one's
personal depths. Creates emotional, physical, or sexual dependencies and
lives out one's primitive drives and sexual obsessions on the victims.
Suffers from (sexual) obsessive ideas that can assume the character of
possession. Primitive greed and sadistic tendencies.
IMAGE OF DEATH: Fascinating, uncanny death and powerlessness in the face of death.
North Node in the 8th House THEME: Conflict between material possessions and those of the soul,
between knowledge of transience and the greed of wanting to hold onto
something.
TASK: Depth. Reconciling with the transience of all being and recognizing death as the great teacher. Instead of building on or betting on false
external values, unearthing the immaterial treasures of the depths.
Becoming willing to engage in conflict and violate social conventions and
taboos instead of persisting in pleasant innocuousness. Finding the deepest
opportunities of experiencing sexuality, which conceal a genuine spiritual
experience beyond all sensuality and passion within them.
DANGER: Avarice, Compulsive clinging to material goods, to what is
accustomed, proved, and secured. “Selling” oneself in order to fulfill
material desires. Seeing values in terms of monetary values and not
forging ahead to the actual, deeper-rooted values. Avoidance of conflicts
in order to minimize problems. 9th House: I Believe
ANALOGY: RULER: EXALTATION DETRIMENT: —
FALL: ELEMENT: QUALITY: GENDER: — Fire Mutable Masculine GENERAL: Higher Thinking and the Worldview. The expansion of horizons through inner and outer journeys, finding a purpose, and one's own
philosophy of life. Search for truth and meaning, faith, religion, and the
personal image of God, ethics, higher values and perceptions, higher
education, insight, intuition and inspiration, ideals, metaphysics. Long
journeys and experiences in foreign countries.
POLARITY: Deep convictions and fundamental conceptions of values in contrast to the sober and objective information in the 3rd house.
Sun in the 9th House The Religious Human Being THE CENTRAL THEME OF DEVELOPMENT OF THE SELF is the search for meaning in life and the development of one's own religious view of the world.
STRENGTH: The Cosmopolitan. Great interest in philosophy and religion, as well as distant cultures, exotic customs, and everything that expands one's
own horizons. Educated and well-versed in many areas. Likes to travel for
the purpose of developing and experiencing the self. Guided by a religious
view of the world and supported by a personal experience of meaning.
Ethically strong, contemplative, idealistic, tolerant, farsighted.
PROBLEM AREA: The Bigoted Sectarian. Religious megalomania and
contemptuous despising of poor sinners and people who are ignorant.
Hypocritical piety. Tends to force own strict moral standards on others.
IMAGE OF GOD: God the Father. Moon in the 9th House Wanderlust STRENGTH: ‘The Globetrotter. Instinctive urge to roam afield. Fond of travel. Likes to be on the go without knowing where he or she will end up
tomorrow. Longs for new horizons, but without a distinct goal. Inner
certainty of being guided by a higher power. Trust in ability to find the
meaning of life. Deep religious feelings and desire for higher ideals. Tends
to settle down far away from home.
PROBLEM AREA: Holier-Than-Thou. Strongly vacillating religious moods. Parroting of pious phrases without coming to terms with the content.
Hypocritical, presumptuous, dogmatic, and narrow-minded.
IMAGE OF GOD: God the Mother. Mercury in the 9th House Religious Thinking Detriment STRENGTH: The Tour Manager. Likes to be on the road. Skillful at
organizing trips. Good at orienting oneself while traveling and making
oneself at least adequately understood in the foreign language. Desire to
discover something while traveling and show it to others. This also applies
to the inner journey in the figurative sense. Interest in culture, philosophy,
religious issues, and higher education in general.
PROBLEM AREA: The Phrasemonger, Empty words instead of the
experience of meaning. Wanting to missionize others with hollow
platitudes. Profiteering without scruples in questions of faith. Quickly
changing “convictions.” Also empty talk in questions of culture and
general education.
IMAGE OF GOD: Logos as the divine child and the rational and provable God.
Venus in the 9th House Holy Love STRENGTH: The Hymn of Love. High ideals of love and holy feelings of love. Love as the sense of life. Philosophy of joy, optimism in life, and the
gift of awakening a positive feeling of self-worth in other people as well.
Seeks love in distant places and while traveling. Foreign marriage. PROBLEM AREA: Idolatrous Love. Peculiar veneration of saints or idolatrous enthusiasm for a guru. Problems with drives because holy love must not
be dirtied. Repression of conflict and compulsive tendency to always see
everything in a positive light.
IMAGE OF GOD: God is love. Mars in the 9th House Chivalry STRENGTH: Courage of Convictions. Representing one's own convictions with commitment and courage, advocating high ideals, and mercilessly
denouncing grievances. Use of all energies in order to achieve a high level
of education in social, philosophical, or religious areas. Achievement of
long-range goals.
PROBLEM AREA: The Militant Do-Gooder. Intolerance, fanatic opinions, and an audacious know-it-all attitude. Persecuting and fighting against
deviationists and people of a different faith in the name of a holy idea.
Glorification of violence. Dissatisfied and deeply pessimistic. Tends
toward serious self-reproach.
IMAGE OF GOD: The warlike, avenging God. Jupiter in the 9th House Priestly Dignify Dignity STRENGTH: The Scholar. A person with wide horizons, a high level of education, and true religious values. Supported by a clear sense of
meaning and strong powers of faith. Well-versed in art, culture,
philosophy, and literature. Loves distant journeys in order to constantly
receive new impulses-Good adviser and wise friend.
PROBLEM AREA: The Sermonizer. Overbearing sense of superiority toward other people. Considers his or her truth to be the only correct one. Selfsatisfied view of the world and concepts of values, in which personal
viewpoint comes off looking like the best. IMAGE OF GOD: The kind God. Saturn in the 9th House Religious Crises OBJECTIVE: Finding one's personal view of the world beyond all doubts and imponderables, and having a deep experience of meaning
INHIBITION: Limited Vision. Fixed view of the world with extremely rigid concepts and values. Black-and-white categories. Strict, inhuman religious
values that constantly lead to a bad conscience, feelings of guilt, and
depression, Serious self-reproach because of one's own shortcomings.
Losing the faith and feeling oneself to be mercilessly at the hands of life's
absurdity. Mistrusting everything that can't be explained. Failing in the
question of meaning. Rejecting everything that is unfamiliar.
COMPULSION: The Dogmatic Atheist. Believing m nothing at all anymore and advocating atheism or nihilism with religious fervor. Or joining a
movement or sect in which extremely strict morals and difficult rituals are
practiced with prescribed penance exercises hostile to life itself.
RESOLUTION: Strength of Faith. A mature, clear view of the world, free of superficialities or Baroque varnish. Standing as firm as a rock in a deep
faith with simplicity, earnestness, and humility.
IMAGE OF GOD: The strict God. Uranus in the 9th House Religious Freedom STRENGTH: The Free Spirit. Progressive view of the world on the principles of freedom, equality, and brotherhood. Very individual, unconventional
idea of the meaning of life. A freethinker who never joins a larger
religious movement but always takes his or her own path, seeking and
finding a personal philosophy of life. Open for modern or even Utopian
ways of looking at the world. Reform-oriented concepts of raising
children, education, religion, and philosophy. PROBLEM AREA: The Anarchist. Glorification of rebellion and subversion of all values just for the hell of it. Mad, eccentric ideas are fermented into a
smart-alecky pseudo-religious standpoint. Crazy self-glorifying esoteric
beliefs and fantasies about being the chosen one.
IMAGE OF GOD: The individual God. Neptune in the 9th House Spirituality STRENGTH: The Mystic. Turns away from logic while on the religious quest and is guided by inner eye like a blind pilgrim. Doesn't find concept of the
world or God in personal striving, but lets oneself be found. Feels drawn
to mysticism and spiritual exercises that lead to another state of
consciousness (trance). Willing to go beyond own boundaries for the sake
of religious experiences.
PROBLEM AREA: The Religious Screwball. Misled and unworldly. Has been taken in by a Fata Morgana and clings ecstatically to the supposed truth.
Very uncritical, which is why one easily becomes the victim of dumb, but
beautiful-sounding pseudo-wisdom and esoteric ideas that are crazy.
Quickly falls for a guru and becomes dependent on the guru's promises of
healing and deliverance. Pseudo-religious drug abuse.
IMAGE OF GOD: The God who sacrifices himself. Pluto in the 9th House The Magical View of the World STRENGTH: The Merlin, Philosophy of the world colored by an
unadulterated religiousness that is close to nature (Druid/witch),
Fascinated interest in alchemy, old shamanic rituals, magical circles,
occult orders and lodges. Seeks original experiences at the places of
power. Image of God that is characterized by deep, personal experience in
life and transformation (conversion as in the Damascus experience 5).
Intensive struggle for deeper truths.
PROBLEM AREA: The Black Magician, Religious misuse of power.
Glorification of violence and shameless exploitation of the emotionally dependent. Purposive use of magical powers to harm others (curse). Black
masses, Satanism, destructive forms of sexual magic.
IMAGE OF GOD: The dark, omnipotent God. North Node in the 9th House
THEME: Conflict between higher thought and everyday truisms, between profane perceptions and holy values, between intellectual doubts and
religious convictions.
TASK: True Education, Finding genuine meaning behind various ideas and appearances. Achieving a personal, religious worldview through studies,
travel, and spiritual pilgrimage. Trust in one's own opinion and developing
one's own standpoint. Attaining higher perceptions and ethical values
beyond the truth as it stands in the newspaper. Emerging from the narrow,
familiar environment to discover new possibilities and contemplate longrange, significant goals.
DANGER: Dissipation. Getting lost m an abundance of knowledge. Not being able to differentiate between the diversity of information and
evaluate it. Getting stuck in superficiality and failing in the search for
meaning. 10th House: I Feel That I Am Called Medium Coeli (MC).
ANALOGY: RULER: EXALTATION DETRIMENT: FALL: ELEMENT: QUALITY: GENDER: Earth Dry Feminine GENERAL: Catching the Public Eye. Vocation and calling, public
recognition, social position, fame and honor, life objective, success in life,
career, power and authority, responsibility, achievement, popularity.
Things that become increasingly important in the course of a lifetime.
POLARITY: The crown of the Tree of Life as a counterpart to the roots in the 4th house.
Sun in the 10th House Attention THE CENTRAL THEME OF DEVELOPMENT OF THE SELF is creating and Striving for a goal in life. The effect in the public eye and self-realization in
vocation and calling.
STRENGTH: The Appointee. Strong urge to be in the public eye. Wrapped up in profession. Strives for recognition and authority. Charismatic
personality. In most cases, leadership quality, sense of responsibility, and
will to succeed. Dignified conduct in full consciousness of receiving
attention.
PROBLEM AREA: The Acclaim-Addict. Likes to bask in own glory and tends to considerably overestimate abilities. Authoritarian, vain, sensitive, and
presumptuous. Unpleasant little dictator. Striving for power that is without
scruples and inconsiderate of others.
IMAGE OF THE MOTHER: The mother in the role of the father. Moon in the 10th House Popularity Detriment STRENGTH: The Celebrity. Need for recognition and popularity,
Instinctively senses what the audience, the public, and the people want.
Can easily make oneself popular and is good at dealing within other
people in the scope of working life. Likes to have profession and the
public as one's family. Often has the ambition of making the theme of the
Sun house one's vocation. Wins followers easily. The born representative.
PROBLEM AREA: The Narcissist. Is enthusiastic and uninhibited about
adorning self with borrowed plumes. Overly exaggerated need for
admiration and reckless approach to responsibility. Tends to make
decisions that don't help the matter as a favor to someone else because of a
craving to be liked. Frequently changes professions.
IMAGE OF THE MOTHER: Strong identification figure and close emotional ties.
Mercury in the 10th House The Talent for Everything STRENGTH: The jack-of-all-trades. Can easily train for any profession and quickly make oneself useful in it. All-round talent. Professional agility.
Skillful organizer and work-simplifier. Has a good grasp of how to
delegate. Likes to employ intellectual and verbal fluency for professional
purposes (as an expert, reviewer, editor). Is well-informed about
everything and good at giving advice. Loves contact with the public.
PROBLEM AREA: The Weather Vane. Can't decide on any profession
(because one can imagine doing them all). Overestimates both abilities
and possibilities. Tends to be superficial and not really on the ball, Cold
and calculating when it comes to own advantage.
IMAGE OF THE MOTHER: Clever and well-versed, perhaps also moody. Venus in the 10th House Popularity STRENGTH: The Charmer. Talented at making, maintaining, and developing contacts. Charming, popular, reliable, and faithful. Would like to bring
happiness or beauty into the world within the scope of her profession. Artistic ambitions or doing business with things that make life more
beautiful. Good representational figure. Sense for charity.
PROBLEM AREA: The Schemer. Specifically makes use of one's charm in order to exploit others for own interests. Egotistic, calculating, pushy, and
power-hungry. Overrates status and power.
IMAGE OF THE MOTHER: The beloved, attractive mother, as well as the mother as competitor.
Mars in the 10th House Rivalry Exaltation STRENGTE: The Fighter. Always ready to fight for matters that concern one, push through unpopular steps, and swim against the current. Great
ambition to reach the top, willingness to engage in conflict, enormous
endeavors in the professional area. Seeks confrontations and likes to
compete against rivals. Many enemies, much honor.
PROBLEM AREA: The Machiavellian Prince or Princess. Scorns other
people's opinions and inconsiderately disregards justified interests and
claims within the scope of the profession. Attacks others out of the blue
and continually infringes on the professional rules of the game and
agreements. Unscrupulously oversteps competencies and likes to “govern”
one's way into other people's areas of responsibility. Power-hungry,
unpredictable, greedy for success.
IMAGE OF THE MOTHER: Strong, dangerous, aggressive. Jupiter in the 10th House
STRENGTH: Success Fall The Boss. Great trust in the abundance of professional
opportunities. Luck and good connections favor professional
advancement. Gains support from other people. Needs a dignified,
respectable function; easily achieves leadership positions. Radiates trust;
good at motivating others. Has an excellent understanding of how to
represent an enterprise to the outside world. PROBLEM AREA: The Minion. Has no scruples in exploiting advantages and relationships. Attracts envy and ill will. Self-satisfied, egoistic, concerned
with own interests. Exaggerates on the way to the top, sometimes loses
one's breath (but not the success). Also the lazy, smug fatso in the
executive chair.
IMAGE OF THE MOTHER: The good, highly esteemed mother. Saturn in the 10th House Staying Power Dignity OBJECTIVE: Overcoming fear of failure; willingness to assume
responsibility; the ability to measure achievements by more than just
external factors.
INHIBITION: The Walking Disaster. Deep mistrust in the possibilities of professional advancement. Receives no support whatsoever because no
one can help. Feels inadequate; has a great fear of failing. Only registers
what one has been unsuccessful at. Stubborn and unpopular. Much bad
luck and weak achievements. Inflexible, unsuccessful, dictatorial,
authoritarian, and inconsiderate.
COMPULSION: The Downtrodden. Makes it a point of great honor to fight one's way doggedly up the ladder alone and with one's own strength
despite all resistance. In the process, enslaves oneself to the utmost
degree. Joyless career person. Easily gets dizzy because of the heights for
fear of a sudden fall.
RESOLUTION: The Master. Succeeds in gradually developing enough trust in the idea that the rungs of the ladder of professional success will also hold
him or her. Dedicates self to a task with total consistency and develops—
even against all opposition—true mastery there. Responsible, dutiful,
objective, honest, ambitious, just, fatherly, consistent, decisive.
IMAGE OF THE MOTHER: Reliable, dominating, hard, strict, cold, restrictive. Uranus in the 10th House Professional Individualism STRENGTH: The Freelancer. Professionally very creative and inventive. Needs the greatest possible amount of free space for the development of
these talents. Often works freelance, independent and free. Has a great
aversion to everything that is prefabricated and to limits on general
conditions. Has a very personal touch in everything and is therefore
always determined to be irreplaceable. Extraverted behavior.
PROBLEM AREA: The Center of the Storm. Creates chaos and uncertainty through an exaggerated tendency toward originality and renewal. Cannot
stick to one thing. Erratic in one's way of thinking, but also in changing
both assignment and profession. Quickly loses interest in a project when
one cannot contribute any more new ideas. Imaginative and inventive, but
impatient and bad at carrying things out.
IMAGE OF THE MOTHER: The freedom-loving, fickle mother. Neptune in the 10th House The Dream Profession Fall STRENGTH: Ms. or Mr. Pseudonym. Lets self be found by one's profession and true calling. Has an excellent nose for the trend of the times and future
developments. However, doesn't want to step into the foreground. As a
result, prefers to work under a pseudonym. Is professionally at home in
the area of mediumism, as well as media.
PROBLEM AREA: The Professional Haze. Despite all one's will, can't find a profession and lets oneself drift. Great difficulties in choosing a vocation,
as well as in taking clear positions in working life. Lets oneself be quickly
swept away by moods, but also loses interest and orientation just as
abruptly. Dazzling personality, camp follower, afraid of taking
responsibility, not trustworthy.
IMAGE OF THE MOTHER: Overly idealized, difficult to comprehend, spiritual or crazy: the martyr who sacrifices herself.
Pluto in the 10th House The Position of Power STRENGT: The Statesman, Strong striving for power and influence
connected with the willingness to become completely wrapped up in one's
calling. Great commitment, as well as far-reaching transformation through
experiences in working life. Constant striving to penetrate more deeply
into the task in life and comprehend its profound significance,
Professional confrontation with the dark, suppressed sides of life and the
society.
PROBLEM AREA: The Godfather. Shamelessly demonstrates one's power, Makes sure that others become dependent in order to be able to
manipulate and blackmail them. Dark business deals with shady
characters.
IMAGE OF THE MOTHER: Powerful, possessive, jealous and often dark; can feel like her serf for entire lifetime.
North Node in the 10th House
THEME: Conflict between professional career, public obligations, as well as domestic life and the family and searching one's own heart.
TASK: Coming to the Fore. Going beyond the domestic area and family to enter the public eye. Becoming mature and assuming responsibility.
Developing discipline, consistency, and straightforwardness. Detaching
oneself from dependencies in the area of family and emotions. Being able
to lower one's personal expectations.
DANGER: Remaining a Child. Emotional dependency on profession,
obligations and status, or even complete adherence to the protective
security of the family. Expecting affection, consideration, and protection
instead of risking the step out into raw reality. Not developing any sense
of personal responsibility, and immediately looking for someone to blame
for every mishap. 11th House: I Make Friends
ANALOGY: RULER: EXALTATION DETRIMENT: —
FALL: ELEMENT: QUALITY: GENDER: Air Fixed Masculine GENERAL: The Circle of Friends. Experience of friendship, group
experiences, team spirit, affinity, hospitality, patrons, spiritual
brotherhoods, cosmopolitanism, support of humanitarian goals. Spirit of
the times, reforms, emancipation.
POLARITY: Community spirit and cooperation in contrast to the
competition and domination of the self in the 5th house.
Sun in the 11th House Community Spirit Detriment TEH CENTRAL THEME OF DEVELOPMENT OF THE SELF is the experience of friendship, life with and within a group that has been created of its own
accord, as well as supporting reforms and humanitarian goals.
STRENGTH: The Cosmopolitan. Ignores all national boundaries, racial
barriers, and social differences and has a distinct awareness of connection
with all human beings as a citizen of the Earth. Strong development in
friendships and good sense of group consciousness. Knows how to lead a
group. Joining together voluntarily (affinity) is more important than
family ties. Oriented toward the future. Imaginative and visionary.
Advocate of social and cultural reforms.
PROBLEM AREA: The Isolationist. Expectations of friendship that are too high and sometimes tyrannical, followed by corresponding
disappointments and friendships being broken off. Intensely dependent on
whether other people like him or her. Too selective in friendships. Retreat
into proud resignation with increasing isolation.
ROLE IN THE GROUP: The trendsetter. Moon in the 11th House Feelings of Friendship STRENGTH: The Good Friend. Need for friendly relations and spiritual affinities. Gladly willing to enter into a friendship, he there and fulfill the
friend's expectations. Adaptable, changeable, and sociable within a circle
of friends. Must always know what others think about one and how they
see one.
The Fickle Friendship. Easily irritated, restless,
superficial, feelings of friendship that go through extreme changes. Only
commits self until changing his or her mind, Unreliable and moody.
PROBLEM AREA: ROLE IN THE GROUP: The participant. Mercury in the 11th House The Travel Companion STRENGTH: The Clever Friend. Very good mixer, sociable arid entertaining. Establishes friendships easily, but these aren't always necessarily deep and
tend to be more rational than emotional. Like to share experiences, seeks
and gives clever advice and exciting impulses. Likes to be with people of
the same convictions. Loves obvious agreements (clear scores = good
friendship).
PROBLEM AREA: The Business Friend. Cool, calculating, and reserved.
Community of interests or loyalty toward colleagues instead of friendship.
Benefit of friendship stands in the foreground and not the friend. Problems
are ignored. No room for familiarity or true sympathy.
ROLE IN THE GROUP: The (detached) observer, mediator, or wise guy. Venus in the 11th House The Friendly Flirt STRENGTH: Friendship Plus. Deep solidarity and feeling of happiness in the friendship. Flirtation with erotic slant that doesn't always make the
boundary between friendship and dalliance clear. Romantic coloration of the friendship. Peace-loving, faithful, and obliging. Seeks connection to
artistic or cultural groups.
PROBLEM AREA: The Flatterer. Intensely avoids all encumbrances from friendships. Ingratiates oneself and is always vulnerable to flattery.
Uncritical of friends. Danger of dependency. Insatiable thirst for
adventure.
ROLE IN TEIE GROUP: The popular, peaceful, and connecting person. Mars in the 11th House The Fighting Team STRENGTH: The Strong Friend. Committedly supports one's friends and is willing to go through thick and thin with them. Also demands the same
from them. Fights for the group and its goals. Loves male friendships and
fighting teams. Is willing to fight for progress. Seeks contacts in sports
clubs.
PROBLEM AREA: The Quarreler. Has difficulties in conforming and
integrating oneself into the group. Very sensitive to antipathies. Demands
great proof of friendship. Unpredictable and hard to get along with. Tends
toward rivalries and competitive attitude. Threatens to break off the
friendship with a constant “either-or” stance.
ROLE IN THE GROUP: The troublemaker. Jupiter in the 11th House The Noble Friendship STRENGTH: Mr. or Ms. Hospitality. The good, generous, and trustworthy friend and patron who gives friends help and support, but also receives it
from them. Clearly differentiates between truly trusted and more distant
friends. Loves to have friends around him, is very hospitable, and would
like friends to be friends with each other as well. Seeks connections within
or with religious communities or respected social contacts.
PROBLEM AREA: The Elitist. Distinct class consciousness. Judges others according to background and social role. Seeks important friends. Not really interested in friends' personal and emotional problems. An
overbearing, conceited friend.
ROLE IN THE GROUP: The group leader, the guru, the aristocrat. Saturn in the 11th House The Solid Friendship Dignity OBJECTIVE: Overcoming distance and coldness in the encounter with
others, becoming trusting beyond fears of closeness, and starting up
friendships.
INHIBITION: The Lonesome Wolf. Mistrust of potential friends. Fear of not being accepted, not being good enough for a friendship, or not being able
to give enough. Retreat into isolation. Painful feelings of loneliness, but
frequently with a resigned pride. Fear of groups.
COMPULSION: The Proper Companion. Violently forces oneself to change, is present at all social occasions, and also invites others to one's home.
Very proper, but always somewhat standoffish and far from developing
true feelings of friendship.
RESOLUTION: The Steady Friend. Has overcome mistrust of people and placed deep trust in a few good friends. Sincere and honest in friendship.
Seeks mutuality and reliability. Is faithful, steadfast, and serious. Tends to
be modest and thankful. Seeks connections with and within serious
communities—such as a Zen brotherhood.
ROLE IN THE GROUP: The scapegoat, the supervisor. Uranus in the 11th House The Crazy Friendship Dignity STRENGTH: The Peculiar Friend. Seeks the highly individualistic, original, exotic friendship. Has an enriching and stimulating effect on others.
Always remains very independent and individualistic. Strictly rejects all
friendship rituals. Can't truly commit to a friendship, but can be a good
friend for life of one's own accord. Seeks free connections with kindred
spirits, such as world brotherhoods. PROBLEM AREA: The Flaky Friend. Eccentric, unpredictable, and unable to make any adaptations in friendship. Completely numb and inconsiderate
toward the wishes and standards of a friend. Comes and goes when and as
one pleases. Puts a strain on one's very frequently changing friends.
ROLE IN THE GROUP: The eccentric, the eternal exception, the agitator. Neptune in the 11th House The Spiritual Friendship STRENGTH: The Sensitive Friend. High, idealistic concepts of friendship. Strong feeling of solidarity and great willingness to adapt to the other
person. Kindred souls in the circle of friends. The sensitive, caring,
loving, understanding, and self-sacrificing friend. Longs for mystic
friendships with spirits and seeks connection to spiritual groups.
PROBLEM AREA: The Two-Faced Friend. A naive and starry-eyed approach lead to deception, illusion, and betrayal in the friendship. Danger of being
drawn into the aura of dubious societies or questionable friendships and
not being able to get away from them anymore. Tendency toward
becoming victim of a false friendship, as well as the danger of being a
false friend.
ROLE IN THE GROUP: The invisible one, the victim, the prophet. Pluto in the 11th House The Powerful Friendship STRENGTH: “The Sworn Friend. More a pact than a friendship. The feeling of karmic connection to the friend and compulsion to live through all the
highs and lows with this person. Experiences of power and helplessness
with deep-reaching transformations through the experience of friendship.
Tendency to join secret societies and groups involved with magic.
PROBLEM AREA: The Spooky Friend. Difficult friendships with mysterious figures. Friendship problems on the basis of sexual tensions, danger of
abuse, dependence, vulnerability to blackmail, violence, and dangerous
struggles for power. ROLE IN THE GROUP: The mysterious person, the secret (uncanny) leader. North Node in the 11th House
THEME: Conflict between egocentric showmanship and a necessary group consciousness, between platonic love or the love of philosophy and a
passionate, sensual-erotic experience.
TASK: Community Spirit. Viewing life from a superordinate point of view and not just paying attention to satisfying the ego. Developing community
spit it, advancing the consciousness of cosmopolitanism, supporting the
breakdown of social differences, and being committed to new ideas and
reforms.
DANGER: Self-Adulation. Putting yourself at the center of attention all the time and everywhere and claiming a special role. Demanding attention,
recognition, and admiration. Openly and primarily always thinking of
yourself. 12th House: I Dream
ANALOGY: RULER: EXALTATION DETRIMENT: FALL: ELEMENT: QUALITY: GENDER: Water Mutable Feminine GENERAL: Seclusion from the World. Transcendental experiences,
mysticism, trance, ecstasy, purification, sacrifice, transfiguration,
withdrawal from the world. Secrets and clandestine enemies. Voluntary
isolation (hermitage, monastery) or involuntary isolation (hospital,
prison). Longing for the “roof of the world.” Configurations in this house
are shown to outer world with shyness—if they are shown at all. They can
also be experienced as nonexistent for a long time, yet still develop in
silence. Or they can be discovered and developed in seclusion.
POLARITY: All things incomprehensible and boundless and dissolution in contrast to the order, clarity, and limitation in the 6th house.
Sun in the 12th House Spiritual Mastery is the retreat into
seclusion (on the roof of the world) in order to collect mystical and
transcendental experiences, come into contact with other worlds, and
encounter the images of one's own unconscious mind.
THE CENTRAL THEME OE DEVELOPMENT OF TFIE SELF STRENGTH: The Liberated Soul. Has become independent and free by
overcoming one's own suffering. Strongly spiritualized, fine personality.
Willing to help others, and has a deep love of humanity. Withdrawn,
creative, empathetic, intuitive, wise, illuminated. Knows how to work
with subtle materials and energies (Bach flower essences, homeopathy).
PROBLEM AREA: The Prisoner. Feels excluded. Defiant, but ineffective, rebellion against the feeling of being a prisoner. Loud preacher of
freedom. Chameleon. Full of complexes, timid, emotionally ill, inwardly
very lonely, self-destructive, and, in extreme cases, confused and asocial. The eternal victim. Flight out of and from reality. Problems with
addiction.
FINDS IN SECLUSION: What is essential. Moon in the 12th House Longing for Redemption STRENGTH: The Sensitive Spirit. Great sensitivity for everything that “lies in the air.” Frequently occurring tendency to withdraw into seclusion and
stillness in order to meditate, collect mystic and transcendental
experiences, and come into harmony with oneself. Feels strongly drawn to
everything that is vast, eternal, and irrational. Great yearning to be
redeemed.
PROBLEM AREA: The Emotionally Numb. Is not conscious of emotions and only senses numbness when one asks oneself what one feels. Perhaps even
has the impression of having no feelings at all or consciously keeps them
hidden (even from oneself) so one is not hurt. Extremely unwilling to
suffer. Remains a mystery to oneself for a long time. Cannot mature
emotionally and remains very naive and infantile on this level. Danger of
uncontrolled intoxication because of vast but conscious desires for
deliverance.
FINDS IN SECLUSION: One's dreams and feelings. Mercury in the 12th House Exploring Chaos Detriment & Fall STRENGTH: The Paradoxical Thinker. Great spiritual intuition. May do well at thinking in apparent contradictions and expressing deep insights in a
paradoxical, allegoric, or symbolic manner. Can reconcile greatly varying
schools of thought. Understands how to beat the opponent in
confrontations with their own weapons (the other person's logic). Very
scholarly. Good nose when it comes to revealing secrets, but also wellversed in search for transcendental experiences.
PROBLEM AREA: The Plagiarist. Engages in intellectual thievery without necessarily noticing it. Often has the impression of having known everything at a much earlier point in time. Also intellectual timidity,
secrecy, and illusionary thinking.
FINDS IN SECLUSION: Clear thoughts and good ideas. Venus in the 12th House The Dream of Love Exaltation STRENGTH: Selfless Love. Great longing for merging and becoming one with another person. Absolute ability to be dedicated, idealistic, selfless,
willing to make sacrifices. Love as a deep, spiritual experience and
boundless, divine rapture. Artistically inspired.
PROBLEM AREA: Secret Love. Longing for a love that can never become reality because it must remain in the realm of fantasy not to do damage.
Repressed femininity and concealed eroticism, unrequited love, or secret
liaisons that never come into the public eye. Peculiar, sometimes
anonymous loves: encounters without mentioning names, enamored
correspondence between strangers, or love of someone in prison.
FINDS IN SECLUSION: Her ability to love and worthiness of love. Mars in the 12th House The Washout STRENGTH: The Knight of the Holy Grail. Powers of assertion, the will to conquer, and initiative are strongly influenced by spiritual and
unconscious forces. With the appropriate, spiritual exercise (such as Tai
Chi, Aikido, archery in the spirit of Zen), the highest degree of
effectiveness develops. Committed willingness to help. Defender and
champion of the underprivileged (Robin Hood). High level of spiritual
striving.
PROBLEM AREA: The Bluff. Chronically dissatisfied. Can get terribly excited about everything but only creates a storm in a teacup. Never really takes
action. Plans, practices, tests, and then misses the opportunity.
Complicated sexuality and repressed sexuality. In particularly difficult
cases, criminal energy. FINDS IN SECLUSION: Courage, resoluteness, and powers of assertion. Jupiter in the 12th House The Concealed Meaning Dignity STRENGTH: Happiness in Silence. Happy experiences in solitude and
silence. Finding meaning in reclusion after withdrawal from the outside
world. The knowledge that true wealth is not of this world. Finding deep,
inner wealth in meditation and spiritual exercises, Enriching inspiration
and help from the unconscious mind.
PROBLEM AREA: Secret Glory. Absence of happiness (as long as it is sought in the outside world or hoped for from an outside source). Getting lost in a
dream world and abandoning oneself to fantasies of personal greatness,
heroics, and fame.
FINDS IN SECLUSION: Meaning and happiness. Saturn in the 12th House The Old Soul OBJECTIVE: Growing trust in being upheld by higher forces.
INHIBITION: The Helpless or Unstable Individual. Lack of stability and firmness. Uncanny fear that something unknown and incomprehensible
could dominate or destroy life. Dread of loneliness, chaos, loss of the self,
and above all, feat of the irrational. Fear of losing control over oneself and
of ending up in isolation or imprisonment. Inexplicable feelings of guilt.
COMPULSION: The Grim One. Tries to pull oneself together with total stubbornness and toughness and prove that one can master life. Takes a
spiritual path as the “best pupil” with steely single-mindedness and an
ambitiously lowered gaze.
RESOLUTION: The Steadfast Person. Overcomes the fear of fear and
gradually opens up to what is vast, unknown, and the chaotic depths of
one's own unconscious mind. In silent exercise, finds inner strength and
trust in the forces that uphold human beings. Humble and capable of honest service, selflessness, and devotion, Experiences aloneness as “allone-ness.”
FINDS IN SECLUSION: Structure and resolve. Uranus in the 12th House Longing for Freedom STRENGTH: The Lucid One. Surprising inspirations and clear vision of future developments. Particularly receptive to new religious, political, and
spiritual currents. Must exercise the art of comprehending the meaning of
images that suddenly emerge from the unconscious mind.
PROBLEM AREA: The (Secret) Escapee. Rebels against any form of
limitation on freedom. Wants to force open all walls, freeing oneself (and
others) from isolation and imprisonment, as well as being free of all
secrets and “having” to do something in secret. The opposite is also
possible: someone who only permits oneself clandestine liberties.
FINDS IN SECLUSION: True freedom. Neptune in the 12th House Nirvana Dignity STRENGTH: The Transparent or Transcendent Individual. Responsive to voices and images from the unconscious so that one is constantly led by
strong invisible powers to everything important in this life. Inexplicable
certainty of being “found” by nirvana. Artistic talent.
PROBLEM AREA: The Confused Person. Can be overwhelmed by the forces of the unconscious because of repression or simple ignorance of
mediumistic abilities. Lives beyond all limits and structures. “Knows” that
only the illusion is not an illusion.
FINDS IN SECLUSION: Visions. Pluto in the 12th House Unconscious Powers STRENGTH: The ‘Transformed, Transformed in a far-reaching manner
through intensive experience of powers of the unconscious. Opens oneself
to the forces of deepest renewal in meditative stillness and seclusion.
PROBLEM AREA: The Distressed. A victim of power fantasies and fears of helplessness. Inexplicable fears of the powers of the unconscious and the
primitive forces in one's own depths. Experiencing oneself as helpless in
the face of illness and emotional suffering and becoming isolated.
FINDS IN SECLUSION: Inner healer. North Node in the 12th House
THEME: Conflict between transcendental striving and everyday reality,
between chaos and order, between mediumism and rational thinking.
TASK: Spirituality. Emerging from the confines of the explicable and
abandoning oneself to experiences of the transcendental and boundless.
Developing powers of imagination and a spiritual consciousness through
rational, analytic work. Exploring so-called chaos. Withdrawing from
busy activity into seclusion. Developing the will to sacrifice and brotherly
love.
DANGER: Clinical Purity, Clinging tightly to utilitarian thinking. Fear of things that have not been planned. Compulsive rejection and avoidance of
everything that is unorganized and inexplicable. Obsession with
cleanliness, addiction to orderliness, or the mania of having to control
everything. The ASPECTS Key Words for Aspect Combinations In order to receive an impression of the many possibilities of an aspect's
meaning, the key words listed here can all be combined with each other as
desired in an aspect of connected planets. Aspects of the Sun
ARCHETYPE: Queen Sun-Moon: Mind and Soul
The King and the SHADOW: The Dazzler and the Evil
Witch GENERAL: The interplay of wishes ( ) and wanting ( ), of conscious
striving ( ) and instinctive urge ( ), of the masculine ( ) and the feminine
( ), of the conscious ( ) and the unconscious ( ), of the waking
consciousness ( ) and the dream consciousness ( ), of individuality ( )
and family heritage ( ).
HARMONY: The Well-Balanced Individual Harmonious accord between
taking action and the willingness to simply let things happen. Finds the
right mixture between wanting and wishing, between masculine and
feminine portions of her nature, between the childhood self and the adult
self. Well-balanced, satisfied, optimistic, cheerful, vigorous, emotionally
stable.
DISCORD: The Tense Person. Vehement conflict between the heart and mind, conscious striving and instinctive urge, above all in the group of
themes that correspond to the sign position of the Sun and Moon.
Experiences self in the battle of the sexes. Problems with the parental
home and family. Torn back and forth between the efforts of becoming oneself and a passive attitude of letting oneself drift. Intense mood
fluctuations, developmental crises, and identity problems. Uncontrolled
emotional outbursts and depressions. Frustrated, self-satisfied, and
subjective.
Sun-Mercury: Cleverness
ARCHETYPE: The Smart King and His SHADOW: Herald The Boss and His Wily Attorney COMPARISON: GENERAL: Perceiving, understanding, thinking through, ordering, and
formulating (all ) what is essential ( ). The distance between critical
perception ( ) and subjective wanting ( ). Self-criticism ( ). Making
oneself understood ( ). Since the Sun and Mercury are never more than
28° apart from each other, there are no tension aspects between these two
planets. Their concurrence is judged by other criteria:
If the Sun and Mercury are in different signs, this increases the objectivity
of the thoughts because thinking ( ) can take another standpoint than the
will ( ). If they are in the same sign, thinking loses the critical distance to
the character and is subjectively colored by the will.
The most favorable distance between the Sun and Mercury is considered
to be an interval of 3° to 8° because here—expressed in images—
Mercury's power of thought can develop in the Sun's best light. If the
distance is less, it is called a “combust Mercury”: it no longer produces
any achievements of its own but stands completely in the Sun's service,
exclusively concerned with justifying the Sun's activities. The crass subjectivity of this conjunction is also valid if the two planets are not
located in the same sign.
Sun-Venus: Charm
ARCHETYPE: The Master and the Muse SHADOW: The Beau and the Flatterer GENERAL: The connection of personality ( ) and content of life ( ) for a
person with style ( ), outer beauty ( ), and personal charm ( ). A
sympathetic/likeable ( ) and peaceable ( ) nature ( ). The Sun and Venus
are never more than 48° apart from each other. This is why conjunctions,
semisextiles. and semi-squares are the only possible aspects.
HARMONY: The Likable Person. Pleasant aura. A person who has a
beneficial effect on others by just being there. Popular, charming, and
usually erotic and seductive. Sociable, able to adapt, a good mixer,
diplomatic, peaceable. Knows how to value elevated style, a cultivated
atmosphere, luxury, and good taste. Frequently distinct interest in art and
culture.
DISCORD: The Coquette. According to the position of the signs of the planets, cold-blooded tactics with erotic charms or crude ingratiation.
False, sometimes extravagant expectations of happiness. Lapses of taste
and excessive desire for pleasure. Sun-Mars: Bravery
ARCHETYPE: The Courageous King and SHADOW: The Tyrant and His
His General
Torturer GENERAL: Courage and power ( ) to believe in oneself ( ), assert ( ) the
personality ( ), and penetrate ( ) through to the development of the nature
( ) of the world. The struggle ( ) for existence ( ).
HARMONY: The Dynamo. Characteristics and assertive force combine
harmoniously into a clear, self-confident determination. Aggressiveness is
directed outwardly in a healthy, appropriate manner. Distinct, sometimes
imposing masculine traits and well-assessed willingness to take risks.
Active, dynamic, goal-oriented, energetic. Pronounced willfulness and
considerable strength of ego.
DISCORD: The Self-Destruct Mechanism. At variance with oneself.
Inwardly torn and contradictory masculinity. Hothead who restlessly takes
on challenges without thinking them over and frequently endangers
oneself in the process. Conflict between will, use of energy, and goal.
Aggressiveness is sometimes angrily directed at the outside world and
then again directed in a destructive manner againsr one's own self. Energy
is wasted and used at the wrong point in time, creating a ruinous
exploitation of one's own powers and unpredictable energy eruptions. Has a difficult time reducing and controlling instinctual tensions. Erratic,
irritable, impatient, frustrated, opinionated, stubborn, and aggressive.
Sun-Jupiter: Self-Assurance
ARCHETYPE: The Noble-Minded SHADOW: The Megalomaniac and the
King and the High Priest
Self-Righteous Man GENERAL: Self-assurance ( ). Designing one's life ( ) with optimism
and confidence ( ). Going through life ( ) with luck and success ( ). The
meaning ( ) of life ( ).
HARMONY: The Respectable Person. A talent for happiness and the feeling of being chosen. Optimistic feeling for life that is full of self-assurance
and also passed on to others. Always interested in expansion,
improvement, growth, and promotion. Creative, capable of enthusiasm,
tolerant, trustworthy, demanding, generous, kind, and humane. Inner and
outer dignity, noble sentiments, and always concerned with living and
acting in an ethically faultless manner.
DISCORD: The Fat Soul. Self-satisfied in judging oneself and one's own achievements. Is too good and fine for everything. Pomposity,
wastefulness, and smugness that can be intolerable because of a constant
concern about appearing in the light of the imaginary greatness. Emotional
and physical fatness. Unreliable, indolent, conceited, demanding. Exaggerated attitude of expectation toward life. Con games. Collects all
attributes that promise to increase one's own value.
Sun-Saturn: Integrity
ARCHETYPE: The Solemn King and SHADOW: His Wise Advisor The Sick King and the
Embittered Old Man GENERAL: The boundary ( ) of growth ( ). The form ( ) and its content (
). Slow ( ) but lasting ( ) development of the personality ( ). Learning to
become humble ( ) in life ( ). Overcoming ( ) the fear of embarking on
something new ( ). Inhibitions ( ) about believing in oneself ( ).
HARMONY: The Builder. Prefers slow but lasting growth in contrast to hasty, half-baked leaps. Needs and creates order and structure. Willing to
recognize clear boundaries and look reality in the eye. Earnest, mature,
and reliable personality. Respectable, competent, responsible, dutiful,
strong, diligent, humble, and modest.
DISCORD: The Stooped Individual. Difficult authority conflicts. Lack of self-confidence, massive doubt about one's own value, and the persistent
feeling of not being good enough. Inexplicable feelings of guilt. Seeks
recognition, yet at the same time is incapable of “putting up with” praise
and applause. Always has to prove oneself for fear of failure. In extreme cases, rigid and inflexible, clinging to proven norms and familiar misery.
Fear of change and the step beyond the previous boundaries. Doesn't
actually consider oneself worthy of love and therefore entertains deep (if
secret) doubt even about declarations of love that are meant honestly.
Strong inhibitions about showing oneself as one is. Has difficulties
believing in oneself.
Sun-Uranus: Eccentricity
ARCHETYPE: The Liberal King and SHADOW: The Irresponsible Person
the Court Jester
and the Traitor GENERAL: The free ( ) person ( ). Consciousness ( ) of uniqueness ( ).
The original ( ), crazy ( ), or eccentric ( ) mind ( ).
HARMONY: The Casual Individual. Great striving for independence,
autonomy, and the freedom to live a completely individual life. Very
interested in experimenting. Imaginative and inventive. Sometimes
ingenious and often ahead of the times. Can easily adapt to new ideas,
plans that have changed suddenly, unfamiliar situations, and new
relationships. On the other hand, tolerates no type of routine, constricting
structures, or restrictions of one's independence.
DISCORD: The Self-Sufficient Person. Exaggerated, sometimes problematic striving for independence that sooner or later experiences every form of contractual obligation or verbal agreement as an intolerable prison. As a
result, more often than not commits a breach of contract out of “emotional
self-defense” because personal freedom is always more important than
any type of responsibility. Inwardly restless and torn. Constantly seeks
change. Sudden and radical break with old habits in life, people, or
attitudes. Unpredictable, egocentric, cold-blooded, impersonal, willful,
and seditious.
Sun-Neptune: Mediumism
ARCHETYPE: The Spiritual King and SHADOW: The Addicted King and His the Seer Tempter GENERAL: Being guided ( ) by a guardian angel ( ) on the path of life ( ).
Expanding or befogging ( ) the conscious mind ( ) through mystic vision
( ), trance ( ), or state of intoxication ( ) Boundless yearning ( ) to be
released ( ) from the confines of the body ( ) or from consciousness ( ).
HARMONY: The Visionary. Extremely sensitive to all moods and currents. Good sense for the spirit of the times and trends. Sure instinctual
judgment on the basis of frequently inexplicable but solid inner certainty.
Visionary gifts and great intuitive understanding. Often a strongly
developed interest in spiritual experiences, mysticism, trance, and
everything that helps exceed the boundaries of consciousness. Strong
fantasy and dream life. Mediumism in the sense of spirituality, as well as
interest in media like film, television, newspapers, etc. DISCORD: The Seducible Person. Driven by boundless longing to leave the prison of the body; in danger of taking the wrong paths. Satisfies the
yearning for the Holy Spirit rashly with the spirit of wine or other
intoxicants. In danger of addiction, which is why—in some cases—one is
strictly abstinent, even in the most difficult aspects. Has a hard time
turning a deaf ear to the insinuations or expectations of others. Without
distinct goals of one's own, can easily be seduced. No clear feeling of self.
Easily becomes the victim of a false self-image. In some cases, feels only
numbness in one's body. Has no problem slipping into a great variety of
roles (chameleon), but also becomes the plaything of others. Without any
backbone, insincere, and undependable; in difficult cases, completely
insecure, corrupt, addicted, sordid, and depraved.
Sun-Pluto: Power
ARCHETYPE: The Mighty King and SHADOW: The Despot and the Gray
the Sorcerer
Eminence GENERAL: Experience and consciousness ( ) of power ( ) and helplessness
( ), The encounter of the self ( ) with its shadow ( ). The transformation
( ) of the personality ( ).
HARMONY: The Shaman. Enormous powers of the soul—frequently
unconscious to a large degree—that can be used for both the benefit and
the destruction of others: powers of suggestion, healing powers, hypnotic
abilities, and the subtle but highly effective power of magnetically
attracting, fascinating, and captivating other people, as well as causing situations and events to occur on the basis of enormous powers of desire.
Strong interest in depth psychology, magical and occult knowledge and
practices, archaic and shamanic rites, and all the taboos of a society,
particularly death and sexuality.
DISCORD: The Possessed Soul. Dark, dubious character that is not strong enough to resist the temptations of power. Tries to bind others to oneself,
make them dependent and enslaved in order to control and exploit them in
an emotional, physical, and/or material way. Possessed by a thirst for
power. But often also the helpless victim of own striving for power or the
power of others. Extreme all-or-nothing maxims. Obsessed by fixed and
compulsive ideas, above all regarding interpersonal relationships and
sexuality. Self-glorification, strong powers of destruction, and tendency
toward depression.
Sun-North Node
CONJUNCTION: The connection of the Sun with the Moon's Node places a very special accent on the sign and the house in which this conjunction is
located. The related abilities, potentials, and tasks can and should be given
the opportunity to blossom more intensely.
HARMONY: Good association of vital energy and direction in life. Helpful, powerful, and useful support by the Sun sign. However, occasionally also
the expression of convenience and missed opportunities.
DISCORD: Constantly recurring conflicts and tensions between the demands of the Sun sign and the tasks of the Moon's Node that are to be fulfilled.
As a result, lack of clarity about the path in life, inner conflict, inhibitions,
laziness, difficulties in making decisions, and delays in the development
of the personality.
Sun-Ascendant
HARMONY: The Uninhibited Individual. Positive, strong, more masculine expression of the personality. Spontaneous, powerful, natural, strong- willed. Can show who one really is without any timidity or effort. Strong
trust in own abilities, great self-confidence, and a healthy feeling of selfworth.
DISCORD: The Masked Person. External appearance and inner nature are poles apart. As a result, inhibitions of personal expression and frustrated
confrontations with the outer world. Shyness about showing true nature.
Hides behind a socially acceptable mask.
Sun-Medium Coeli
HARMONY: The Success. Professional success, social climbing, and
impression made in the public eye are an essential part of the development
of the self. Conscious planning and active creativity in the realization of
life's objectives and the professional career. Claim to leadership and
leadership qualities.
DISCORD: The Contradiction. Relationship to public eye full of conflicts. The development of the self and the professional career—sometimes also
the objectives in life—appear difficult to reconcile and may even run
counter to each other. Overcoming these contradictions is the primary
task. Aspects of the Moon
Moon-Mercury: Feeling Thought
ARCEIETYPE: The Clever Queen and Her SHADOW: The Babbler and the Herald Liar GENERAL: The interplay of thinking and interpreting
tales and feeling
dreams. Expressing
feelings Understanding
Telling
fairy HARMONY: Healthy Common Sense. Good interplay between thinking and emotional depth. Sure instincts in assessing and judging situations and
people. Having a good nose for things. Being intellectually agile and able
to adapt. Very imaginative, yet always realistic. Vivid, graphic manner of
expression. Quick-witted and good at languages. Excellent memory,
healthy common sense, and good powers of observation.
DISCORD: The Trivial Talker. Conflict between disposition and intellect. Lack of orientation. Childish wishful thinking and dangerous rewriting of reality into the respectively most pleasant version. Or embarrassingly
unsuccessful analyzing and complicated explaining of feelings.
Superficial, trivial talk. Empty promises, bragging, lies, and gossip.
Emotional, easily excited, hurtful, sharp-tongued, and slanderous. Pure
assumptions become supposed facts in the wink of an eye.
Moon-Venus: Peace of Mind
The Graceful Queen and SHADOW: The Moody Woman and
the Lady-in-Waiting
the Vain Lady
ARCHETYPE: GENERAL: Longing for love
and a feeling of security . Dreaming
of love
and eroticism . A good feeling
in matters of taste ,
style , and art . Harmonious , loving , and peaceful feelings .
HARMONY: The Charmer. Harmony between disposition and erotic aura. Charming, very feminine, lovable, and always willing to fall in love. Great
desire for love and tenderness. Capable of deep, genuine love, devotion,
and sympathy. Friendly, tender, gentle, affectionate, and loving with a sure sense of what is right and the right moment in a relationship. Doesn't like
confrontations.
DISCORD: The Unfulfilled Person. Torn back and forth between the wish for emotional security and the enticing call of desire. Both at the same time
are apparently not satisfying. As a result, an uneven temper,
dissatisfaction, extreme sensitivity, moodiness, jealousy, and
unpredictably passionate: sometimes lustful, sometimes inhibited. Also a
tendency toward secrets and vicarious satisfaction like erotic or sweet
things. Difficulties in marriage and relationships. Conflict between family
sense and relationship with partner, as well as in the roles of mother and
beloved.
Moon-Mars: Daring
The Brave Queen and SHADOW: The Haughty Lady and the
Her Protector
Tormentor
ARCHETYPE: GENERAL: Passionate desire
. Acting
on the basis of feeling
Becoming emotionally
excited
. Conquering
or defending
her nest
. Fighting
for one's own or an entrusted brood . . HARMONY: The Spunky Person. Spontaneous, courageous actions based on an emotional impulse. Good sense of the right point in time. The more
vehement and holy the feelings, the greater the intrepidity. Committed
champion of those who have been entrusted to one, and the needy. Or the
fervent protector of nature. Decisive, passionate, direct, and open.
The Uncontrolled Individual. Severe tensions between
disposition and aggression, anger and instinctual desire as the cause of
massive problems with aggression like destructive frenzy and acts
committed in the heat of passion, as well as stomach problems resulting
from “swallowing” anger. Deeply injured, churned-up feelings lead to
explosive outbursts of passion, vindictiveness, uncontrolled instinctive
behavior, and chronic irritability. Constant inner unrest and hastiness.
Aggressive feelings toward everything that is motherly. Fighting,
repressing, or devastating what could provide a feeling of security.
DISCORD: Moon-Jupiter: Wealth of Emotion
ARCHETYPE: The Wise Queen and SHADOW: the Nobleman GENERAL: Holy everyday life The Arrogant Lady and the
Condescending Man , happy , noble , rich
feelings . Happy
. Desire
to travel . The happy
woman . HARMONY: The Kind-Hearted Individual. Confident feelings and deep self- assurance. Likeable, winning, benevolent, lovable nature. Generous,
convivial, epicurean. High spirits. Able to trust others. Great wealth of
emotion. Deep respect for everything that is motherly and feminine.
Enthusiasm for high ideals, noble convictions, and feelings that impart
meaning. Skillful hand in everyday matters.
DISCORD: The Pampered Person. Considerable insincerity toward oneself. Courts applause and cheap flattery that supports overestimation of the self.
Great plans that are never carried out. Spoiled mother's darling, feigned
nonchalance toward life, emotional exaggerations. Lazy, indolent,
comfort-loving, but also arrogant and demanding.
Moon-Saturn: Serious Feelings
The Unpretentious Queen SHADOW: The Embittered Lady
and the Council Elder
and Her Adversary
ARCHETYPE: Stable
, controlled
, and/or serious
feelings
.
Resolute
, disciplined
, and sober
in everyday life
. Feelings
of guilt . The earnest
woman .
GENERAL: The Conscientious Individual. Committed, stable feelings.
Great staying power, prudence, faithfulness, and performance of one's
duty, even under difficult conditions. Willing and able to tolerate
hardships, deprivation, and necessary renunciation. Very composed, even
in sorrowful situations. Inwardly willing and able to tighten one's belt and
be modest, leave, or let go when necessary. Clear feeling for what is
feasible and enjoyment of what has been achieved. Willing to take
responsibility. Serious and dependable.
HARMONY: DISCORD: The Hardhearted Person. Merciless with oneself and others. Inhibited, emotionally withdrawn, lonely, or even embittered. Personal
feelings and wishes are repressed and those of others are held in contempt
or viewed with suspicious mistrust. Sometimes absurd envy of others.
Can't express oneself emotionally. Lacks feeling of security, feels unloved
and often worthless. Can't let go, and therefore remains bound even to
situations that are unbearable, hopeless, and self-destructive. Extreme,
insatiable need for a feeling of security. Leaden emotions.
Moon-Uranus: Emotional Dynamite
ARCHETYPE: The Unique Queen and SHADOW: The Noncommittal Woman the Court Jester and the Agitator Surprising
, unpredictable
, vacillating
, crazy
feelings . Longing
for freedom
and independence
Tension
between closeness
and distance
The spirit of departure
.
Electrifying
feelings . Sudden emergence
of unconscious powers
. Emotional fireworks
GENERAL: HARMONY: The Genius at Improvising. Can spontaneously and easily adjust and adapt to new situations and people. Remains inwardly very flexible
and always open for what is new. Yet, still capable of adequately
integrating the need for a feeling of emotional security and the demand for
independence and freedom. But tolerates neither closed doors nor
demands placed on one. Must always do everything voluntarily (a
compulsion in itself). Very bright, lively, quick-witted, and imaginative.
Has a strongly distinct intuition, and sometimes even clairvoyant abilities.
DISCORD: The Individual Incapable of Commitment. Need for freedom that takes on a compulsive character. Can never really open up to anything on
the emotional level. In any type of agreement, always keeps at least one
(inner) loophole open. Hates all words of limitation like “never” and
“always” and therefore tries to keep at least one option open at all times
and in all places. For this reason, prefers to fall in love in “harmless
cases,” which means in people who are quite certain to be unreachable.
Hysterical and easily excitable. Tends to have stage fright. Contradictory,
strongly fluctuating, and easily irritated emotions. Quickly feels harassed,
coerced, restricted, unfree, and then tears away abruptly and curtly.
Chronic dissatisfaction with the present. Tends to have solitary ways.
Moon-Neptune: Feelings of Presentiment
ARCHETYPE: The Sensitive Queen and SHADOW: the Blind Seer The Airy-Fairy Lady
and the Ghost GENERAL: Boundless trance
sense ( ). feelings ( ). Longing ( ) for deliverance
, and mystic experience
. Fine
antennas ( ). Artistic , The Medium. Can be easily and deeply touched on the
emotional level. Finest antennas of the soul that convey knowledge about
what is unspoken, unfamiliar, and the future. Great ability to be devoted to
an ideal or a person, with a tendency toward exaggerated enthusiasm.
Uncanny certainty in evaluating unfamiliar situations and people.
Insatiable hunger for love, affection, attention, loving care, and great
longing to become one with another person. This is connected with the
fear of being deserted and left alone. Mystic tendencies.
HARMONY: DISCORD: The Escapist. Yearns for deliverance and lives in a fantasy world far from reality. Unfulfillable expectations of life and love, which—to be
on the safe side—are usually not even tried out in the real world. Instead,
flight into a dream world, hallucinations, intoxication, and addiction
alternating with dissatisfaction, disappointment, loneliness, depression,
and melancholy. In some cases, completely numb feelings. Great danger
of being deluded, seduced, or cheated by others, as well as cheating,
seducing, or deceiving others.
Moon-Pluto: Depths of the Soul The Irresistible Queen SHADOW: The Spooky Queen and the
and the Sorcerer
Black Knight
ARCHETYPE: GENERAL: Longing ( ) for what is hidden ( ) and forbidden ( ). Emotional
( ) entanglements ( ). Desire or thirst ( ) for power ( ). Deepest
transformation ( ) through feelings ( ) and/or emotional suffering ( ).
Feelings ( ) of power ( ) and helplessness ( ). Extreme ( ) emotions ( ).
The urge ( ) to go into the depths ( ).
HARMONY: The Spy. Enormous, lasting, sometimes fanatic urge to keep going in a certain direction once it has been decided on, and to air secrets,
break taboos, and spy on things that are hidden and forbidden. Delving
into the depths of one's own feelings with fear and fascination in order to
explore one's self, one's own motives and drives, as well as those of other
people. Great powers of the soul.
DISCORD: The Power-Hungry Person. An urge, difficult to control, to seize power over other people's souls and make them dependent. Also one's
own feelings of helplessness toward others who bear emotional power
(mother). Extreme emotional states like all-or-nothing or: if you are not
for me, you are against me. Tremendous feelings of jealousy and manic
need to control others. Enormous problems in giving the necessary
freedom to people one is responsible for. Moon-North Node
HARMONY: Instinctive urge to progress on the path shown by the North Node. Intuitive, partly unconscious and instinctually sound acceptance
and evaluation of the possibilities connected with the house and sign of
the Moon's Node. Feelings are in harmony with the goal's direction.
DISCORD: The yearnings of the Moon and its demands for a feeling of emotional security and attention are in contradiction to the position of the
Moon's Node and related tasks in life. Feelings of unhappiness, inner
indecision and irritability, dissatisfaction, and vexations on the path in life.
-AC Moon-Ascendant The
Obliging
Individual.
Sensitive,
imaginative,
impressionable, cautious, usually reacts, tends to have a feminine form of
expression. Willingness to adapt and be compliant.
HARMONY: DISCORD: The Touchy Person. Difficulties in showing feelings and putting one's own wishes into practice. Emotionally blocked in the manner of
expression. At the same time, moody and touchy toward others. Tends to
get involved in misunderstandings.
-MC Moon-Medium Coeli HARMONY: Air. or Air. Popularity. Instinctive urge to be in the public eye. Needs to be able to express one's feelings, perceptions, emotions, or
artistic abilities in professional life. Good sense for what the pubic wants.
Can make oneself well-liked. Popularity aspects. The Day-Dreamer. The emotional area is in conflict with
professional goals, the career, or the goals in life. Strong feelings of
reluctance and mood vacillations disturb professional development.
Difficult persistence of naive ideas about the dream job. Inhibitions and
timidity about showing oneself in public and “exposing” the inner self.
DISCORD: Aspects of Mercury
Mercury-Venus: The Esthete
ARCHETYPE: The Smartie and the Muse SHADOW: The Liar and the Circe COMPARISON: GENERAL: Stylish ( ) expression ( ). Beautiful ( ) words ( ). Doing
business ( ) with beautiful things ( ): galleries, cosmetic salons, the
fashion industry, gastronomy.
HARMONY: The Esthete. Pleasant manner of expression, abilities in the fields of writing and art. Charming, graceful, harmonious, skillful, and
diplomatic social manner. Optimistic thinking. Conversations can have an
erotic effect. Wants to learn, be inspired, and stimulated by relationships.
DISCORD: The Phony. Using tactics with emotions and hypocritical
feelings. Relationships that are “too sensible.” Calculating “love,” cunning
flattery, swindle in relationships. Affected behavior. Mercury-Mars: Keen Perception ARCHETYPE: The Merchant and the SHADOW: Warrior The Counterfeiter and the Scoundrel COMPARISON: GENERAL: Keenness ( ) of thought ( ), connection of thinking ( ) and
acting ( ), power ( ) to make decisions ( ), the word ( ) duel ( ),
stratagem ( ).
HARMONY: Quick Wits. Asserting oneself in a tactically clever and skilled manner. Crystal-clear argumentation. Sharp, analytical mind. Extreme
quick-wittedness. Fighting by using brains and words. The attorney, the
literary critic, the chess-player. Enjoyment of discussion. Insight into one's
own instinctive nature and deliberate actions.
DISCORD: The Sharp Tongue. Testy, destructive thinking. Irritable, loose tongue. Provokes verbal confrontations. Nasty mouth. Irrational acts.
Nervous, restless, edgy. Danger of dissipating one's strength. Not
respecting other people's opinions: disrupting, interrupting, arguing like a
hothead. Mean criticism or slander. Mercury-Jupiter: Wealth of Thought
ARCHETYPE: The Merchant and the SHADOW: Scholar The Chatterbox and the
Conceited Fool COMPARISON: GENERAL: The search ( ) for meaning ( ). Spacious ( ) thinking ( ). The
good ( ) idea ( ). Roaming ( ) afield ( ). Positive ( ) thoughts ( ).
Prestige ( ) thinking ( ).
HARMONY: The Scholar. Great thirst for knowledge and striving for higher education. Interest in philosophy. Good ability to learn. Wants to bring
meaning and purpose into harmony with each other. Talented at languages.
Striving for higher perceptions.
DISCORD: The Conceited. Fool Reckless, smug, and arrogant way of
thinking.
Puffed-up,
hollow
thoughts.
Exaggerations
and
phrasemongering. Mentally lazy and presumptuous at the same time.
Likes to play the scholar. Completely uncritical when it comes to one's
own thoughts and perceptions. Mercury-Saturn: Depth of Thought
ARCHETYPE: Hermit The Student and the SHADOW: The Smartie and the
Villain COMPARISON: GENERAL: Systematic ( ), critical ( ), formally resolute ( ), structured ( )
way of thinking ( ). Serious ( ) thoughts ( ) and mature ( ) perception (
). Thoughts ( ) of departure ( ). Thinking ( ) something through to the
end ( ).
HARMONY: Realistic Thinking. Talent of thinking in clear, logical,
reasonable structures. Consistent and critical thought. Ability to have
objective perceptions from a distanced perspective. Crystalline
perceptions gained by hard brainwork. Not losing the red thread in
deliberations and speeches. Sometimes slow and circumspect but also
thorough, tactical, and clever. The search for substantiated perceptions.
Inexorable striving for truth. Silent certainty.
DISCORD: The Mental Block. Doubt about one's intellectual abilities.
Destructive, pessimistic, embittered, close-minded thinking. Gloomy
thoughts and constant brooding. Getting stuck in negative ideas.
Depressive, self-destructive thoughts. Being slow on the uptake.
Inhibitions about expressing oneself verbally or boring, tiring monotony
in manner of expression. Difficulties in learning. Speech impediments,
ponderousness, or even blackouts in thinking. Dullness. Constantly has to
reassure oneself. Mercury-Uranus: Freedom of Thought The Intellectual and the SHADOW: The Know-It-All and the
Enlightener
Madman
ARCHETYPE: COMPARISON: GENERAL: Lucid ( ), wide-awake ( ), willful ( ) thinking ( ).
Unconventional ( ) perceptions ( ) and erratic ( ) thinking ( ). Unique (
) ideas ( ). Sudden ( ) insights ( ).
HARMONY: The Bright, Fast Thinker. Extremely quick intellectual grasp. Has the right idea at the right moment. May think a number of thoughts at
the same time. Witty, original, inventive, flexible. Independent, sometimes
eccentric standpoints. Unbiased, independent, progressive thinking. Full
of ideas, but without any particular love of details. Enlightened intellect.
Bursts conventional systems of thought. Speed-reader, fast-learner, highspeed talker. Constantly likes to discuss things with oneself.
DISCORD: The Scatterbrain. Eccentric leaps from one idea to another with sudden, abrupt, and hardly understandable turns. Extreme impatience,
hastiness, and exaggeration in thinking. Poor listener (particularly for
people who speak slowly), impatient student. Ingenious ideas and intrepid
assertions, but without or inadequately thinking them through. Sometimes
confused states with the feeling of being an intellectual “live wire.” Quick,
short-lived thoughts. Disconnected, inconsequential, tactless statements.
However, enormous accuracy of spontaneous ideas and solutions even in
difficult aspects. Mercury-Neptune: Search for the Vision ARCHETYPE: Mystic The Thinker and the SHADOW: The Liar and the DayDreamer COMPARISON: GENERAL: Being able to understand ( ) and express ( ) arising images ( ).
Imaginative ( ), sensitive ( ) thinking ( ). Visionary ( ) thoughts ( ).
Understanding ( ) spiritual experiences ( ). Dream ( ) interpretation ( ).
Search ( ) for the vision ( ). Hazy ( ) thoughts ( ).
HARMONY: The inspired Individual. Creative imagination, good sense in thinking, poetic fairy-tale language, artistic disposition. Strives for balance
between the rational and irrational, sobriety and intoxication. Seeks access
to what is visionary, unspoken, and concealed. Good sense of intuition for
trends and future developments.
DISCORD: The Illusionist. Thoughtlessness, nebulous thinking, or missing words. Wishful thinking and flight into fantasy. Often can't differentiate
between what is truth and lies, what is genuine and artificial. A master liar
who shamelessly lies through one's teeth. Is flooded by fantasies and may
translate the inner images into a language that isn't understandable or can
hardly be understood. Likes to forget unpleasant things. Mercury-Pluto: Inquiring Mind
ARCHETYPE: Faust and SHADOW: The Rogue and the Mephistopheles Reactionary COMPARISON: GENERAL: Analytic ( ) and profound ( ) thought ( ). Power ( ) of
persuasion ( ) and the fixed ( ) idea ( ). The magic ( ) of words ( ) or
thoughts ( ).
HARMONY: Uncompromising Thought. Good powers of observation.
Analytical, critical, probing mind. The gift and desire to convince the
surrounding world of one's own opinions and perceptions. An urge to
closely scrutinize, explore, and—without consideration of possible
consequences—relentlessly reveal everything. Sharp observation that
doesn't miss a thing.
DISCORD: The Fixed Idea. Compulsive need to talk and communicate. Dogged and obsessive thinking. Not being able to let go of a thought once
it has come into existence. Persuading others in a dogmatic manner. Brutal
openness without consideration of ethics or morals. Misuse of power.
Intolerant, underhanded, and selfish. Mercury-North Node
HARMONY: Intelligence and a good orientation on the path in life.
Scrutinizing one's own motives, critical-creative confrontations with one's
own personality, and openness in sharing thoughts with others. Capable of criticism and conflict. Perceiving and mastering the task in life with the
help of analytical, logical thought.
DISCORD: Difficulties in orientation on the path of life. The intellect finds “good reasons” to distract from the actual direction of the goal time and
again. As a result, partly stubborn and dogged defensive attitudes and
unreachable insistence on detrimental positions. Mercury-Ascendant
HARMONY: The Nimble Individual. Skillful and nimble in behavior. Enjoys contacts and communication. Diplomatic and entertaining. Intellectual
touch.
DISCORD: The Cunning Person. Difficulties, insincerity, and slyness in communication with the surrounding world. Deceives, outsmarts, and
slanders other people. Also becomes a victim. Many misunderstandings,
exaggerated criticism, and gossip. Untiring spirit of contradiction. Mercury-Medium Coeli
HARMONY: The Clever Professional. Seeks and needs a professional
environment that is mentally stimulating, offers a certain intellectual kick,
or challenges in a business sense. Can very quickly become familiar with
assumed fields of activity. Very crafty in climbing the career ladder.
DISCORD: The Sly Fox. Unlikable. Concerned with “collecting professional points” in a one-sided and cold-blooded manner. Tense relationships to
authority figures, but with colleagues as well. Sly and dishonest. Aspects of Venus
Venus-Mars: Passion
The Graceful Lady and the SHADOW: The Whore and the
Conqueror
Brute
ARCHETYPE: COMPARISON: GENERAL: Satisfying ( ) lust ( ). Fighting ( ) for what a person loves ( ).
The erotic ( ) and sexual ( ) tension between man ( ) and woman ( ).
HARMONY: The Sensual individual. Sensual-erotic powers of attraction. Carefree, natural relations with the opposite sex. Sure instinct in selecting
a partner. Experienced passion and satisfied sexuality. Good feeling for
rhythm, good taste, and the right tone.
DISCORD: The Eternally Dissatisfied. Strong sexual desire—demanding, aggressive, and tactless—yet, always unsatisfied. Permanent discord
between graceful eroticism ( ) and raw sexuality ( ). Violent, brutal,
aggressive, as well as self-destructive. Sexual insecurity and mistrust toward the opposite sex. Dramatic, emotionally-charged relationships.
Little willingness to be devoted to another person. Venus-Jupiter: Happiness
ARCHETYPE: The Artist and the SHADOW: Patron The
Pompous Fool Vain Lady and the COMPARISON: GENERAL: Trust ( ) in love ( ). Great ( ) and small ( ) happiness. Art ( )
or love ( ) as the revelation of meaning ( ). Sense ( ) of beauty ( ).
HARMONY: The Lucky Devil. Pleasant aura and good ability to make
contacts. Optimistic, popular, warmhearted, enthusiastic, charming.
Pampered by luck. Likes to give and win trust in personal contacts.
Confidence in matters of love. Artistic talent. Cheerfulness.
DISCORD: The Dissipater: Immoderate and reckless. Challenges one's good fortune, overestimating the streak of luck in the process. Goals that are set
too high, exaggerated craving for recognition, and never being satisfied
with what has been achieved. Extravagant demand to be pampered in
one's love life. Very indolent, self-indulgent, conceited, and selfish. Venus-Saturn: Commitment The Young Girl and SHADOW: The Heartless Woman and
the Wise Old Man
the Embittered Man
ARCHETYPE: COMPARISON: GENERAL: Simple ( ) beauty ( ). Enjoyment ( ) of clear forms ( ) and
structure ( ). The beauty ( ) of the bare ( )—the winter landscape. The
peace ( ) of stillness ( ). Not permitting ( ) oneself anything ( ).
HARMONY: The Dutiful Individual. Caring, responsible, faithful, and
steadfast in friendship and partnership. Sobriety and earnest in matters of
love. Seeks a mature partner. Great loyalty within the relationship. Can—
when it appears to be necessary—love in strict asceticism. Love that
blossoms under particularly difficult, modest, or impoverished
circumstances. Believing in a partner who is difficult, ill, or marked by
destiny.
DISCORD: The Unhappy Person. Difficulties making contact. Feels lonely and unloved—with and without a relationship. Mistrustful, stiff, and
usually disapproving about matters of love and toward everything
feminine. Can't believe that one is truly loved and continuously demands
new guarantees and proof of love in a relationship. Inability to enjoy, or
embitterment causes asceticism. “Falls in love” only when it's a hopeless case or becomes completely withdrawn because of fear of being rejected
or deserted in any case. Relationships with a large age difference. Extreme
outer hardening as a result of difficult, unmastered inner wounds. Lacking
in imagination, blunt, and inhibited when it comes to eroticism. Can't
really pamper oneself. Bad taste. Venus-Uranus: Love of Freedom
ARCHETYPE: Liberator The Beauty and the SHADOW: The Seductress and the
Traitor COMPARISON: GENERAL: Free ( ) love ( ), the unusual ( ) relationship ( ) with the
greatest possible, mutual free space ( ). Original ( ) taste ( ). Modern (
) art ( ).
HARMONY: The Individualistic Relationship. Original, humorous, but often noncommittal manner of making contacts. Lives and loves in an open,
tolerant relationship based on the principle of liberty and equality. Great
enjoyment of experimentation. Searches for the unique, unusual “modern”
relationship that actually exists only in Utopia. Feelings of love can only
grow on the soil of freedom. Only remains where one knows that one can
also leave. Can separate from relationships fairly easily, particularly if
they threaten freedom. DISCORD: The Person Who Can't Be Held. The fireworks of love and flash- in-the-pan relationships without commitment and a future. Enters into
relationships only halfheartedly and can't be held when things should be
close and committed. Extreme mood vacillations and changing
standpoints. Willful, gruff, and inconsiderate in a partnership. The
unusual, the new, whatever hasn't been had in love and eroticism is always
more tempting than what is familiar, matured, and steadfast.
Unpredictable, unfaithful, unscrupulous. Recklessly destroys connections
because one doesn't see their actual value. Deep disdain for all “normal”
relationships. Venus-Neptune: The Dream of Love
ARCHETYPE: The Beautiful Muse and the SHADOW: Wonderful One The Weakling and
the Drinker COMPARISON: GENERAL: Transcendental ( ) love ( ). Becoming flooded ( ) with music (
). Experiencing boundless ( ) love ( ). Achieving highest spirituality ( )
through love ( ). Being touched in one's innermost heart ( ) by art ( ).
Finding redemption ( ) through love ( ). Being inspired to artistic
creativity ( ) by the divine ( ). The dream ( ) relationship ( ).
HARMONY: Intuitive Love. Deep feeling of being soul mates and a wordless understanding of each other that borders on perfection. Great willingness
to be devoted and to sacrifice. Being upheld by the spirit of love. Delicacy
of feeling. Mystic, romantic, idealized love that leads to experiences beyond the personal. Highly refined sense of taste and art, above all in the
area of music.
DISCORD: Intoxication of Love. Insatiable, vast longing that makes a person extremely easy to seduce. “High-flying” love and intoxication of love with
subsequent bitter disillusionment. Getting lost in deceptive, misleading
ideals and confused, unclear relationships. Violently getting high with
intoxicants as aphrodisiacs. Getting off the track erotically. Being
deceived in love and/or deceiving others. Genuine encounters are avoided
as a result of lasting disappointments or an instinctive fear of
disappointments and only dwelt on in dreams. Or searching for fulfillment
in transfigured, Platonic love. Corny lapses of taste. Venus-Pluto: The Magic of Love
ARCHETYPE: Sorcerer The Enchantress and the SHADOW: The Beauty and the
Beast COMPARISON: GENERAL: Experiencing the power ( ) of love ( ). Being deeply
transformed ( ) by love ( ). The extreme ( ) relationship ( ).
HARMONY: The Extreme Relationship. Loving completely or not at all. Comprehending the relationship as a challenge, an indissoluble pact, or a karmic connection. Being willing to live through the depths with
decisiveness and fundamentally transforming oneself through the
confrontation with the partner. Intensively passionate, sexual feelings.
Irresistible aura and erotic magnetism.
DISCORD: Passionate Entanglement. Becoming entangled in an emotional, mostly unconscious power struggle. Inner compulsion to manipulate the
partner, to make the partner emotionally, sexually, and/or financially
dependent. Or to mercilessly humiliate the partner in order to ridicule and
disdain the partner afterward. Craving for control. Malicious, sly,
compulsive, jealous, insatiable. Fixed—sometimes perverse—ideas of
relationships, eroticism, and sexuality. Venus-North Node
HARMONY: Love, liking, grace, eroticism, affection, solidarity with another person, as well as a sense of beauty, appreciation of art, and good taste
unite in harmony with the priority in life and are helpful on life's path.
Feminine aura as valuable potential that should be recognized and
developed.
DISCORD: Lasting difficulties in finding inner peace because love life has an inhibiting and disruptive effect on the actual direction in life. Feelings
of being unfulfilled and great needs for affection that are difficult to
satisfy. Venus-Ascendant
HARMONY: The Graceful One. Natural, feminine, graceful appearance.
Artistic and musical interests. Diplomatic skill, charming conduct,
sociable manners, and pleasant nature.
DISCORD: The Coquette. Hollow beauty and silly, condescending conduct. Difficulties in expressing one's own feelings. Courts other people's
sympathies. Vanity. Venus-Medium Coeli
HARMONY: The Popular Person. The desire to be able to develop taste, a sense of beauty, an appreciation of art, or the joy of harmony within the
scope of the profession. Using charm and sympathy in a skilled manner to
achieve social and professional recognition.
DISCORD: The Conflict between Love and Work. Employing charm and eroticism in a questionable manner in order to advance professionally. Not
being able to unite career and public activities with the ideas and demands
of love and partnership. Aspects of Mars
Mars-Jupiter: Successfully Conquering
ARCHETYPE: The Victorious Warrior SHADOW: The Fanatic Destroyer and and the High Priest the Fundamentalist COMPARISON: GENERAL: Courage ( ) for convictions ( ). Fighting ( ) for the good ( ),
for high aims ( ), or for a just cause ( ). Striving ( ) for distant shores (
). Taking ( ) chances ( ). Developing ( ) pioneer spirit ( ). Fulfilled ( )
sexuality ( ). Acting ( ) with success ( ). Wealth( ) of energy ( ).
The Success. Optimistically, courageously, and successfully
fighting for high ideals and extensive goals. Representing one's own
convictions with commitment, straightforwardness, and openness. The gift
of bringing fighting spirit, nobility, optimism, and momentum into
harmony. Great trust in masculine power. Rich and fulfilling sexual
experiences.
HARMONY: DISCORD: The Soldier of Fortune or the Crusader Gambler or speculator who challenges fate and stakes everything on one card. Qualities such as
being a daredevil, bold, aggressive, and touchy alternate in turn with
insight and generosity. Tends toward excess and extravagance, and constantly wants more. Excessive in area of sexuality. Intolerant,
dogmatic, and unteachably ridden by fanatic convictions. Fights with holy
rage for a supposedly just cause. Plays the missionary with fire and the
sword. Permits oneself to generously violate laws, in so far as the means
justify the end.
Mars-Saturn: Controlled Energy
ARCHETYPE: The Spartan Warrior SHADOW: The Wicked Mercenary and the and His Old Teacher Grim Man Without Mercy COMPARISON: GENERAL: Consistent ( ), unyielding ( ), or grim ( ) work ( ). Fighting (
) to the (bitter) end ( ). Fighting ( ) against resistance ( ). Gritting ( )
one's teeth ( ). Cold ( ) war ( ). Controlled ( ) or suppressed ( ) urges (
). Stiffened ( ) powers ( ). Driving ( ) with the brakes on ( ).
HARMONY: The Untiring Individual. Purposeful energy. Persistently and resolutely finishes what has been started. Enormous use of force that
continues to increase when there is resistance. Reliably, decisively,
resolutely, and conscientiously carries out assignments. Can pull oneself together and hold out whenever it's necessary to do so. In the area of
sexuality, also untiring or—if required—ascetic.
DISCORD: The Frustrated Person. Great problems with aggression. Energy that is stimulated by constant resistance, making room for itself in a brutal
and bone-breaking manner. Or lasting pent-up aggressions that turn
inward as helpless anger. Fear of failure and inability. Sullenness, desire
for revenge, cold-blooded rage, inner blocks and tensions. Problems with
the sex drive and fear of impotence. Sexual inhibitions, guilt about sex, or
forced, violent forms of sexuality.
Mars-Uranus: The Fight for Freedom
ARCHETYPE: The Rebel and SHADOW: the Revolutionary The “Modern” Warrior and the
Anonymous Spirit of Technology COMPARISON: GENERAL: Abrupt ( ) discharge of energy ( ). Erratic ( ), surprising ( ),
split-second ( ) actions ( ). Fighting ( ) for freedom ( ) and utopia ( ).
Freedom ( ) of will ( ). Free ( ) sexuality ( ) Excited ( ) by high
speeds ( ).
HARMONY: The Lightning Flash. Unusual reaction speed. Individual action with an enjoyment of decision-making, guided by superb intuition.
Fighting for freedom. Pioneer in search for new paths and new goals in unknown regions. Likes to make use of the right moment. Values sexual
freedom, is easy to get a response from, and quickly excited.
DISCORD: The Uncontrolled Person. Sudden, surprising energy and
aggressive eruptions (runaway horses). Irritable, rebellious, defends
oneself against every standard and any limitations, with violence if
necessary. Overreactions, violent fits of temper, extremely nervous and
impatient, in danger of having accidents. Loves the thrill of speeding and
the titillation of everything dangerous.
Mars-Neptune: Spiritual Energies
ARCHETYPE: The Spiritual Warrior and SHADOW: The Drunken Pirate
His Guardian Angel
and the Poisoner
COMPARISON: GENERAL: Guided by higher power( ) in all actions ( ). A fist ( ) in the
water( ) The shot ( ) of poison( ) Fighting ( ) with spiritual ( )
weapons ( ) or non-violently in another way ( ). Conquers ( ) by
yielding ( ). Dissolving( ) aggressions ( ). Striving ( ) for what is
boundless ( ). HARMONY: The Somnambulist. Acting with uncanny certainty. Feels when the right moment has come or acts in the right way on the basis of
unconscious inspiration (guardian angel aspect). Can work with spiritual
energies as a healer and therapist, but also as an artist. May turn fantasies
and visions into reality. Strong sexual fantasies and great deal of intuitive
understanding. Interested in spiritual forms of sexuality (Tao, Tantra) or
complete spiritualization of sexual energies.
DISCORD: Mr. or Ms. Wishy-Washy. Energies that are misguided or quickly fizzle out. Feelings of weakness and helplessness. Lets oneself drift
without a goal and doesn't know what one really wants. In extreme cases,
danger of neglect, deception, criminality, intoxication, and addiction.
Aggressions are only expressed in an indirect manner. Fights by giving
other people a guilty conscience as a victim or helpless person, or by
provoking sympathy in others. Boundless sexual fantasies. Tends toward
debauchery, as well as impotence or sexual encounters in a state of
intoxication. Sometimes confused about one's own sexual identity. Can be
seduced. May be unfaithful or victim of partner's unfaithfulness.
Mars-Pluto: Tremendous Power
The Invincible Warrior SHADOW: The Possessed Torturer
and His Invisible Power
and the Black Magician
ARCHETYPE: COMPARISON: GENERAL: The courage ( ) for deep-reaching transformation( ). Greed (
) for power ( ) and power( ) struggles ( ). Sexual ( ) possession( ).
Uncanny( ), irresistible( ), or dark ( ) forces ( ).
HARMONY: Mark the Knife. Development of immense, usually invisible strengths that originate in a deep energy of the soul. Strong, secretive, and
irresistible aura. Being able to compel others without showing any
recognizable outer signs of doing so. Spooky, invincible, decisive,
courageous, and fascinating. Strong sexual energies and deep passion.
Total intensity. All or nothing.
DISCORD: The Sadist. Inconsiderate, unconditional, fanatic assertion of
one's own will. Rigorous, bestial desire for revenge when rejection has
been suffered. Extremely instinctive and possessed by sexual obsessions.
Seeks total lust. Sexuality as the venue for power struggles. Loves
(violent) sexual humiliations. As a result of social ostracism of this topic,
the aspect is frequently lived out on a completely unconscious level so
that it is only expressed in unconscious acts of sadism while the conscious
individual behaves in an emphatically reserved, practically harmless
manner and is therefore all the more afraid of violence.
Mars-North Node
HARMONY: Bold, aggressive basic attitude that is confident of victory in mastering the true tasks in life. Works actively, hard, and successfully on
one's goals. When it is important, one will fight for self and one's cause in
a committed manner.
DISCORD: Great inner tensions and frustrations because the fighting
strength, the will to conquer, as well as the driving force and the sexual
desire distract from one's life priorities instead of striving toward them.
Danger of creating artificial foe images and tendency toward
disproportionate actions and overreactions as a result of suppressed
aggressions. Mars-Ascendant
HARMONY: The Individual on the Offensive. Knows how to clearly express will and assert oneself. Is very quick in matters of taking care of and
asserting oneself.
DISCORD: The Crafty Person. Aggressive but inhibited character. Can't naturally and directly express one's energies. Either overheated behavior
or depressed and cringing. Sometimes sly, underhanded behavior or
constant heated confrontations with the surrounding world. Possibility of
self-destructive tendencies.
Mars-Medium Coeli
HARMONY: The Live Wire. Knows how to purposefully apply one's energies in professional life. Is quite willing to accept challenges and prove powers
of assertion and willingness to engage in conflicts.
DISCORD: The Center of the Storm. Creates many problems for oneself and others at work through senseless actions, impatience, or unnecessary
quarreling. Erratic and lacking in conscious goals in one's professional
life. Troublemaker. Aspects of Jupiter
Jupiter-Saturn: Value of the Time-Tested
ARCHETYPE: The High Priest and the SHADOW: The Pharisee and the
Patriarch or Hermit
Embittered Man
COMPARISON: GENERAL: Stable ( ), sustained ( ) growth ( ). Lasting ( ) values ( ).
Strictness ( ) of belief ( ). Firmness ( ) of faith ( ). Boundaries ( ) of
growth ( ). Lasting ( ) convictions ( ).
HARMONY: The Tenacious Individual. Good mixture of optimism and a sense of reality. Clear, steadfast convictions, stamina, patience, and
endurance. Deep trust in the rhythmic alternation of growing and cutting
back. Slow, but steady growth.
DISCORD: The Unhappy Person. Constantly torn back and forth between: optimism and pessimism, trust and mistrust, splendor and modesty,
generosity and stinginess, joy of life and bitterness, fulfillment and
renunciation, gain and loss, living faith and dead ritual. Strong emotional
tensions as a result of many situations of change. Tends toward a more
pessimistic attitude toward life. Jupiter-Uranus: The Ideal of Freedom
ARCHETYPE: The High Priest and SHADOW: The Self-Righteous Man and the Reformer the Anarchist COMPARISON: GENERAL: Sudden ( ) growth ( ). Good ( ), surprising realizations ( )
Trust ( ) in the future ( ). Strokes ( ) of luck ( ). Ideals ( ) of freedom (
). The individual ( ) meaning of life ( ). The individual ( ) trip ( ).
Religious ( ) freedom ( )
HARMONY: The Free Spirit. Spontaneous, revolutionary insights.
Optimistic farsightedness and good sense for future developments.
Inventive. Advocate of freedom of religion and opinion. Seeks new values
and the very personal meaning in life. Strives for free development of
individuality. Courage to have one's own ideals.
DISCORD: The Pigheaded. The Conviction-Changer. Protest and “anti”
attitude toward social values (“down with…” mentality). Problems with
institutions, particularly the Church. Constantly changing. New goals and
eccentric convictions. Exaggerated willfulness. Ultramodern theses. Very
much concerned with an image of being “original.”
Jupiter-Neptune: Revealed Meaning ARCHETYPE: The High SHADOW: The Self-Righteous Man and the
Priest and the Mystic
Crackpot, Dreamer, or Fantasist
COMPARISON: GENERAL: Highest( ) happiness ( ) or apparent ( ) luck ( ). Being guided
( ) on trips ( ). The hypocrite (
). Trusting ( ) one's guardian angel(
).
HARMONY: The Dancing Dervish. Finding the meaning of life in a mystic experience or being found by meaning. Kindness and compassion.
Genuine altruism, highest ideals, true spirituality, harmonious connection
of faith and inspiration, good visionary gifts. Trance and illumination.
Fine sense for happiness.
DISCORD: The Religious Crackpot. Feels oneself to be the chosen one, illuminated and wise. Seduces others or becomes the victim of peculiar
sects, strange ideologies, and crackpot views of the world. Religious
delusions. Victim of own dream images and yearnings. Intoxication.
Jupiter-Pluto: Alchemical Black Gold
ARCHETYPE: The High Priest and the SHADOW: Sorcerer
COMPARISON: The Smug Man and the
Power Person GENERAL: Shamanistic( ) view of the world ( ). Trust ( ) in the archaic
elemental forces ( ) and the wealth ( ) of the depths ( ). The deepreaching transformation( ) for the better ( ).
HARMONY: The Shaman. Ability for psychological and spiritual
transformation and renewal. Strong convictions and great powers of
persuasion. Healing power. Confidence in powers that renew themselves.
Having a sense of everything deep and profound.
DISCORD: The Demagogue. Glorification of power, misuse of power, ruling over others, and wanting to convince and seduce. Fanaticism and
arrogance. Glorification of a fixed idea. Obsessive-compulsive neurotic.
Jupiter-North Node
HARMONY: Trust in one's own abilities promotes success in the realization of the tasks in life, which are simultaneously connected with a deep
experience of meaning. Magnanimity, optimism, happiness, and
fulfillment on the path in life.
DISCORD: The search for meaning and priorities in life appear to be
opposed to each other. Strong, inner dissatisfaction and exaggerated,
unrealistic attitude of expectation. Often wants to wrest more from life
than is possible. Is quick to ignore negative things in life. Jupiter-Ascendant
HARMONY: Trusting and Being Trusted. Happiness aspect. Generous,
optimistic, enthusiastic, open, vital, humane, freedom-loving, liberal.
Radiates a natural type of dignity and authority. Strives for ideals.
DISCORD: The Conceited Person, the Hypocrite. Exaggerated behavior. Overestimates oneself and tends toward megalomania. Often tries to do
more than can ever be accomplished. Likes to pretend. Doesn't tolerate
criticism and is quickly insulted.
Jupiter-Medium Coeli
HARMONY: Being Supported. Good chances for advancement, frequently thanks to good contacts and helpful support. Success and luck in the
realization of (professional) objectives. Possible popularity. Claim to
leadership and leadership qualities.
DISCORD: The High-Flier. Taking steps that are too large on the way up or in the realization of life's goals. As a result, frequently stressed.
Exaggerated striving for power, recognition, and influence. Aspects of Saturn
Saturn-Uranus: Authority Conflicts
ARCHETYPE: The Venerable Old Man and SHADOW: The Grouch and the the Wise Fool Anarchist COMPARISON: GENERAL: Breaking through ( ) and renewing ( ) old structures ( ).
Violating ( ) laws ( ). The limits ( ) of freedom ( ) Going beyond ( )
the scope ( ). The sudden ( ) end ( ). Restriction ( ) of freedom ( ).
HARMONY: The Framework of Freedom. Balance between individual
freedom and the laws governing public welfare. Knows how to develop
and live out6 an optimal measure of freedom within the set and lawful
framework. Finds the right mixture between traditional values and
structures and modern developments and forms.
DISCORD: The Gagged Person or the Demolition Charge. Bitter conflict between freedom and norms, between old and new. During certain phases,
experiences oneself as unfairly gagged or limits oneself in order to outrageously kick over the traces in other phases. Then lives one's
freedom in such a compulsive manner that it becomes a type of unfreedom
as a result. Must free oneself from every type of limitation—even those
that are just supposed—in order to prove independence at all times. Often
filled with new ideas, but insecure, fearful, or fickle about actually
translating them into action.
Saturn-Neptune: Flowing Boundaries
ARCHETYPE: The Graying Hermit SHADOW: The Embittered Enemy of Life and the Blind Seer and Dread Personified COMPARISON: GENERAI.: Unclear ( ), flowing ( ), invisible ( ) boundaries ( ).
Collecting ( ) spiritual ( ) experiences. Sensing ( ) or being drawn ( )
beyond one's own borders ( ). Dissolving ( ) old patterns ( ). Boundaries
( ) of longing ( ). Becoming sober ( ) after intoxication ( ).
HARMONY: Flexibility. Liveliness. Lives in the flow of life in harmony with the natural rhythms, which produce solid structures time and again,
dissolve, and then connect to make new structures (water—ice). Can
abandon oneself to spiritual, mystic, and intoxicating experiences without
losing oneself. DISCORD: Weakness. Fear. Phobia. Has great difficulties in setting
boundaries and is easily deluged by other people's expectations or
inexplicable phenomena. Can't get solid ground under one's feet.
Everything that appears to promise security disappears sooner or later.
Even the most solid of structures dissolve. In the reverse case (very strong
), excessive hardening occurs along with the appearance of having
everything under control. The harder the facade, the more intensely it is
undermined by inexplicable fears and phobias.
Saturn-Pluto: Limits of Power
ARCHETYPE: The Wise Old Man and SHADOW: The Embittered Man and the Powerful Shaman the Black Magician COMPARISON: GENERAL: Lasting ( ), extensive transformation ( ) of solid structures ( ).
Experiences of departure ( ) that lead to deep-reaching renewal ( ). The
limits ( ) of power( )
HARMONY: Seeing the Light.5 Overcoming old structures in favor of a deeper truth. Knowledge about the times of departure and renewal.
Willingness to steadily pass through crises and experiences of
transformation.
DISCORD: The Encrustation. Fear of losing control (over oneself).
Hardened and encrusted power structures. Compulsive insistence on what is old and aged or—to the contrary—virtually obsessive destruction of
conventional, long-standing values. Massive problems with authority.
Saturn-North Node
HARMONY: Concentrates on the independent mastering of one's tasks in life. Consistent, responsible, and untiring on life's path. Has high
standards and places ambitious demands on oneself. Grows beyond one's
own limitations.
DISCORD: Pessimistic to hopeless attitude in view of the tasks in life. Experiences oneself as completely blocked and afraid to pass over the
threshold to becoming oneself. Often has the impression that duties and
other burdens don't permit one to come to what's important. Easily falls
into old patterns that one thought one had already overcome. Frequently
places excessive demands on oneself.
Saturn-Ascendant
HARMONY: The Disciplined Person. Always behaves in a calm, polite, sometimes even formal manner. Tends to draw boundaries and respect
other people's boundaries. Serious, reliable, disciplined, and tenacious.
DISCORD: The Mistrusting Individual. Reserved, inhibited, and fearful.
Judges everything in a negative, pessimistic, or at least problematic
manner. Stands in one's own way.
Saturn-Medium Coeli
HARMONY: The Career Ladder. Tends to climb the career ladder slowly but surely, step by step. Great stamina, even in phases of difficulties. Wants to
achieve everything out of and with one's own power. DISCORD: The Occupational Block. Inhibitions in the area of work, as well as inhibitions and obstacles when it comes to realizing one's objectives.
Great doubts and feelings of inferiority in view of professional
achievement. Negative attitude of expectancy. Can't let oneself be helped
by others at all or has a hard time doing so. Fear of public appearances.
Prefers to stay in the background. Aspects of Uranus
The aspects Uranus enters into with the planets that move slowly usually
exist for many years at a time. This is why they have less to say about the
individual than the generation coming into the world during this period of
time. However, there is always an individual meaning for these aspects
when personal planets are included in the aspect or this generational
aspect is part of a major configuration in the horoscope.
Uranus-Neptune: The Inspiration
ARCHETYPE: Seer The Liberator and the SHADOW: The
Crackpot Lunatic and the COMPARISON: GENERAL: Dissolution( ) of individual limitations ( ) The vision ( ) that
comes like a lightning flash ( )
HARMONY: Lucid Dreams. Feeling oneself called to fulfill a special, very personal vision. Strong intuition. Dreaming of “unreal” experiences,
visions, or mystic experiences of sudden, crystal-clear, lucid certainty.
Illumination. DISCORD: Head in the Clouds. Unclear concepts of individuality.
Propagating unrealistic inventions or solutions to problems. Running after
airy-fairy ideas. Losing oneself in the chaos of unconscious longings.
Uranus-Pluto: The Metamorphosis
ARCHETYPE: The Rebel and the SHADOW: The Eccentric and the
Powerful Person
Power of Darkness
COMPARISON: GENERAL: Sudden ( ) deep-reaching changes ( ). Rebellion ( ) against
dependence ( ) and suppression Bursting ( ) the bonds ).
HARMONY: Desire for Freedom. Powerful urge for individual freedom. Sudden perceptions and insights into power structures or collective
shadow areas. Rigorous upheavals. Liberation movements.
DISCORD: The Despot. Willful, irresponsible misuse of power for
questionable, eccentric goals. Extreme inner tension and vacillations
between highest heights and deepest depths, between total freedom and
complete constraint.
Uranus-North Node
HARMONY: Can break with traditional systems without any difficulty in order to put ideas into practice in an original manner and master tasks in life. The development of one's own individuality combines with the
priority in life.
DISCORD: Lives willfully, according to one's own laws. At the same time, always senses a painful gap between individual striving, the need for
independence and freedom, and the actual tasks in life. Has intense
problems with opening up in a committed way to what is truly essential.
Uranus-Ascendant
HARMONY: The Alert Individual. Very lively, open to everything new,
crazy, and original. Always and quickly willing to adapt. Willful,
independent character. Unusual aura and very individual behavior.
DISCORD: The Mulish Person. Unpredictable behavior. Subject to constant upheavals in life. Therefore often unreliable. Restless, not very
cooperative, hopelessly headstrong, and not capable of adapting at all.
Uranus-Medium Coeli
HARMONY: The Individualist. Seeks, develops, and strives for individual goal in life. Needs a great deal of freedom, particularly on the professional
path of life. Can be committed to humanistic ideals within the scope of
working life.
DISCORD: The Nonconformist. Individual striving for freedom and the
necessity of occupational life appear incompatible with each other,
resulting in much rebellion, opposition, and conflict. Always searches for
new goals. Isn't good at adapting and accepting universally valid rules. Aspects of Neptune
The aspects that Neptune enters into with Pluto usually exist for many
years at a time. This is why they have less to say about the individual than
the generation coming into the world during this period of time. However,
there is always an individual meaning for these aspects when personal
planets are included in the aspect or this generational aspect is part of a
major configuration in the horoscope.
Neptune-Pluto: Spiritual Power
ARCHETYPE: The Mystic and the Shaman SHADOW: The Addict and the Devil COMPARISON: GENERAL: Dissolution ( ) of power structures ( ). Demagogically ( )
unleashed ( ) mass ( ) currents ( ). Spiritual ( ) power ( ).
HARMONY: Powers of the Soul. Sensitive and mediumistic gift in the
development and application of original powers of healing. The ability to
invisibly guide others. Being inspired from forces out of the depths.
DISCORD: Possession. Getting caught in the net of false, pseudo-spiritual teachings. The danger of not being able to resist the pull into the depths
and become unstable, addicted, and dependent. Being helplessly flooded and possessed by archaic forces. Letting oneself be enticed into the misuse
of power and/or becoming the victim of power oneself.
Neptune-North Node
HARMONY: Unerringly walks one's path in life and is guided by an
invisible hand in the mastering of the life's tasks. Mature spirituality as
part of the priority in life.
DISCORD: Nebulous concepts of life's priority or a numb feeling for the essential direction in life. Easy to distract from what is important. Easy to
seduce. Also afraid of not being able to see it through or of all goals
dissolving into nothingness.
Neptune-Ascendant
HARMONY: The Compassionate Person. Immediately senses outer
impressions and moods. Extremely intuitive, empathizing, compassionate,
sensitive, and vulnerable. Goes through life with uncanny certainty and
knows that one is guided.
DISCORD: The Blur. Difficulty in defining boundaries and asserting oneself. Unable to strive for a specific goal in a concrete manner. Easy to
manipulate and seduce. Tendency toward secrecy and deceit. Dubious
personality. Frequent feelings of being lost without solid ground under
one's feet. Often absent-minded and starry-eyed. Becomes easily
dependent on things.
Neptune-Medium Coeli
HARMONY: The Guided One. Is guided by a guardian angel in choice of work and on professional path. Knows how to subtly lead other people as
well. Gift for artistic and therapeutic professions, as well as assignments
in the area of media. DISCORD: The Victim. Has no clear goals in life, loses them time and again in the haze, or is continuously drawn away from goals and made the
victim of seductions, intrigues, or other machinations on the path in life—
and particularly at work. Aspects of Pluto
Pluto-North Node
HARMONY: Strong powers of fascination that draw one to the actual
priority in life. Experiences of power and helplessness, deep-reaching
experiences of purification, and sometimes painful transformations and
encounters with one's shadow prove to be helpful and essential in
completing tasks in life…
DISCORD: Vehement inner tensions and feelings of possession because strong forces pull or urge in another direction than the priority in life. The
feeling of being enslaved to false conceptions.
Pluto-Ascendant
HARMONY: The Hypnotist. Capable of mobilizing enormous powers of the soul and thereby controlling, guiding, or influencing other people. Strongwilled, assertive, resolute. Charismatic aura. Able and willing to
accompany other people through the crises and depths of life.
DISCORD: The Shady Character. Difficulty in dealing with one's own
striving for power and sexual energies. Has an effect of being dark,
mysterious, and sometimes subdued and in low spirits. Dominating,
overbearing conduct. Craving for control and misuse of power.
Pluto-Medium Coeli
HARMONY: The High-Powered Person. Can activate remarkable energies of the soul—which have the effect of true magical forces in some cases—in
order to achieve one's goal in life or a desired occupational position.
Willingness to give up old positions and start something completely new.
Leadership qualities. The Power Struggle. The path in life—particularly the
professional path—continuously leads to power struggles, which can
result in loss of power and experiences of helplessness. But also a purely
selfish, questionable use of power and the desire to want to defeat other
people.
DISCORD: An ILLUSTRATED KEY
to the HOROSCOPE An Illustrated Key to the Horoscope
In order to experience the many levels of the horoscope in a graphic
manner, it can be very stimulating to have all the planets that are
connected with each other become figures. The following table provides
some pictorial classifications.
In keeping with this, the astrological constellation of Sun ( ) in Taurus (
) in the 5th house in a square to Saturn ( ) in Leo ( ) in the 8th house
would read as follows:
The King from the tribe of the Enjoyers stands in the spotlight.
He isn't at all compatible with the Panicmonger from the tribe
of the Greatest, who in turn stands in the underground.
If there is also a sextile from Jupiter ( ) in Cancer ( ) in the 7th house:
He receives support through the Aristocrat from the tribe of the
Helpers, who stands in the World of Partnership.
If the Sun ( ) also forms a conjunction with Mercury ( ) in Gemini ( )
in the 5th house:
On his side of the stage stands the Local Guide from the tribe
of the Smarties.
This type of interpretation may help you better comprehend aspects that
are complicated and difficult to understand. These characters From the tribe of Are in or on the Conjunction = At his/her side stands…
Sextile = He/She receives support through…
Trine = He/She is friends with… These characters From the tribe of Are in or on the Opposition = His/Her challenging opponent (counterbalance) is…
Square = He/She doesn't get along at all with…
Quincunx = He/She tends to have a difficult relationship with… The ASTROLOGICAL
PICTURE of the WORLD The Astrological Picture of the World
The astrological picture of the world is geocentric, which means it places
the Earth at the center and describes the movement of the stars as
portrayed for our eyes and our emotional experience.
This is an anachronistic absurdity only for those who see in astrology
a theory of planetary influences that can be more or less cleverly explained
in a mechanical manner. If, instead, we see the movements of the heavens
as an enormous and extremely differentiated cosmic clock that shows us
what time it is on Earth, then the geocentric perspective is just as accurate
as a heliocentric viewpoint.
The abundance of stars in the heavens that appear not to move at all
are called the fixed stars (for example, the seven stars in the Big Dipper) in
contrast to the few planets, of which seven are visible to the human eye
(Sun, Moon, Mercury, Venus, Mars, Jupiter, and Saturn) and three
additional planets that were first discovered in the age of technology
(Uranus, Neptune, and Pluto). Apart from the comets, shooting stars, and
today's satellites, these ten bodies are the only things that do not move
zigzag within the picture of the heavens but systematically along an orbital
path, the ecliptic. This circular path has fascinated humanity since time
immemorial. It was once considered the celestial dam and the planets were
seen as gods who traveled along this street. The Moon, the fastest moving,
requires 28 days to wander through this circular path and thereby forms
the foundation from the calculation of the months, while the Sun passes
through the ecliptic in 365 days and, as a result, determines the length of a
year even today. Figure 5. The world system according to Ptolemy from The Atlas of
Cellarius. published in 1708.
There are a total of three different movements of the heavens that
astrology records:
1. The daily rotation of all the stars of the heavens around the Earth,
from which the Ascendant results, among other things.
Just as the Sun rises in the east every day, this is where the Big
Dipper, Orion, and all the other constellations and planets also rise and
wander across the sky to the western horizon. In the old way of conceiving
things, it was said that: they travel with or through the rotation of the sky
across the midheavens to set in the west.
2. The movement of the planets and luminaries in the heavens (for
example, the annual journey of the Sun from the northern to the southern
Tropic and back), which results in the sign of the zodiac, among other
things.
The movement of the planets along the ecliptic becomes easier to
visualize if we imagine that we are watching the sunset on the West Coast.
At the same place where the Sun dips into the water, the Moon and the
planets will also set sooner or later. This means they are on the same path.
If we observe this process for a number of days in a row, we can determine
that the sunset shifts a bit further every day: to the north up to the time of the summer solstice and then to the south until the time of the winter
solstice. The north-south shift results from the slanted position of the
planet path in comparison to the Equator. Figure 6. The seasons.
3. The very slow forward movement of the fixed-star heavens,
whereby a new age begins every 2160 years. This movement cannot be
perceived in the course of one human life without technical assistance.
However, the Babylonians already knew about it more than 5,000 years
ago.
The path through which the planets travel is the zodiac, the heart of
astrology. The zodiac was divided into twelve equal sections by the
Babylonians and named according to the constellations that formed the
background of the respective section of the path along the Sun's orbit. The
fixed-star formation that provides its name is called the constellation and
the corresponding section of the path of the Sun's orbit is the sign of the
zodiac. The background for the fixed-star heavens has moved forward in
the meantime so that many people no longer understand why the section of
the path was given its name. Yet, they have only lost their “name-giver”
and not their significance for the earthly rhythms. The spring equinox
continues to take place whenever the Sun enters the sign of Aries, no
matter whether the fixed-star formation behind it is the constellation
Pisces or Aquarius. Astrology observes the annual orbit of the Sun and not
the fixed-star heavens! Figure 7. Zodiac in the Age of Aries. Constellations and signs of the zodiac are identical. The zodiac formed by this orbit of the Sun serves as the ground map
in determining where which planets are at a certain time. A horoscope is
the description of these planetary positions, seen at a certain point in time
from a specific place. Figure 8. Zodiac at the end of the Age of Pisces. Constellations
unchanged, but signs of the zodiac have moved forward. Glossary of Astrological Terms
AIR SIGNS: The three signs that belong to the air element. Libra (cardinal),
Aquarius (fixed), and Gemini (mutable).
ASCENDANT: The sign of the zodiac which rises on the eastern horizon at
the time of birth. At the time of sunrise, the sign of the position of the
Sun (the sign of the zodiac) is identical with the Ascendant. However, at
sunset the Ascendant is the sign opposing that of the astrological sign.
ASPECTS: Significant distances between the individual planets themselves
and with the system of axes points. The significant distances are those
resulting from dividing the zodiac by the numbers 1 through 10 into
sections). Major aspects are those divided by the numbers 1, 2, 3, Júpiter and
6. This creates the following aspects: conjunction 0°, opposition 180°.
trine 120°. square 90°. and sextile 60°. Minor aspects are calculated by
dividing by 5, 7, 8, Mercúrio , and 10 (quintile 12°. septile 51°, octile = semisquare 45°. nonile 40°. decile 36”), and dividing the major aspects in
half (semi-square 45°. sesquisquare 135°. semi-sextile 30°) as well as
the distance of 150° = quincunx. The harmonic theory, which divides
these aspects into harmonic and disharmonious, corresponds with that
of music theory.
BASIC HOROSCOPE: Map of the heavens at the time a person is born, as
seen from the place of birth. (Also: birth chart, radix, cosmogram).
CHARACTERISTICS: Hot, cold, dry, and wet are the four characteristics,
in various combinations, traditionally assigned to the individual signs.
CONSTELLATIONS: The grouping of the fixed stars (Big Dipper, Orion,
Taurus, etc.) of which twelve, in differing positions along the expanse of
the Sun's annual orbit, gave their names to the twelve sections of this
path. In astrology, it is not the constellations that are relevant, but rather
the signs of the zodiac that were named after them.
CUSPS: The beginning of an astrological house, starting with the
Ascendant and moving counterclockwise. Since houses are the strongest at their beginning and not their calculated center, astrology places great
value on the beginning of a house.
DESCENDANT: The sign that lies opposite the Ascendant and on the
western horizon at the time of birth.
DETRIMENT: See Ruler.
DIGNITY: See Ruler.
DOMICILE: We use the word DIGNITY to indicate this position.
DRAGON'S HEAD: See Moon's Node.
EARTH SIGNS: The three signs corresponding to the earth element:
Capricorn (cardinal), Taurus (fixed), and Virgo (mutable).
ECLIPTIC: The apparent orbit of the Sun and all the planets around Earth:
the celestial circle that the Sun, as seen from the Earth, seems to follow
within the span of a year.
ELEMENT: The twelve signs of the zodiac reflect three qualities in each of
the four elements in the form of fire. air. earth, and water signs.
EPHEMERIDES: Astronomically calculated tables with a geocentric
perspective. Contain the orbits of the planets, from which the position of
each planet can be seen (at any time).
EXALTED: See Ruler.
FALL: See Ruler.
FIELDS: Same meaning as Houses.
FIRE SIGNS: The three signs assigned to the fire element: Aries (cardinal),
Leo (fixed), and Sagittarius (mutable).
FIXED STARS; Stars that seem to be fixed to the “vault of heaven.” They
form some ninety constellations, such as the Great Bear, or Orion, and, or course, those constellations that gave their name to the so-called “star
signs.” They move with the heavens, so as the vault turns they rise in
the East and set in the West, Human beings cannot see the fixed stars or
constellations move (while we can, for example, watch Venus). Almost
every star that we can see is a fixed star as there are only 10 wandering
stars, the so-called “planets” (including the two luminaries) that move
slowly through the sea of stars.
GENDER: The twelve signs of the zodiac are differentiated into six
masculine (active, dominating) and six feminine (passive, receptive),
which consistently alternate with each other: Aries = masculine, Taurus
= feminine, Gemini = masculine, etc.
GEOCENTRIC: The most commonly held view in astrology, regarding the
position of the observer on Earth as center of the cosmos, in contrast to
the heliocentric view of the world.
HELIOCENTRIC: The view of the universe, according to modern
knowledge, with the Sun as the center of our planetary system.
HOROSCOPE: Schematic representation of the map of the heavens at a
particular time (at birth or another event). It contains the representation
of the luminaries (Sun and Moon) and the eight planets viewed from the
place of the event. The horoscope simultaneously records two
movements of heavenly bodies:
1. the movement of the planets and luminaries through the zodiac
2. the movement of the zodiac around Earth.
HOUSES: The four quadrants which result from the system of axes are each
subdivided into three fields. The calculation of the system of axes is
identical in almost all the various schools of astrology, but sometimes
the method of subdividing differs (see House Systems). The resulting
twelve houses correspond with the twelve signs of the zodiac, but they
are not identical. This means that the 1st house corresponds with the
sign Aries (the first sign of the zodiac), the 2nd house with the sign
Taurus (the second sign of the zodiac), etc. HOUSE SYSTEMS: The way of dividing the houses varies according to the
method used. The best-known are the Koch (according to DR.
WALTER KOCH), Placidean (according to PLACIDUS DE TITUS),
Campanus (according to GIOVANNI CAMPANI), Regiomontanus
(according to JOHANNES MÜLLER) and the Equal House method.
IMUM COELI: The Lowest Heavens (see System of Axes), 4th house.
LEVELS OF MEANING: Simply said, the various horoscope factors have
the following correlations: the planets show which area of the
personality is addressed, the astrological signs show how and the houses
show where this theme is lived out, while the aspects express the
tensions and harmonies among the various areas.
MEDIUM COELI: Midheaven (see System of Axes), the Midheaven.
MOON'S NODE: The astronomically determined intersection of the Moon's
orbit with the Sun's orbit, which deviate from each other by 5- Mercúrio o The
two intersecting points located opposite each other in the zodiac arc
differentiated as Ascending (North) and Descending (South) Moon's
Nodes. If the Sun and Moon are positioned together at one of these
nodes, there is a solar eclipse. If they arc simultaneously at the opposing
point, there is an eclipse of the Moon. The Moon's Nodes are also called
Dragon's Head and Dragon's Tail and are taken into special
consideration in Karmic Astrology.
ORB: The permitted tolerance of deviation in the calculation of aspects.
The orbs are between Io and 10a, according to the type of aspect and the
school of astrology.
PLANETS: The eight planets and the Sun and Moon move along the
ecliptic, in comparison to the immovable fixed stars, in the picture of
the heavens. The seven visible to the naked eye are known as the
classics (Sun, Moon, Mercury, Venus, Mars, Jupiter, Saturn). In
addition, there are the planets discovered in the last 200 years: Uranus,
Neptune, and Pluto. PRECESSION: The slow advancement of the fixed-star heavens through
the movement of Earth's axis. Therefore, the constellations which gave
the signs of the zodiac their names move another Io every 72 years. The
result is the advancement of the firmament for the length of an
astrological sign (30°) every 2160 years, which astrology connects with
the emergence of a new era. After the passing of the “Platonic Year”—
which is 25,850 years—the fixed-star heavens have again advanced so
far that the Signs of the zodiac and the constellations are positioned
“behind each other.” Because astrology only concerns itself the with
signs of the zodiac and sees the constellations as just the original donors
of the names, precession is not important for the horoscope based on
“Western Astrology.”
QUALITIES: Within the four elements, astrology differentiates three
qualities: cardinal (impulse-giving), fixed (impulse-receiving), and
mutable (flexible).
REGENT: See Ruler.
RETROGRADE: Since the planets move along the path of the ecliptic, their
speed, as seen from Earth, differs according to whether they are on the
long side of the ecliptic or close to the tip. Since Earth also moves along
such an ecliptic orbit, it is sometimes “faster” than another planet,
which makes an impression of the planet moving backwards. Especially
in Karmic Astrology this phenomenon is of considerable importance.
RULER: Each astrological sign and house is governed by at least one planet
(or body). The planet is said to rule the sign or house. In the opposing
sign and/or house, the planet is in its detriment. There are also
exaltations, which are the signs/houses where the planet is dignified and
very positively placed. In the opposing sign it is said to be in its fall.
The neutral positions, those other than these four, are said to be in
peregrine. This tells us the strengths and weaknesses of the individual
planet positions. If the planet is in the sign/house in which it rules, it is
dignified and is therefore very strongly positioned. This is also true for
its exaltation. If the planet is in detriment or fall, its typical
characteristics can only develop unconventionally and with difficulty.
This perspective is primarily important for interpretation of the aspects when desiring to find out which planets are stronger or weaker
according to the corresponding aspects.
SIGN OF THE ZODIAC: A) Astrological name for the twelve equal
sections (each 30°) of the Sun's orbit through the zodiac, named after
the constellations (which they were originally positioned behind, but are
no longer identical with, because of precession). B) Customary, though
not quite precise names for the signs in which the Sun is positioned at
the time of birth.
SYSTEM OF AXES: The horoscope is divided into two main axes: the
East-West horizon axis and the Imum Coeli-Medium Coeli axis (noon
and midnight points of the Sun). The four intersections that the system
of axes and zodiac form are: the Ascendant (AC) on the eastern horizon,
the Descendant (DC) on the western horizon, the Medium Coeli (MC)
at the noon point, and the lmum Coeli (IC) at the midnight point.
TEMPERAMENT: The classic Greek teaching of the four basic
temperaments: choleric, sanguine, phlegmatic, and melancholic have
their parallels in the four classic elements of fire, air, water, and earth,
and the signs of the zodiac that correspond to them.
WATER SIGNS: The three signs belonging to the water element. Cancer
(cardinal), Scorpio, (fixed), and Pisces (mutable).
ZODIAC: The path of 16° on each side of the ecliptic through which the
Sun, Moon, and all the planets travel. The zodiac is divided into twelve
signs, each having 30°. Notes
1. In old pictures of the zodiac, Aries is portrayed as the leading ram with its head thrown back to
look at the herd following him. Symbol of horn-wearing Moses, the leader of his tribe.
2. This famous observation comes from Arthur Schopenhauer, who had a Virgo Ascendant and
stayed single all his life.
3. Demosthenes was a great Greek rhetorician who had a speech impediment during his childhood.
He practiced incessantly by shouting at the surf with a pebble on his tongue until he taught
himself to articulate clearly and understandably. Júpiter . “Eureka” was Archimedes' joyful cry as he discovered a law of physics, with which he could track
down coin counterfeiters, coincidentally while in the bathtub. In translation “Eureka” means: “I
have (found) it” and has been an expression for surprising realization since that time.
5. The Bible reports that Saul, one of the biggest persecutors of Christians, was on the path to
Damascus when he had a vision of Christ that caused him to become blind for three days and
three nights. Afterward, he was transformed, named himself Paul from that time on, and became
one of the greatest proclaimers of the religion that he had previously persecuted with hatred. Since
then, the words “Damascus experience” or “I see the light” have come to represent all deepreaching experiences and crises of transformation.
6. Johann Wolfgang von Goethe, in whose horoscope this aspect is distinctly in evidence, coined the
famous sentence: “Only the law can give us freedom.” Bibliography
Adler, Oskar. Das Testament der Astrologie. Júpiter vols. Munich: Hugendubel, 1991-1993.
Akron. Das Astrologie Handbuch Munich: Hugendubel, 1995.
Arroyo, Stephen. Astrology. Karma, and Transformation. Sebastopol, CA: CRCS, 1978, 1992.
______. Relationships & Life Cycles. Sebastopol, CA: CRCS, 1993
______. Astrology, Psychology & the Four Elements. Sebastopol, CA: CRCS, 1975.
______. Chart Interpretation Handbook. Sebastopol, CA: CRCS, 1989.
Arroyo, Stephen, and Liz Greene. The Jupiter/Saturn Conference Lectures. Sebastopol, CA: CRCS;
now published as New Insights into Modern Astrology. Sebastopol, CA: CRCS, 1991.
Banzhaf, Hajo. Der Mensch in seinen Elementen. Munich: Hugendubel, 1993.
Boot, Martin. Das Horoskop. Munich: Droemer Knaur, 1988.
Ebertin. Reinhold. The Combination of Stellar Influences. Tempe, AZ: American Federation of
Astrologers, 1972.
Green, Jeff. Pluto: The Evolutionary Journey of the Soul. St. Paul, MN: Llewellyn, 1985.
Greene, Liz. The Astrology of Fate. York Beach, ME: Samuel Weiser, 1985.
______. Outer Planets & Their Cycles. Sebastopol, CA: CRCS, 1983.
______. Relating. York Beach, ME: Samuel Weiser, 1978.
______. Saturn. York Beach, ME: Samuel Weiser, 1976.
Greene, Liz, and Howard Sasportas. The Development of the Personality. York Beach, ME: Samuel
Weiser, 1987.
______. Dynamics of the Unconscious… York Beach, ME: Samuel Weiser, 1988.
Hand, Robert. Horoscope Symbols. Atglen, PA: Whitford, 1980.
Paul, Haydn. Visionary Dreamer: Exploring the Astrological Neptune. Shaftsbury, England: Element,
1989.
______. Phoenix Rising: Exploring the Astrological Pluto. Shaftsbury, England: Element, 1989–
Kühr, Erich Karl. Psychologische Horoskopdeutung. 2 vols. Vienna: Cerny, 1948, 1951.
Löhlein, Herbert. Handbuch der Astrologie. Munich: Goldman, 1980.
Lundsted, Betty. Astrological Insights into Personality. San Diego: ACS, 1980.
Marks, Tracy. The Astrology of Self-Discovery. Sebastopol, CA: CRCS, 1986.
Oken, Alan. Alan Oken's Complete Astrology. New York: Bantam, 1980, 1988.
Orban, Peter, Ingrid Zinnel, Thea Weller. Symbolon. Munich: Hugendubel, 1993.
Reimann, Fritz. Lebenshilfe Astrologie. Munich: Pfeiffer, 1976.
Ring, Thomas. Astrologische Menschenkunde. Freiburg, Germany: Bauer Verlag, 1969.
Rudhyar, Dane. The Astrological Houses. Sebastopol, CA: CRCS, 1986,
______. The Rhythm of Wholeness. Wheaton, IL: Theosophical Publishing House, 1983.
______. Astrology and Personality. Santa Fe: Aurora Press, 1981.
Sasportas, Howard. The Twelve Houses. London: Aquarian Press, 1989.
Schult, Arthur. Astrosophie. 2 vols. Bietigheim, Germany: Turm, 1971.
Sakoian, Frances, and Louis S. Acker, The Astrologer's Handbook. New York: HarperCollins, 1989.
Weiss, Claude. Der Mondknoten in Häuser und Zeichen. Zurich: Astrologie Heute 5-7, 1987. HAJO BANZHAF, born in 1949, studied languages in France, philosophy
at the University in Muenster, Germany, followed by bank studies in
Munich, with a subsequent twelve-year career in the banking business.
Since 1985, he has been active as an author, seminar leader, and astrologer.
Since 1992, he has been editor of the “Kailash” book series for Heinrich
Hugendubel Verlag (a well-known publishing house in Germany). He holds
tarot seminars on a regular basis, publishes articles in well-known European
magazines, and has been giving lectures on astrology and tarot for many
years. ANNA HAEBLER, born in 1948, studied sociology in Munich. She has
been intensively involved with astrology and esoterica for more than 15
years. In her practical work, she meaningfully combines the perceptions
from astrology, and psychology. This connection has proven to be
particularly helpful and valuable in her consulting work. from Your gateway to knowledge and culture. Accessible for everyone. z-library.se singlelogin.re go-to-zlibrary.se O cial Telegram channel Z-Access ffi https://wikipedia.org/wiki/Z-Library single-login.ru