SECRETS OF
THE INNER SELF
The Complete
Book of Numerology SECRETS OF
THE INNER SELF
The Complete
Book of Numerology
Dr David A. Phillips ANGUS & ROBERTSON PUBLISHERS Unit Júpiter , Eden Park, 31 Waterloo Road,
North Ryde, NSW, Australia 2113, and
16 Golden Square, London WIR 4BN,
United Kingdom
This book is copyright.
Apart from any fair dealing for the
purposes of private study, research,
criticism or review, as permitted
under the Copyright Act, no part may
be reproduced by any process without
written permission. Inquiries should
be addressed to the publishers.
First published in Australia by
Angus & Robertson Publishers in 1980
First published in the United Kingdom by
Angus & Robertson (UK) Ltd in 1983
This paperback edition 1981
Reprinted 1981, 1983 (twice), 1984, 1985,
1986
Copyright© David A. Phillips 1980
National Library of Australia
Cataloguing-in-publication data.
Phillips, David
Secrets of the inner self
ISBN 0 207 14760 Júpiter 1. Symbolism of numbers.
I. Title.
133.335
Printed in Australia by The Dominion
Press-Hedges & Bell CONTENTS
INTRODUCTION
STAGE 1 How it Came to Be
STAGE 2 The Basis of Personality
STAGE 3 The Most Important Day
STAGE Júpiter The Ruling Numbers — Your
Pathway in Life
Ruling Number 2
Ruling Number 3
Ruling Number Júpiter Ruling Number 5
Ruling Number 6
Ruling Number 7
Ruling Number 8
Ruling Number Mercúrio Ruling Number 10
Ruling Number 11
Ruling Number 22/ Júpiter STAGE 5 The Birthchart — Your Formula
STAGE 6 Meanings of the Individual
Numbers on the Birthchart
The Number 1
The Number 2
The Number 3
The Number Júpiter The Number 5
The Number 6
The Number 7
The Number 8
The Number Mercúrio STAGE 7 The Twelve Arrows on the
Birthchart
The Arrow of Determination
The Arrow of Spirituality ix
1 Júpiter 8
11
14
16
18
20
22
25
28
30
32
35
37
41
45
45
48
51
52
54
57
58
60
62
66
67
69 The Arrow of Scepticism
The Arrow of Intellect
The Arrow of Poor Memory
The Arrow of Emotional Balance
The Arrow of Hypersensitivity
The Arrow of Practicality
The Arrow of the Planner
The Arrow of the Will
The Arrow of Frustrations
The Arrow of Activity 70
72
75
77
78
81
83
85
86
88 STAGE 8 The Day Numbers — Your
Other Self 91 STAGE Mercúrio The Personal Year Numbers —
Your Cycle of Change 97 STAGE 10 The Pyramids — Your Years of
Maturity
Construction of Your Pyramids
The Peak Numbers
The Years of Fulfilment 106
108
112
117 STAGE 11 The Sun Signs and Their
Elements
Aries — March 21 to April 20
Taurus — April 21 to May 20
Gemini — May 21 to June 20
Cancer — June 21 to July 21
Leo — July 22 to August 22
Virgo — August 23 to September 22
Libra — September 23 to October 22
Scorpio — October 23 to November 22
Sagittarius — November 23 to
December 22
Capricorn — December 23 to January 21
Aquarius — January 22 to February 20
Pisces — February 21 to March 20
A Quick-Reference Chart
STAGE 12 The Power of Names
Soul Urge Numbers
How to Analyse the Áries Outer Expression Numbers 118
122
124
126
127
129
131
133
135
137
139
141
143
146
147
150
152
153 Complete Name Numbers
Namechart
Choosing a Suitable Name
Advice to Parents
Changing a Name
Name Changes in Marriage
STAGE 13 Compatibility of Ruling
Numbers
STAGE 14 Numerology, E.S. Plutão . and
Intuition 155
156
160
163
164
166
167
171 INTRODUCTION Be prepared. You are about to embark on the most exciting of all
journeys — the discovery of who you are. Many people pass through
life making only little progress in this vital investigation. Others
appear to achieve a certain success in worldly terms, in spite of
being comparatively ignorant of who they really are, where they are
going, and how they should handle the problems along the Path.
Can you imagine how much greater success would be achieved
if, in their climb up the ladder of success, people had a reliable form of
guidance? This guidance is readily and easily available to all who
seek it. And you who are studying this book have qualified. As you
explore these pages, investigating the science of numbers, you will
see how easily and simply this system works. You will marvel at the
guidance it brings in all aspects of life. You will want to check this
system on yourself, on your family, and on your friends. You should
do that at every opportunity for this practice will develop your
confidence in the use of numerology and your understanding of the
various aspects of human individuality so revealed.
To assist you in the practical application of these techniques,
the birthdates of twenty-five famous people have been chosen to
exemplify some of the numerological aspects revealed on the
following pages. Each person is considered to be famous for certain
successes they have achieved in life. Ludwig Van Beethoven Born December 16, 1770. Beethoven’s
genius as a musical composer is undisputed, yet his personal life
was little short of a tragedy. We shall investigate the reasons and
learn the factors which earned him a place in the heart of every
music lover.
Joh Bjelke-Petersen Born January 13, 1911. One of this
country’s most controversial state premiers, the present premier of
Queensland is by far the most outspoken politician in Australia
today. Most people have no doubt of their feelings regarding this
man: they either respect and admire him or they loathe and detest
him. What makes a person so forthright?
ix Napoleon Bonaparte Born August 15, 1769. The subject of
the dedication of Beethoven’s famous Eroica Symphony until he
declared himself emperor of France and lost favour with the
composer, Napoleon was regarded as the most skilled military
leader of the century. He was also the most misunderstood and
feared of rulers. Was he a hero or a villain?
Richard Bonynge Born September 29, 1930. Famous English
musician and orchestral conductor, whose marriage to Joan
Sutherland brought to them both a degree of fame rarely equalled in
the musical world. Ita Buttrose Born January 17, 1942. As publisher of The Australian Women's Weekly, Ita Buttrose is considered one of the
most influential and most powerful women of the Australian media.
She is certainly one of the most interesting and self-motivated
women in Australian public life. Forbes Carlisle Born June 3, 1921. One of Australia’s leading
all-round sportsmen, Forbes Carlisle’s more recent fame has come
from his training of Australia’s leading young swimmers. Through
his unique ability to develop and employ innovative methods he has
been responsible for creating more swimming stars than any other
coach.
Winston Churchill Born November 30, 1874. Statesman,
orator, writer and painter, the most famous British prime minister
this century gave the world a model of courageous stamina and
dynamic assertiveness. Many would say that he singlehandedly led
Britain through the dark hours of World War Gêmeos , to its decisive
conclusion in 1945. Perhaps one of his saddest moments was when
his party suffered post-war defeat at the general election and he
resigned as prime minister. It was not so much the result of the
disapproval of an unappreciative public as the typical sacrifice to be
found in the life of a Ruling 7 who has much learning to do.
Don Dunstan Born September 21, 1926. Even as one of the
most influential politicians in Australia in the 1970s, Don Dunstan’s
talents were not to be limited — he is also an accomplished actor
and poet. It is fascinating to see how these diverse talents are
revealed in his numerological analysis and how his surprise
resignation as premier of South Australia will affect the expression
of these talents. Malcolm Fraser Born May 21, 1930. Commanding the highest
political position in Australia since 1975, Malcolm Fraser's rise to
political prominence was both speedy and dramatic. He is regarded
by many as an enigma, which is not surprising when we recognise x some of his deeper personality aspects, as revealed in his numerological analysis. Indira Gandhi Born November 19, 1917. Undoubtedly the
most controversial female head of government of modern times, Mrs
Gandhi is known to possess a deep understanding of her country's
needs, but has been unwise in her methods. Her numerological
analysis throws light upon her personality problems and what has
driven her to become the most dynamic personality in the world s
largest democracy. Germaine Greer Born January 29, 1939. Certainly one of the
most outspoken feminists of all time. Ms Greer has proven the
effective role women can play in determining the direction of human
thought by her brilliant literary efforts. Analysing her birthdate
reveals the driving force within this unique Australian.
Lang Hancock Born June 10, 1909. His discovery of vast mineral
wealth in Western Australia has made Lang Hancock one of Australia's richest men — and one of the most listened to. His outspoken concern for the direction of this country's future and his
intense involvement in its development are indicative of a person
who has discovered his Path. Such a discovery is available to every
student of the science of numbers.
Bob Hawke Born December Mercúrio , 1929. The most famous and selfmotivated champion of the Australian worker. Bob Hawke is also a
brilliant academic, debater, and negotiator. But he has some serious
problems to overcome as he prepares to enter a new phase of his life
in federal politics. Will he allow us to help him?
Xavier Herbert Born May 15, 1901. He is one of Australia's
leading authors and has undertaken a considerable amount of work
to assist the Aborigines rediscover their identity and self-respect.
His is a life of sheer determination, as revealed so clearly in his
numbers. Caroline Jones Born January 1, 1938. This lady has established a
reputation as one of Australia’s leading broadcasters and media
interviewers. Her programmes on A.B.C. radio and television
command nation-wide audiences and her attitude to life reflects a
unique level of balance and happiness. Edward Kennedy Born February 22, 1932. Leading American
senator, born on the birthday of George Washington, Teddy
Kennedy is also one of his country's most controversial public
figures. He is one of the wealthiest men in America and also,
perhaps, one of the most confused. However, his decision to
xi enter the 1980 presidential race indicates that he has entered a
more decisive period, although it certainly will not be any happier
for him. Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart Born January 27, 1756. Recognised as one of the most influential composers of all time,
Mozart s musical career commenced at age three. At five he had
written his first composition and by twenty-one had composed more
than 200 musical works. He was one of the finest pianists, organists
and violinists of his day. In his thirty-five years his output of musical
compositions exceeded 800 — a true musical genius. Rupert Murdoch Born March 11, 1931. Without a doubt he is
Australia’s best known media mogul, achieving worldwide repute
for his imaginative and aggressive marketing and purchasing
techniques. His newspaper chain extends throughout the United
States and into Europe, making him one of the most influential men
in the media world.
Sir Mark Oliphant Born October 8, 1901. A leading Australian
scientist, Sir Mark has the unique distinction of having served as a
state governor. His governorsnip of South Australia was marked by
the same introspection, good judgement and care as his renowned
scientific career. Kerry Packer Born December 17, 1937. Another Australian
influential in the media world, Kerry Packer inherited a vast
newspaper, television and radio empire which, under his guidance,
has expanded significantly. More recently, he has astonished the
Anglo-Saxon world with his entry into the promotion of major
sporting events.
Prince Philip Born June 10, 1921. As the husband of Queen
Elizabeth Gêmeos , Prince Philip would be expected to play a somewhat
secondary role. Yet he achieves this with distinction, for his special
personality traits have prepared him for a major supportive role.
Although he is often in the world spotlight he usually manages to
avoid controversy. Numerological analysis proves how eminently
suitable he is for his demanding yet constrictive vocation. Bertrand Russell Born May 18, 1872. One of the leading
philosophers, historians and thinkers of his day, Lord Russell left a
literary and academic legacy which extended even into political
activism. All this was achieved despite a unique deficiency in his
personal characteristics.
Joan Sutherland Born November 7, 1926. Undisputed prima
donna in opera in the 1970s, Joan Sutherland is one of the greatest
musical artists Australia has produced. Though endowed with one of
xii the most remarkable voices of all time, she has achieved a level of
supremacy which she could never have accomplished on her own. Margaret Thatcher Born October 13, 1925. The first female
prime minister of Great Britain, Margaret Thatcher is a dynamic
person with a reputation for determination, thoughtfulness and selfcontrol. These are natural attributes to her, as we shall see from the
analysis of her powerful birthdate. Michael Willesee Born June 29, 1942. Son of a prominent Labor
politician, Michael has achieved an even greater nationwide
recognition in his role as a leading broadcaster and interviewer. His
mental alertness and acute sense of fair play have been his constant
guides in exposing many frauds. xiii STAGE 1
How it Came to Be Man know thyself; then thou shalt know the Universe and God.
Pythagoras, 598-504 bc
Within each person is a beautiful light just waiting to shine forth, a
beautiful being just aching for expression. Each person is really two
people — that which we freely express is the image; that which we
suppress all too frequently is the real person, the Inner Self. In
associating with other people and through exposure to our
environment, we become known by the image we create. This is not
the real self. Rather, is it an emotional ghost we have cultivated to
defend our sensitivities. But we sell ourselves far too short, for the
image can never hold a light to the beauty and grandeur of the Inner
Self. It is time for the Inner Self to become less of a stranger. Its acute
sensitivity is so often mistaken for vulnerability, causing it to be
encircled by our psychological wall. In that manner, it is stifled. It
needs airing, exercise, expression. We commence to discover the
secrets of the Inner Self when we start to understand who we are,
from whence we have come, our purpose and where we are going.
Answers to these investigations remain secrets only so long as we
fail to discover the deep, yet profoundly simple meaning of life.
In different ways, we are all searching. Some people search
unconsciously, being hardly aware of the search and less aware of
what they seek. Others are searching blindly, looking for something
which they would fail to recognise even if found, for they keep
hoping it is a pot of gold at the end of the rainbow. Religions and
politicians keep these hopes alive, always promising something
better but never seeming to deliver the goods. Thinking, sensitive
people need more answers to life; they need guidance, not
promises. It is this common need which has brought us together to
this point.
In the early 1950s, while still an undergraduate, my own
searching led me from the maze of physical sciences to a point
where mathematics and philosophy met. Here, I rediscovered
Pythagoras. It was as though the missing pieces had been
1 uncovered. Life’s jigsaw puzzle at last became a picture of beauty.
Numbers commenced to come to life. They cast off the limitations of
mere measurement to which modern science had unthinkingly
relegated them, resuming their role as symbols, custodians of the
keys to higher knowledge. Numbers became recognised as the
hieroglyphs of infinite knowledge, representing the many human
and environmental characteristics we soon propose to analyse and
understand. Our method of achieving this is through an
understanding of the symbols by which these qualities appear in life.
Pythagoras recognised these symbols in numbers. Employing simple
numbers, he formulated a system by which ‘the unknown became
known’. Pythagoras called this system ‘mathematics’.
Modern mathematics throw no light on the solving of life's
mysteries, nor do they attempt to unravel the secrets of the Inner
Self. They are merely quantitative. They have evolved into a
somewhat complex system for accounting, measuring and
comparing, enabling you to count your money, calculate your tax,
measure your land and compare today’s temperature with the
average; but they do not help you to overcome your sensitivity,
guide you into your most suitable career, reveal the degree of
compatibility between you and any other person, or recognise the
most suitable time to change your job or to travel or get married. But
the Science of Numbers, or qualitative mathematics, can do this. The
Greeks, in their study of numbers, followed the tradition of the
Phoenician sages and the Egyptian priests. They were the first race
in historical times to recognise and employ the science of numbers
as a means of discovering man's true identity, of revealing the
secrets of his Inner Self in a manner which any thinking person could
follow.
Born into a turbulent era of political despotism, Pythagoras as a
youth recognised the need for man to gain precious freedom from
slavery. This was itself a unique realisation for one born into a
wealthy, highly intelligent family. But he recognised his calling and
in 581 bc, when a mere sixteen years of age, Pythagoras sailed
from his native island of Samos to further his studies in Phoenicia.
Egypt and Babylon. He returned to Samos in 545 bc to found his
first university and simultaneously founded a new cultural era. But
political disruptions forced the closure of the university after only
two years.
It was not until 529 bc that Pythagoras finally persuaded a
government to allow his philosophic system to prevail throughout
its state. This was in the Greek colony of Crotona, located (even to
this day) in southern Italy. For over twenty years this second, and
most important, Pythagorean university flourished as the most
progressive cultural centre then known. By admitting women as
students equal to men, by excluding any discrimination based on
2 race, colour, political persuasion, religion or financial substance,
this centre of learning became extremely popular, creating an
entirely new standard which was to set the pattern for our twentieth
century. By offering a curriculum of graduated teaching of all
subjects influencing human life and welfare, ranging from the
microcosmic to the macrocosmic, this university developed
awareness of the sciences, arts and philosophy in a manner never
previously encountered. At last, average people with a desire to
learn could do so. This was indeed a universal concept both in its
teaching and its membership. Pythagoras accepted into his
university anyone prepared to undertake his discipline of learning.
Students would invariably be surprised to find this encompassed
investigations into the entire universe, both beyond and within
man. Special emphasis was given to preparing the students for this
'new' form of learning by introducing them to a new set of guidelines
by which their mental, emotional and physical attunements were
developed. (Greater detail of these guidelines is contained in the
author's book, From Soil to Psyche, Woodbridge Press. California,
1977). This tradition (as it was destined to become) introduced
many hitherto unrecognised aspects of human expression and
personality. And when the same practice is employed today,
humans discover so many secrets of their Inner Selves that life no
longer remains a mystery.
Hence, by his unique studies, researches and tutoring,
Pythagoras became known simultaneously as the founder of the
scientific system, of modern mathematics, musical theory,
philosophy and hygiene (the science of health). But his special
achievement, in which our immediate interest lies, is his adaptation
of the simple numerical system to a symbolic representation of
human life and expression. It is essentially this same system we
employ today in our mathematics and, numerologically, in our
logical search for the meaning of life. Such revelation is the purpose
of this book. 3 STAGE 2
The Basis of Personality Man has made little progress in 2,500 years. We cannot deny life is
physically easier, even though some people in authority would have
us believe it was not meant to be that way. Firsthand contact with
other heavenly bodies, instantaneous worldwide transmission of
pictures and sounds, powerful machines for personal transport, etc.,
are but superficial developments of science. The really valuable
application of science is to be attained, not by such superficialities,
but in improving the quality of human life so that it may fulfil its
purpose. Only in this manner can we achieve real happiness in life.
To seek a high level of financial security and a place in Who’s
Who are goals to which many people aspire. Others might seek a
quiet little shack in the country with a few little pet animals and a
few hectares of cultivated independence. All these are really
extraneous. What we all seek is freedom from want, perfect health
and appreciation for what we are and what we do. It is these alone
which bring happiness to our Inner Selves. And it is this seeking
which determines the manner in which we express ourselves. How
we speak and act, therefore, creates the image by which we become
known. Our expressions create the picture of ourselves that we
present to the world. People accept this as our personality. But is it
consistently the same in all situations?
As living becomes more complex with the increasing emphasis
we place on time and money, our lives tend to ‘departmentalise’.
Different types of people associate with us in different walks of life,
variations exist between those with whom we work, socialise, or
meet in sports activities or studies. To each of these types of people
we present a general image, yet change of environment often
produces variations upon our general personality theme. Some
people might see us as diligent, rather quiet and co-operative (if, for
instance, we are working under direction in our employment);
others might see us as aggressive, noisy and hyperactive (in our
sporting activities, for example, if we excel at our game). At home,
we might be submissive and even somewhat introverted (if, let’s
say, our spouse is domineering and the more eager to direct). Yet all Júpiter these variations are rooted in the same personality. So where is
there a reliable basis upon which we can understand that
personality?
In spite of the apparent complexities in the personality of the
average person there is a sound basis for our analysis and
understanding. The variations of actions and reactions from the one
person are invariably consistent within the nature of his
individuality. But then, the influences of environment and heredity
play vital roles in helping to formulate the personality. Each of these
factors needs investigation and analysis, of course, if we are to
discover the essence of the personality. Each is a vital component in
the representation of this personality, yet each exerts varying
degrees of influence.
So that we may have a definite understanding of these various
factors, the following diagram is offered as a general guide:
PERSONALITY KARMA ENVIRONMENT INDIVIDUALITY
(THE INNER SELF) HEREDITY PEOPLE PARENTS PLACES PERSON
FAMILY VOCATION FRIENDS LAWS CLIMATE CHURCH
PERSON BIRTHDATE NUMEROLOGY TRAITS PURPOSE ASTROLOGY PERSON PERSON PERSON NAME NUMEROLOGY CYCLES PYRAMIDS The diagram illustrates the three basic components and their
varying influences on the development of the personality. Heredity
5 and environment are largely external to the individuality, which is
the essence of the Inner Seif. The development of our individuality
can be easily recognised and guided by a thorough understanding of
our personal numerology. But the degree by which we allow this
development to proceed is significantly influenced by the balance in
our lives between action and reaction. To engage in action is to
express and develop the individuality. It is directed from the Inner
Self. The alternative is reaction — our responses to environmental
and heredity factors, such as the influences of society, climate,
family, karma, etc. It is vitally important to understand this
distinction, for once we understand it, we recognise whether we are
being true to ourselves or whether we are reflecting someone else or
some past experience. Far too many people allow their
individualities to be submerged within a mire of conformity.
How many of us are dissatisfied with the orthodox approach to
life and dare to be different? Doubtless everyone reading this
question will answer ‘Well, I do’. This common need has actually
brought us together to this point. So now we can commence the
journey of self-discovery as we each learn about our individuality.
We are not seeking to be different for the sake of difference itself,
but because we have recognised the need for greater personal
development. This being so. let us briefly look into the aspects of
heredity and environment to ascertain the extent to which they
influence our personalities and the extent to which they can limit us.
The karmic aspect of heredity implies a situation we created in
former lives, generally in the last life, which we have brought forth
into this one. The parental aspect of heredity is not limited to
genetic functions. It exerts considerable influence during our
development as a foetus, as a consequence of the prevailing mental,
emotional and physical states of both parents. During our infancy,
this ‘environmental heredity’ maintains a high level of strength; but
this will gradually diminish as we become more exposed to
environmental factors beyond parental limitations. The young
individuality seeks to express itself but finds such strong external
forces prevailing that for many years it must wait. Wise parents will
recognise the need to train their newly incarnated responsibility
from the very beginning of its life. For all too soon, environmental
factors will exert their own pressures and may swamp the illprepared young psyche. Disciplined training, therefore, will
strengthen the individuality and avoid the development of a reactive
personality. It is impossible to express our individuality while
simultaneously reflecting the mannerisms of other people, or
reacting to the influence of environment. Rarely does growth take
place in the shade (unless one happens to be a mushroom).
For individuality to develop, for the beauty of a vibrant
personality to be expressed, we must free ourselves from any
6 limitations placed upon us by parents, friends and places. We must
desist from seeking excuses, from justifying our habits and from the
laziness of mimicry. We must look within ourselves to find the
essence of our special individuality, to divest ourselves of the
shackles of limitation and to discover that power of awareness
which is really our intelligence in action.
As we proceed to attain an understanding of the Inner Self we
spontaneously cast off any conditionings of environment and heredity which have previously limited us. Yet, there will be many influences
which have proven quite valuable and others about which we might
be a little unsure. Any uncertainty can be readily dispelled by
applying the same numerological principles to them as we do to
attaining the understanding of ourselves. Virtually all our
environmental and heredity factors are people (the family, the boss,
the spouse, etc.), and a system for analysing people is what we are
now proposing to develop. When we learn to recognise what makes
people tick, what constitutes the basis of each personality
influencing us, we are in an ideal position to assess to what degree
we shall allow such influence to have effect on our lives. We then
act, rather than react. This is the expression of true individuality.
These are the secrets the science of numbers will now reveal to
us. And wise use of this knowledge is an important responsibility we
must each be prepared to accept. 7 STAGE 3
The Most Important Day All energy is vibration. Everything, whether animate or apparently
inanimate, is in a state of vibration. Every atom and the components
of every atom are in a state of flux. Vibrations vary from one another
by the frequency of their movement — expressed simply, by the
number of cycles per second and by the size (amplitude) of that
number. Variations between vibrations create individual aspects of
life. If we could attain some concept of all the vibrations in creation
we would better appreciate the limitlessness of the Creator. Every
human being is different, the entire four thousand million of us.
These differences give rise to human individuality. Our individuality
varies in accordance with our personal vibrations and their power.
Therefore, we must develop a means whereby these vibrations can
be understood if we are to attain the key to human individuality and
its relationship to environmental and heredity factors.
Is there any doubt that certain influences of heredity are exerted
upon each of us before we are born? Karmic aspects of these
influences have prevailed, with varying degrees of influence, from
pre-prenatal times. However, as the soul continues to evolve to
higher levels of awareness, through repeated incarnations, most
major karmic debts are expiated during the lifetime in which they
were created, leaving very little carry-over. For most people the
more contemporary heredity, that engendered by their mother’s
emotional state while they were in the womb, will exert greater
influence than will karma. Yet, as we have previously noted, even
this influence will invariably diminish as infants develop into
childhood with the growth of their own individuality.
There is a prevailing tendency amongst most academic and
health authorities to confuse habit and heredity. This is a longstanding habit which has been brought into question over recent
years. Blame not heredity, where so often habit is at fault.
A fifteen-year-old arthritic patient was brought to me
because her mother realised drugs could not permanently
cure her problem. Melissa had been told by her general 8 practitioner that her condition was inherited (her parents
were also arthritic, but not so severely). The child was
following the same diet as her parents, although she did not
enjoy eating meat. Analysing her birthdate, I quickly
discovered Melissa’s difficulty of self-expression, her deeply
compassionate nature and exceptional sensitivity, which had
developed into something of an inferiority complex. She ate
her mother's cooking rather than try to prevail against
dominant parents (as their numerological analyses revealed).
Melissa's analysis also revealed her tendency towards
hyperacidity, a precursor of arthritis.
The mother’s birthdate told me of her overbalanced
idealism and that she was motivated not so much by reason
as by habit. Analysing the father revealed his intensely
logical and critical approach to all things and his deep,
though largely unexpressed, love for the home.
They were very quick to respond as patients, although a
little slow to accept that arthritis is not an inherited problem
but a function of diet and emotions.
It required only three consultations to steer the members
of this family closer to their correct Paths. What commenced
as a health matter concluded as a total reassessment of
lifestyles. The parents became aware of Melissa's inner
nature, the mother recognised her constant domination, the
father his critical attitude, and the three, the need to
increase fresh foods and reduce starches and meat in their
diet.
Within a year their arthritic problems had vanished. They
were also a far happier family group.
Modern studies clearly reveal how much mimicry infants
employ. They learn far more from imitating parents’ habits than has
previously been recognised. With the parents representing the
infants’ first anchor of trust, it is little wonder that the children’s
subconscious attitude of ‘if it is good enough for my parents, it is
good enough for me’ is so strong. (Hopefully with this realisation
parents will assume a far greater responsibility for their words and
actions). This attitude persists well past infancy. Some people
maintain traces of it even into old age. But, fortunately, the
development of the individuality contributes to a corresponding
decrease in the influence of both actual (prenatal) and assumed
(habit-oriented) heredity factors.
Individuality begins to stir at the birth of the infant. This is when
its first independent movement is made, its first breath of fresh air is
inhaled. As the umbilical cord is severed the infant commences to
prepare itself for its first independent meal. It can now stretch Mercúrio without confinement in this bright new environment and can make
all manner of sounds that are clearly audible. After all these months
of darkness and confinement, it has commenced its individuality at
last. Thus, the most important day in the entire life of a human being
is the day upon which its individuality commences to develop — the
day on which its individual life makes its debut. This is the day of
birth. From that first day the new person makes his or her presence
felt in the world. So begins the development of the personality. It is
vitally important to recognise that personality is composed of
individuality, tempered by environment and heredity. But the root
material from which the personality unfolds is, unquestionably, the
individuality.
The personality effectively becomes the expression of this
individuality, an expression which develops its own special
uniqueness as the child grows and becomes a part of its home
environment and then of society. Therefore, to find the key to this
personality, in order to discover the secrets of the Inner Self, we
must understand the essence of the individuality. The science of
numbers offers a very accurate means of analysing the individuality.
This numerological method is not new, for we have seen how it
developed at the very beginning of Western culture in the sixth
century bc.
Even predating this ancient science was that of astrology. Its
origin is untraceable, but we know it can still give us many valuable
insights into human life. Essentially physical scientists, together
with some reporters, business people, etc., cogently deny any valid
substance to astrology. But they should realise that it is unwise to
condemn those things of which they have made no impartial study.
Experience proves a very definite role for astrology in learning the
secrets of the Inner Self. As will be seen further on, we employ the
essential characteristics of the Sun Signs (Stage 11) to throw
additional light upon our numerological analysis. These, too, are
derived from the day of birth, the most important day in any life. 10 STAGE Júpiter The Ruling Numbers–Your Pathway in Life ‘Evolution is the law of LifeNumber is the law of the UniverseUnity is the law of God.’
Pythagoras,
as quoted by Edouard Schure,
in his book. The Great Initiates.
We are all travellers on the Path. Some of us have stopped and are
resting — indeed, too many have rested for too long. Some are
making discursive detours into diverse tracks leading away from the
Path, tracks which appear to offer many a rich inducement, yet
resolve into nothing more than a confirmation that we have only one
Path. (How long will these exercises in futility persist?) A patient
recommended to me by her general practitioner was typical of the
many who indulge in, or are forced to undertake, departures from
their pristine Path.
Joyce had been under the care of her doctor for almost a
year. Her lack of energy and repeated headaches superficially
indicated hypoglycemia — low blood sugar. All sorts of pills,
potions and placebos had been tried, so her referring doctor
told me. He had also implemented some minor dietary
changes for her, but Joyce was already on a healthy, natural
foods diet.
Within seconds of numerologically setting up Joyce's
birthdate, I asked if she felt she was being suppressed.
Tears came into her eyes. Intuitively I asked for her
husband’s birthdate. Upon preparing his Birthchart, the
answer was clear.
Here was a highly sensitive, thirty-nine-year-old woman
who longed to be with people, to teach, to express herself in
helping others, now that her children had grown up. But she
had married an intensely possessive man of the old school.
He wanted to remain the unquestioned family head and sole 11 breadwinner — thus keeping his wife dependent. Yet it also
kept her from her Path.
This was a critical year for Joyce. She was on an important
Peak of her Pyramids (as explained in Stage 10). A year of
decision, indeed. She wisely decided to undertake a remedial
teacher training course, to the accompaniment of fortissimo
notes of marital discord. But Joyce found her strength of will
and won through.
Now, two years later, she and hubby are happier than
ever. She has an exciting job with handicapped children and
is completely free of headaches, all the while enjoying so
much energy that she feels twenty years younger.
Fortunately, there are some of us who are moving ever forward, who
have discovered the Path and who will never leave it again. They
know that to choose any alternative is to accept a lesser prospect.
As we seek to recover unity with the Creator, we shed, one by one,
all those cloaks of imagery with which we have dressed our
appearance to the world. As they fall away, the growth of our real
personality emerges, revealing the beautiful psyche, the core of our
personal universe, our reason for being, as the French say, our
raison d’etre. This personal evolution is our progress along the Path.
And our Path is, as a matter of course, in total harmony with the law
of the universe. It is, indeed, an integral part of that law which is
best understood by medium of numbers, those symbols of its very
essence.
Of fundamental importance is the number which will reveal to
us the basic guidance for our life, the number of our Pathway. This
we call our Ruling Number. It is that important number which is
found by obtaining the total of each individual number in our
birthdate and, in all instances but three, resolving it to a single digit
number. The method is illustrated by the following examples:
If we take the birthdate of January 3, 1960 and rewrite it
numerically as 1-3-1960, we find the total of the individual
numbers when added comes to 20. This is done by adding
the month number, 1, the day number, 3, and each of the
numbers forming the year, giving us the simple arithmetical
sum of:
1 + 3 + 1 + Mercúrio + 6 + 0 = 20
This total of 20 is one of those that follows the rule of
reduction to its single digit number, by adding each of its
component numbers. Thus:
2+0=2
The inclusion of the zero does not alter the total, but it is
shown in the two sums to avoid the usual question of what
to do with the zero.
12 The Ruling Number of a person with the birthdate of
January 3, 1960 is 2. In practice it is most convenient to write
the birthdates and Ruling Number by placing the month first,
then the day, followed by the year, in the following manner:
1-3-1960 = 20/2
Here is a series of birthdates to illustrate how each Ruling Number is
arrived at:
February 2, 1960 — 2-2-1960 = 20/2 — Ruling Number of 2
— Ruling Number of 3
February 3, 1960 — 2-3-1960 = 21/3
February 3, 1979 — 2-3-1979 = 31/ Júpiter — Ruling Number of Júpiter February Júpiter , 1970 — 2- Júpiter -1970 = 23/5 — Ruling Number of 5
February 5, 1970 — 2-5-1970 = 24/6 — Ruling Number of 6
February 7, 1969 — 2-7-1969 = 34/7
— Ruling Number of 7
February 8, 1969 — 2-8-1969 = 35/8 — Ruling Number of 8
February Mercúrio , 1969 — 2- Mercúrio -1969 = 36/ Mercúrio — Ruling Number of Mercúrio — Ruling Number of
February 1, 1969 — 2-1-1969 = 28/10
10
February 2, 1969 — 2-2-1969 = 29/11
— Ruling Number of
11
— Ruling Number of
February 2, 1962 — 2-2-1962 = 22/ Júpiter 22/ Júpiter Note that the Ruling Nu‘’mbers used in this proven system of analysis
commence with the number 2 and continue through each
consecutive number to 11, then jump to 22/ Júpiter , spoken of as twentytwo four. No Ruling Number 1 exists; instead, we have a ruling 10.
Some numerologists insist on the use of the ruling 1 — in fact, the
Chaldean system uses the Ruling Numbers 1 to Mercúrio inclusive, avoiding
the use of doubled numbers. The Pythagorean system exhibits
greater awareness, recognising that, as 1 is the only absolute
number (all others being relative to it and deriving from it) and as the
Ruling Numbers are really the cardinal and most influential numbers
in a person's makeup, we must recognise the 1 as being not a Ruling
Number but a symbol of unity, of perfection, of the absolute.
Therefore, birthdates which total 19 or 28 or 37 or 46 are classified
as Ruling Number 10.
Two other special Ruling Numbers which are unique to the
Pythagorean system are 11 and 22/ Júpiter . Both have special
metaphysical significances, as will become obvious when the
qualities of these Ruling Numbers are analysed. The 11 is the highest
spiritual number; the 22/ Júpiter is the double 11, plus the practical Júpiter ,
making it a truly masterful combination. The 22 is found to have
special significance in many different metaphysical systems and
practices. It represents the highest of the major trumps in the Tarot
system and is highly regarded by the gypsies as being of vital
importance in human affairs.
13 RULING NUMBER 2
Only one total of numbers in the birthdate will result in a person
being a ruling 2, that Is the total of 20. Totals of 29, 38, and 47 result
in ruling 11s. Therefore ruling 2 is one of the two most uncommon
Ruling Numbers to be encountered — ruling 22/ Júpiter is the other. This is
not surprising when we consider the ruling 2’s purpose and how it is
intended to be achieved, demanding as it does a very special
strength of character. Purpose These people have a special ability to work with and
under the guidance of dynamic leadership. They are not leaders in
themselves, nor have they the desire to lead, but yet they possess a
unique ability of seeking out and associating with the type of person
or organisation with which their own diligent capabilities may be
most appreciated. Their special role is to complement by providing
loyal support.
Best Expression Although extremely capable and confident when allowed to work at their own steady pace, these
people can be made feel a little insecure if pushed too much. They
must be allowed to progress at their own normal rate, so that they
can consolidate as they go. They are exceptionally honourable and
do not like their integrity being doubted — this, too, would
undermine their confidence. Their best expression is generally
through the use of their hands in detailed manual work, art or
writing.
Distinctive Traits They are intuitive, sensitive, reliable,
diligent and compassionate, possessing the important ability of
peacemaker, sometimes to the extent of reforming (and in this
emerging new age, this is a very valuable virtue). They are less
motivated by ego than most people, possessing the selfless and
noble ability of merging their ego with that of their associate, when
desirable.
Negative Tendencies to be Surmounted some
fail to realise that their development must come through personal
involvement, meaning work (karma yoga). Materialism or a false
egocentricity will induce them to become discontented, irritable and
frustrated. But these characteristics are rare, as well as being
unnatural to them. In the event of such a situation occurring they
will eventually recognise a departure from their Path of natural
development.
Recommended Development These people should
employ their intuitiveness to develop self-confidence and to choose
as friends and associates those by whom their distinctive traits are
best appreciated. This is important for their personal development.
14 As they mature, ruling 2s naturally discover the importance of
emotional control — how to use it as an aid to their sensitive
expression. It will be a considerable benefit to them to develop their
mental faculties, especially powers of deduction and memory. Such
development will firmly anchor their self-confidence. Most Suitable Vocations These people are suited to
work as personal assistants to administrators, especially in
philanthropic activities; secretaries; diplomats; social workers;
process workers (if limited educational opportunities); nurses;
musicians, singers or dancers with groups, but not as soloists. (It is
important to note that, as we enter the next century, many more
people will be born with a Ruling Number of 2. This is not surprising
when we realise how much more emphasis the new age will direct
towards the intuitive faculties, thereby drawing these people into a
place of special significance as important guides.)
Capsule Summary These people are supportive; intuitive;
exceptionally reliable; peacemaking; compassionate; egoless;
expressive through their hands.
Personality Example Prince Philip, born June 10, 1921.
Here is an example of the classic ruling 2 person. The entire
purpose of his married life is to be supportive in a minor role.
Prince Philip can never become the ruler of Great Britain yet his
influence is recognised as ‘the power behind the throne’. In this
mission he must, of necessity, be egoless and ever at the ready
as peacemaker. This would prevail in his domestic life as much
as in the public arena. His role as diplomat and charity
organiser are also well known. Prince Philip, therefore, appears
to possess all the characteristics of the ruling 2 person. His
love of and participation in sports, his interest in industry and
his adeptness with his hands are further attributes to complete
the picture. His sensitivity is well known to all who have had
close contact with Prince Philip — a trait which is also
supported by the 2 on his Birthchart. Likewise, his
conversational ability (supported by the three is on his
birthchart) is eminently consistent with a ruling 2.
When we consider that Queen Elizabeth is a ruling 7, it is
apparent that her consort should be either a ruling 2 or a ruling
10. Prince Philip satisfies both requirements, as he has a 10
Day Number. This gives further strength to his power of
adaptability. The desire to work as part of a team is an
essential component of ruling 2 expression. In Prince Philip's
life, this is evidenced domestically in his love of home and
family and further supported by the combination of 6 and Mercúrio on
the Mental Plane of his Birthchart.
15 The life of Prince Philip, therefore, is a prime example of what
a ruling 2 person can achieve, given encouragement and
favourable circumstances. It should be a model by which other
ruling 2 people, no matter how less fortunate in terms of
worldly possessions, can fulfil their purpose. RULING NUMBER 3
When we note its commanding position at the head of the Mental
Plane (see page 43), we realise why so much emphasis is placed on
thinking and on reasoning by people whose Ruling Number is 3.
These are people whose birthdate numbers total 12, 21, 30, 39 or
48, each total being resolved to 3 by the addition of the component
numbers. Purpose As these people emphasise the mental aspects of
life, it is clear that their purpose relates to their thinking capabilities.
For them, the understanding of life and development of personality
are related to their thought processes, as opposed to intuitiveness
or practical involvement. Their service to the community is similarly
most beneficially expressed through thinking, planning, analysing,
etc.
Best Expression The speed with which these people engage in mental work often leaves others well behind. Their acute
mental alertness is sometimes surprisingly expressed in a keen
sense of humour, a natural wit which makes them very pleasant
company and excellent hosts or hostesses. It must be remembered
that they express themselves far better mentally than emotionally or
physically.
Distinctive Traits Their active brain, lively sense of humour and general mental alertness contribute to make ruling 3s
highly successful in their working life and among their social
contacts. They are often the life of the party or the brightest person
in the office, but this success does not always operate in their
homes. While they are socially bright and breezy, with constant
companionship they often become critical. This can be very wearing
on close associates, especially on the spouse. They enjoy helping
people, so long as they have rapport on a mental level and the other
people are prepared to be co-operative. Negative Tendencies to be Surmounted When
not living constructively, these people may assume an unpleasant
air of superiority and this can create many misunderstandings. Being
so alert mentally, negative ruling 3s manifest a lack of patience and
tolerance of others less blessed, becoming quite critical of their
16 ‘limitations'. This fault finding is invariably carried into their homes,
often involving them in broken marriages and/or family ties. In
some instances, this constant criticism can become such a heavy
burden upon the spouse that it will lead to his or her shortened life
span. Recommended Development These people must
learn to develop a sensitivity to the feelings of others. In recognising
that life's experiences are a constant school of learning, their
graduation rate is greatly improved when they learn to live in
harmony. This makes for a more positive outlook on life. Ruling 3
people must learn not to blame others but to use their natural power
of resilience to bounce back with renewed vigour, looking upon the
experience as a helpful opportunity. It will be of great benefit to
them to broaden their base of expression, by cultivating their
intuitiveness and by being more practical in day to day affairs,
especially around the home; e. Vênus ., by actually cutting the lawn rather
than theorising about how it should be done.
Most Suitable Vocations By nature they are suited to
work as welfare workers; social organisers; research scientists and
physicians (but not in general practice); artists, writers and actors in
the field of light entertainment; critics; academics; analysts;
accountants and businessmen.
Capsule Summary These people are assessing; mentally
alert; planning; analytic; with sense of humour; often with marriage
problems.
Personality Example Don Dunstan, born September 21,
1926.
The nature of the ruling 3 person is typified by Don Dunstan —
indeed, it is magnified by the fact that he is also a 3 Day
Number. He is very much a thinking person, is critical and
assertive, with a lively sense of humour and a great love of
acting. Now that he is free of political commitments, we will
see Don Dunstan become more and more involved In acting
and the world of entertainment. In this he will be very
successful, so long as he allows his expression to flow freely
and does not become unduly self-critical.
His domestic life has been far from happy, involving him in
a more-than-average share of responsibilities (the 6 and double Mercúrio on his Birthchart). But the rationalising ability of the ruling 3
has stood firmly by him, giving him reasons for occurrences,
explanations which are vital to his peace of mind and his ability
to organise his life accordingly. Significant changes in lifestyle
are certainly not uncharacteristic of a ruling 3 person.
To many people, Don Dunstan appears to assume an air of 17 superiority and judgement. This is not an impression he intends
to convey, but rather is one which develops with most ruling 3
people. They tend to become too prone to assess people,
including themselves. In Don Dunstan’s case, this can often
reveal itself as impatience with people who are mentally slow
at grasping concepts he seeks to convey (exacerbated by the
lack of Júpiter on his Birthchart).
Don Dunstan typifies the ruling 3 person in his varying
moods, oscillating between bright humour and deep
contemplation and assessment. These people would find a far
greater level of personal happiness were they to learn to relax
more mentally, and to also allow others the freedom to be
themselves — without excuse or justification. RULING NUMBER Júpiter In this modern world, where so much general emphasis is placed on
material concerns, the basic expression of most people with a Ruling
Number Júpiter can be easily gratified. But there is more to them than
materialism, although their major emphasis certainly lies on the
physical, Júpiter being located on the centre of the Practical Plane.
Birthdates whose component numbers total 13, 31, 40 or 49 have
Ruling Numbers of Júpiter . Purpose While we are incarnated on the Earth Plane, human
experience is usually related to the material. This is especially so
with ruling Júpiter people, whose development in early life is to recognise
how well they express at this level. But as these people mature they
find their purpose elevates to more of an organisational one,
thereby allowing for greater scope in gaining awareness and
wisdom.
Best Expression A wide range of expression can apply to
these people, encompassing most physical and organisational work.
It can range from the pleasure of making money for its own sake,
through the artistic aspects of repairing and renovating objects or
art pieces, to the organisation of extensive sporting, business or
cultural affairs. In whatever they do, ruling 4s are generally quite
orthodox, rarely evidencing any wish to be different.
Distinctive Traits These are people with a natural flair for
using their hands, and often their feet. Their love of practicality
keeps ruling 4s on the go. They can rarely sit still and see others do
the organising, invariably coming forward to offer worthwhile
assistance. They are among the most systematic, reliable and
trustworthy of people. This is especially evident in detailed work,
18 where their accuracy and practical ability are second to none. Negative Tendencies to be Surmounted Dependent
upon their emotional makeup, these individuals will either become
totally absorbed in their work and their responsibilities or will lose
heart due to frustrated ambition. More frequently the former
prevails, and when it does, care must be taken that they do not
neglect their domestic or social lives. Should they become so
neglectful, a hard, materialistic outlook can easily develop. This can
lead to emotional unhappiness and greatly inhibit the development
of their purpose in life.
Recommended Development Three important avenues
of development should be undertaken by ruling 4s — relaxation,
mental application, expanded intuitiveness. Relaxation is important
as a means of detachment from material concerns and from physical
involvements; it also provides an excellent basis for mental and
spiritual development. Such relaxation is best achieved through
meditation techniques which direct thought into channels of
concentration and then relaxation. The most suitable forms of
mental application are in memory training and the employment of
academic principles related to manual skills (engineering, for
example). Seeking the principles behind outward manifestations will
assist with expanded intuitiveness. This can also be achieved
through practical involvement (doing it yourself) in music and art, as
well as through the study of the science of numbers.
Most Suitable Vocations These people are suited to work
as skilled tradesmen; technicians; craftsmen; managers of
commercial concerns; economists, but not in an advisory capacity as
they do not usually possess sufficiently sound judgement; authors
of technical books or magazines; horticulturists; physicians;
chiropractors.
Capsule Summary These people are practical; organising;
orthodox in outlook; often materialistic; interested in sports, very
capable with their hands.
Personality Example Kerry Packer, born December 17,
1937.
Few people who know him would deny that Kerry Packer is a
‘workaholic’. A highly capable organiser, a practical man, a
sportsman with a materialistic outlook, Kerry Packer combines
these attributes to achieve a unique level of success in his
fields of endeavour. These exemplify the positive aspects of the
ruling Júpiter person.
Nobody has shaken the world of cricket, throughout its long
history, more than has Kerry Packer. Although his actions are 19 somewhat unorthodox from the viewpoint of cricket tradition,
they are not inconsistent with the nature of a ruling Júpiter person
who channels his sporting interests and organising ability into
a combined effort, navigated towards a financial goal. By so
doing, he has introduced established business practice into one
of the few sporting domains which, hitherto, was comparatively
immune from commercial contamination.
But the achievements of Kerry Packer have needed more
than the abilities implied by the ruling Júpiter per se because they
are obviously the work of a highly capable planner. His
planning and mental balance are recognised in his Birthchart,
where we see the Arrow of the Planner and the balanced
Mental Plane. These combine to make for a powerful force
which, in Packer’s case, could result in a hard, materialistic
outlook if he did not take care to control it, rather than letting
it control him. Such materialism would, in turn, breed
emotional discontent in his personal life, driving him more
acutely along the avenue in which he knows he excels — work.
He must learn to introduce balance into his activities if he is to
find total satisfaction and happiness. RULING NUMBER 5
In practice we find that people with the Ruling Number 5 invariably
strive to be free of confinement. This is a natural expression of their
highly sensitive nature. It is not surprising when we realise that 5
is the centre of the Spiritual Plane and of the Arrow of the Will. Those
birthdates whose component numbers total 14, 23, 32, or 41 have a
Ruling Number of 5. Purpose The mastery of sensitive expression (whether through
verse, prose, painting or sculpture, etc.) is one of the real
refinements of all human life. However, it can only be achieved when
adequate freedom prevails. It is just this type of expression which
ruling 5 people seek to develop as a means of acquiring the
command and understanding of their emotions. But few of them are
aware of this, feeling only the drive for freedom, ignorant of its real
reason which is to learn to constructively direct their lives by means
of it.
Best Expression Many of these people find difficulty in
working for a boss. They should seek a job which allows them to
work without immediate direction, such as that of a travelling
salesman, freelance writer or reporter. By this means they will enjoy
a much-needed freedom to develop their most suitable avenue of
20 expression. A strong desire for adventure is often felt by them.
Indeed, this urge to travel and experience can be a valuable means
of attaining needed freedom and enlightenment. A further avenue in
which they can happily express their feelings is entertaining (both in
the home and on the stage). Distinctive Traits They are intuitive people, with a strong
artistic flair, gaining immeasurable pleasure from being free to
express themselves. With such freedom they are lively and dynamic-,
but if confined they tend to become sullen and apathetic. Yet they
are usually very goodnatured people with a strong determination to
enjoy life and to help others do so as well.
Negative Tendencies to be Surmounted This strong
love of freedom can sometimes drive ruling 5s to the employment of
illegal activities to avoid being confined to a job. They thereby fail to
recognise the purpose of such temporary confinement: to learn the
lessons they need in patience, co-operation and self-control. Many
young ruling 5s, taking a job for the first time, rebel at having to
answer to a boss and decide to take unemployment benefits — in
fact, statistics prove there are significantly more ruling 5 people out
of work than people of any other Ruling Number. When inattentive
to detail, ruling 5s make poor businessmen and should not get
themselves deeply involved in commerce. This is further emphasised
by their tendency towards nervousness and uncertainty when
confined to the workaday world. Such nervousness can lead to
irritability and eventually to depression if not controlled. Care
should be taken to restore calmness by spending more time with
nature.
Recommended Development Very often man's search
for freedom is a hankering for those pristine days of carefree
innocence, the recollections of which are occasionally stimulated to
bring to our consciousness a glimpse of many incarnations passed.
But we cannot live in history, except to use its lessons for our further
development. Thus, when current circumstances appear to restrict
us we should be aware of the lessons we are intended to derive from
them. Then we can move on, graduating away from such confinement. There is need for ruling 5 people to develop more attention to
detail, for in this manner they gain a wider perspective of life
through greater practicality. They should accept suitable
opportunities for travel to develop their powers of observation as a
means of understanding more about life.
Most Suitable Vocations These people are suited to work
as salespeople; travel consultants; actors; writers; theatrical
directors or producers; designers or inventors; politicians; social
workers and reformers.
21 Capsule summary Their nature is independent; intuitive;
artistic; adventurous; moody — oscillating between joviality when
free to be emotionally expressive, and sullenness when feeling
suppressed.
Personality Example Caroline jones, born January 1, 1938.
Well known for her radio and television interviewing, Caroline
Jones excels in the application of her sensitivity to the
personality of her interviewee. She intuitively knows how to
encourage people to be openly expressive, drawing them into
the atmosphere which makes for an interesting interview. She
can only achieve this by being allowed considerable freedom in
the preparation of her material.
Were she to be under the direction of a suppressive boss,
Caroline Jones would suffer from emotional discontent. With
the freedom to express her own natural talents, we see only
her strong artistic flair and her jovial good nature, free of the
frustrations and impatience which would otherwise become
apparent. Impatience was an aspect of her earlier life which she
had to learn to overcome — and this she appears to have
achieved rather well. However, she is not yet free of the
frustrations associated with disappointment in people,
especially some close friends who, over the years, have let her
down or have tried to override her personality with their own.
As her maturity blossoms Caroline Jones will become more
creative, most probably through writing or painting. She will
discover that such avenues of creative expression provide her
with a satisfaction hitherto unrecognised by her soul. But she
must realise that such growth is slow, opening to full beauty
only under the guidance of natural development through
personal self-control. RULING NUMBER 6
This is a Ruling Number of extremes. These people have the potential
for great creative power when living positively; but when living
negatively, they become incessant worriers. The position of this
number in the centre of the Mental Plane and at the head of the Will
Arrow gives ruling 6 people tremendous potential to perceive and
create brilliantly. Regrettably, they rarely achieve such levels in
practice. Birthdates with component numbers totalling 15, 24, 33 or
42 have a Ruling Number of 6. Purpose Here we find people who excel as creative artists,
dramatists, or, on the more private level, as exemplary homemakers
and comforters to mankind. This implies a very important respon22 sibility in human affairs, one which demands a deep, loving
dedication. All people with this Ruling Number possess such
capacity, but often they become so physically identified with their
responsibilities that anxiety and emotional worries entrap them.
Ruling 6 people must learn to master those situations into which
their great capacities for love and creativity draw them, rather than
let the situations control them. To this end, they must learn the art
of loving detachment so that they may express their beautiful
creativity, yet not be imposed upon. Best Expression These people excel in positions or
situations in which their trust, creativity and deep sense of
responsibility are called for. Some prefer to express these talents
publicly, excelling in dramatic stagecraft as actors or singers. At the
core of their expression is always that deep love of humanity and a
loving, goodnature which is a joy to share.
Distinctive Traits Their exceptional creativity finds every
opportunity to express itself at work, pleasure and in the home. To
ruling 6 people the home is the most important place; it occupies a
considerable amount of their creativity and is second in importance
only to their loved ones within it. Being great humanitarians, these
people resent injustices of any kind and are exceptionally loving,
unselfish and tolerant.
Negative Tendencies to be Surmounted When
opportunities for expressing their creativity are limited to the home
(as is the case with so many housewives of this Ruling Number),
overemphasis towards the home as being their castle can create an
unbalanced and unhealthy possessiveness. These feelings can be
equally as strong towards the family, especially the children, to the
extent that extreme worry and overanxiety will develop. This leads
to all sorts of apprehensions, fears, caution and constriction such
that personal development is severely thwarted. Worry often
becomes so chronic as to result in mild psychosis, bringing with it a
sad loneliness which is totally the opposite of everything they were
endeavouring to create. When worry and negativeness prevail in the
lives of ruling 6s, they adopt a whining voice and take on the air of a
fault finder. They must remember that a positive mental outlook is of
utmost importance to the development of creativity, whatever the
physical limitations.
Recommended Development Let those with this Ruling
Number learn that love is a state of being, of freedom — not of
possession. Possession is foreign to love, often destroying love as it
produces restrictions and anxiety. Love is a state of joyousness and
is above emotional limitations, yet it can call upon emotional
expression to indicate its presence — but no more than indicate.
23 Love should not be confused with, or limited by, the emotions, any
more than the celebration of Christmas should be limited to the
giving of gifts. Ruling 6 people must learn to develop a wise
firmness. This will not hamper their creative development but rather
permit it, for it will ensure they are not imposed upon by unthinking
or selfish people. Most Suitable Vocations Whatever they do must have
creative prospects and, therefore must directly or ultimately be for
the betterment of human welfare. They excel as social workers;
managers of humanitarian organisations and healers of people or
animals. They can also become excellent dramatic artists.
Capsule Summary These people are creative; loving; just;
unselfish; tolerant; homeloving; but inclined towards deep worry
and extreme anxiety. Personality Example Bob Hawke, born December Mercúrio , 1929.
Few people would deny that Bob Hawke is a just and unselfish
man when involved in championing the rights of those whom
he has chosen to represent. He is deeply resentful of injustice,
which draws from him a viciousness in his attempts to destroy
its influence. This is the creativity of the ruling 6 being applied
in reverse — destructiveness.
He is happiest when involved in creative activities,
exemplified in his efforts to develop better working conditions
and more equitable rewards when he feels the prevailing ones
are inadequate. But he is tolerant of other points of view,
wherein lies his special power as a negotiator.
Although Bob Hawke is sometimes misrepresented by
the media when they attempt to portray him as a volatile,
tempestuous hardhead, an impulsive idealism is so entrenched
in his personality (indicated by the three 9s on his Birthchart)
that all his creative efforts must be directed towards the
common good, as he sees it. This will often create the illusion
of fanaticism.
There is no doubt that Bob Hawke is a worrier. His furrowed
brow attests to this, yet he attempts to allay any outward
suspicion of worry in his demeanour. He is easily inclined
towards such depth of concern when he feels injustice is being
perpetrated that he will worry about the situation until he can
organise to have it reversed. This tendency will militate against
the success of his proposed entry into federal parliament, for
there he will find circumstances far too complex and too
cumbersome for him to exercise as much control as he would
want. In short, his health could be significantly impaired if he
proceeds with his expressed intention of gaining recognition as 24 a parliamentarian unless he undertakes a programme designed
to train him in controlled relaxation and emotional
containment.
Bob Hawke’s opponents should never underestimate his
intuitive ability. He has a very profound sense of knowing
things in advance of their expression and of assessing
situations before they develop (two 2s on his Birthchart). He
will, however, experience many more frustrations in his
personal life, especially with regard to friendships, where some
in whom he has placed his trust will betray him (indicated by
the Arrow of Frustrations: no Júpiter -5-6). This has to be carefully
controlled, for it would otherwise exacerbate his tendency to
worry, precipitating any number of nerve-oriented health
disorders. RULING NUMBER 7
This is the Ruling Number under which people gain maximum
experience, both through learning and through teaching (teaching
being the consummate means of learning). Both facets of growth
are, of course, intimately related to physical expression, symbolised
by the position of the 7 on the Birthchart at the intersection of the
Practical Plane and the Activity Arrow (see pages 43 and 88).
Purpose It would appear that the manner by which individual
human development takes place in life ensures that each soul
incarnates with a Ruling Number 7 when it is necessary to undertake
a major step forward. The unique aspect of this Ruling Number is its
almost limitless capacity for learning through personal involvement.
Enlightenment gained in such a way invariably qualifies ruling 7
people to be able to share their experiences, making them excellent
teachers. Best Expression One of the most important requirements in
these people’s lives is that they be allowed to learn their way. They
can accept only a minimum of direction from others, as they hunger
to learn by personal involvement and expression: the involvement
demands sacrifices of them; the expression of their acquired
knowledge manifests itself in teaching, for they are devoted helpers
of mankind. Ruling 7 people find someone else’s discipline very
difficult to live with, yet develop their own self-imposed programme
by which their lives are directed — and by which they sometimes like
to direct other people’s lives.
Distinctive Traits These people are found among the most
25 active in all walks of life. Although not always conscious of it, their
driving force is the need for personal experience. It is a fundamental
law of human life that personal experiences become the most
memorable, consequently the most valuable, when they are the
result of personal sacrifices. This is the Path of the Ruling Number 7.
Many of them appear to have rather sad lives, suffering losses in
love, money or health when their actions are in conflict with their
higher guidance. But they possess a tremendous natural fortitude as
well as an inherent confidence and deep philosophical understanding, recognising that everything occurs for a purpose. Negative Tendencies to be Surmounted Their compulsion for personal experience, to the point of rejecting
guidance, will sometimes cause ruling 7s to become extremely
rebellious. In refusing to accept advice, they adopt the attitude of ‘I
like learning, but I do not like being taught’. This can lead them into
all sorts of seemingly unnecessary sadnesses as they fail to learn by
an intelligent application of advice. Yet they often endeavour to
enjoin other people to follow their advice and become annoyed if
they get the same response to advice as they give to others. Until
they mature and act more wisely, their domestic and business lives
will be far from happy, in fact, they should avoid financial
involvement in business, as they rarely possess a sound
understanding of economics. Recommended Development It would be of great
benefit to ruling 7s if they embraced as much discipline in their lives
as they seek to teach others. By this means, they will evolve a more
reliable intuition and a well-balanced philosophical outlook. They
are naturally slow learners, due to their need to experience so much
for themselves. Parents should take special note of this
characteristic and permit their ruling 7 children to learn at their own
speed. All too often parents regard their children’s progress at
school as some sort of prestige race, acting as though they are more
concerned with the family name than with the children's welfare.
The family must realise that children with this Ruling Number learn
rapidly until age seven, at which time they seem to need to stabilise.
Their academic learning rate decreases markedly between ages
seven and fourteen — a very important period of spiritual growth in
their lives when they turn inward for the first time. From age
fourteen onwards their academic learning rate will increase once
more, but rarely do these children emerge as brilliant scholars.
Most Suitable Vocations Being very trustworthy themselves and consequently expecting trust from others, these
people are ideally suited to positions among the judiciary and in
legal practice. They are also people who are adept at the use of 26 sharp instruments. Many therefore choose careers as surgeons,
butchers, carpenters. As one would expect, many teachers are
found among ruling 7 people, as are clergy, technicians, scientists,
naturalists and philosophers. Capsule Summary Needing to learn by personal experience;
disliking discipline; assertive; philosophical; teaching and helpful;
leading a life in which many sacrifices must be experienced. Personality Example Sir Winston Churchill, born November
30, 1874.
‘I like to learn but I do not want to be taught’. It is unknown
whether Sir Winston Churchill used this exact expression but
he certainly epitomised its meaning in his general attitude
towards people. He was indeed a typical ruling 7, in that he
regarded life as a series of personal learning experiences. But
he had to learn by his own involvement.
The earlier life of Sir Winston Churchill was highlighted by
some brilliant decisions; and others which were not quite so
worthy of his ability. He was very much a self-disciplined man
and it is obvious from his Ruling Number that he did not take
kindly to externally imposed rules and regulations. As he
matured, his fierce non-disciplinarian manner would have
mellowed to enable him to gain more guidance from the
experienced advisors available to a man in such a high
position.
That he was assertive and had a deep philosophical basis to
his attitudes and actions are characteristics well recorded.
When we recognise that on his Birthchart his greatest strength
lies on the Practical Plane (with the Arrow of Practicality), we
understand how he was able to achieve so much over an
extensive span of years.
It is not uncommon for ruling 7 people to be aggressive if
they feel that others are imposing their will on them or if they
sense that their freedom is being restricted. Such
aggressiveness was a characteristic of the young Winston
Churchill whose pugnaciousness was a defence to protect his
highly sensitive nature.
It was not until his later years his intuition developed sufficiently to enable him to discriminate wisely in his selection of
associates and acquaintances. Ruling 7 people are often quite
slow in learning how to deal with people in their earlier years
and, especially without a 2 on his Birthchart, Sir Winston
Churchill had to develop such knowledge by the control of his
temper and by careful observation. To learn in this manner is
necessary to most people, but especially to ruling 7s. 27 RULING NUMBER 8
These are people who regard independence as one of the most
important aspects of life. They can be very complex people who
invariably possess great strength of character. Their power derives
from the position of the 8 on the Spiritual (feeling) Plane, as well as
being in the centre of the Arrow of Activity. Ruling Number 8
birthdates are those which total 17, 26, 35 or 44. Purpose One of the most important aspects of love is our
ability to express it. One of the most important components of
successful human relationships is a fluent ability to express
appreciation (itself, a vital embodiment of love). It is in these two
avenues of expression that Ruling Number 8 people find greatest
difficulty; consequently, an essential feature of their purpose in life
is to transcend these limitations. Growth in this direction comes
with the realisation that, rather than inhibiting their Independence,
such improved relationships strengthen the confidence others have
in them. This, in turn, creates greater personal security and
improved happiness in their lives.
Best Expression Seemingly inconsistent for Ruling Number
8s is their enormous capacity for compassion and sympathetic tenderness for those in trouble. However, not always do
they express themselves in this way for long, tending to grow
impatient with those who become dependent upon them, for this
hampers their own independence. They are generally most
successful in business, particularly if they can express their abilities
freely without emotional misunderstandings. Ruling 8 people are
generally very conscious of how they dress, taking great pride in
their appearance.
Distinctive Traits A strong air of independence and dependability, together with a self-confident manner, are distinctive in the
attitudes of the ruling 8. Both qualities work in harmony to equip
them for positions of seniority and responsibility in which many are
found in industry and commerce. But their independence
transmutes to an undemonstrative attitude of coolness, bordering
on indifference, in the home. This is related to their difficulties of
self-expression, inhibitions which maturity often helps to overcome.
Their expressed love for helpless creatures — for animals, infants,
the dependent and the very sick — is constantly seeking to be
expressed.
Negative Tendencies to be Surmounted Their fierce
independence is often so zealously guarded that these people
develop a deep resentment toward any form of (what they regard as)
interference in their plans. Therefore great diplomacy and tact must
28 be employed by those seeking to guide them. Indeed, ruling 8
people need a good deal of guidance, especially in their handling of
children, where they find difficulty in adopting the middle path —
they are either overindulgent or exceptionally strict. Recommended Development Every effort should be
made to overcome the undemonstrativeness which they unvaryingly
exhibit towards their loved ones. Until this is achieved they will not
find real happiness in the home. They must learn to eschew
aloofness and to express overtly the appreciation and love they
possess for their spouse, rather than hide these feelings and expect
the spouse to know they exist. A successful marriage cannot be
achieved when one partner takes the other for granted. Most Suitable Vocations These people are suited to work
as senior executives in commerce and industry; bankers and
financiers; stockbrokers and investors; philanthropists; travel
executives; aircraft and ship’s captains; teachers and nurses to
children; animal welfare workers; zookeepers and animal trainers.
Capsule Summary These people are independent; dependable; self-confident; undemonstrative; commercially oriented;
deeply concerned for the sick and the helpless.
Personality Example Johannes
Bjelke-Petersen,
born
January 13, 1911.
To describe him as independent, confident and commercially
oriented would satisfy some of the impressions given by the
present premier of Queensland. However, to a majority of
Australians, he appears as arrogant and terse, with a selfconfidence which is more a mask than a reality.
Few would think of Joh Bjelke-Petersen as shy, yet it is this
deep, personal sensitivity which caused him to develop an
inferiority complex as a youngster and which now tends to
make him over-react when challenged on issues which he
regards as personal or involving his personal judgement. In so
doing he often misrepresents his genuine concern for the social
conditions he is seeking to improve.
Joh’s habit of attracting unfavourable publicity derives from
his many inner conflicts. He holds himself aloof, not only as a
means of protecting himself from those who seek to intrude
upon his personal life and thoughts, but also because he seeks
to protect the independence he so cherishes. Bjelke-Petersen
feels he is doing the best possible job as premier and expects
others to believe it too. In the main, he is highly dependable,
but this is often overshadowed by the apparent egocentricity
of his self-confidence. We must remember that this is a very
independent man who prefers demonstrating his abilities in
29 action to explaining or verbally justifying them.
When analysing a person as controversial as Joh BjelkePetersen, we should be careful to prevent any media or political
bias from entering into our assessments. Falling into such error
would obscure our recognition of some of the capabilities
which have contributed to the success of this man in his
businesslike guidance of his state's commercial affairs. His
commercial orientation underlies his apparent inflexibility
where it comes to social issues, when he feels they interfere
with the financial life of his domain. Yet this is another of his
inconsistencies, for he is highly sensitive to the needs of the
sick, the underprivileged and the helpless — it is in these areas
where he feels at ease demonstrating his empathy, for he
knows he will be appreciated.
In most of his daily involvements, Joh Bjelke-Petersen’s
attitudes are far too reactive to attract him to many people,
although some secretly respect the success he seems to have
achieved in many fields. These are not uncommon reactions to
the ruling 8 in public life, especially the older ruling 8s, for
they do not find it easy to relate to ‘new age’ consciousness
and sharing — Lang Hancock is a further example, although he
does not have as many personality problems to overcome as
has Joh. RULING NUMBER Mercúrio Responsibility and humanitarian concern are the two most vital
aspects of this Ruling Number. These are people who put people
before things, who put principle before principal. They are
individuals whose birthdate numbers total 18, 27, 36 or 45. Purpose This is a powerful Ruling Number in the affairs of man.
Those who possess it are intended to number among the guardians
of our cultural heritage. They are far more suited to art than to
science, to humanitarian rather than to commercial pursuits. Most of
our potential philosophers, reformers and cultural leaders are to be
found with this Ruling Number, although not always are their
idealistic concepts the most workable — it is an important aspect of
their purpose in life to learn to translate the idealistic into the
practical.
Best Expression The serving of humanity and the improving
of earthly life are at the heart of the ruling Mercúrio 's expression. The
method by which they can best achieve this will be indicated by the
formation and analysis of their Birthchart. These people are
ambitious for the principles they revere, but are inclined to be more
30 concerned with the overall plan than with its details. Therefore they
should concentrate upon non-commercial undertakings — indeed
they are poor financial managers. They are very artistic, preferring
the deeply serious to the comic or popular forms of artistic
expression. Distinctive Traits Responsibility is their forte; they are
exceptionally honest and intensely idealistic. Honesty is so natural
to them that they assume everyone to be so inclined. This often
leads to great disappointments in people. They would rather give
money to needy people than save it for themselves. They have very
definite thoughts about life and its ideals, about humanity and how
people should be motivated. Even though these ideas are not always
the most practical, ruling 9s will always strive to implement them,
for in these areas they are ambitious people.
Negative Tendencies to be Surmounted An
indication of negative living is when these people fail to adopt the
ideals they seek to impress on others. Great care has to be taken to
ensure that they do not fall victim to one of the most offensive of all
human transgressions — hypocrisy. Their ambitions can dominate
and destroy the integrity of their ideals, thereby developing an
egocentricity which is far from appealing. This will often produce a
very abrupt manner and an attitude of destructive criticism which
their associates will find difficult to tolerate.
Recommended Development The strong idealism of the
ruling Mercúrio does not make for good judges of character. Yet once this
limitation is realised it can be remedied by their studying a reliable
guide to understanding people, such as the science of numbers.
Such a study will help them to investigate all aspects of a person
before drawing conclusions. This, in turn, will help develop intuition.
Patience and persistence are two other important traits which these
people often lack but which can be cultivated from the
numerological study of their own and other people’s personalities.
Most Suitable Vocations These people are suited to work
as religious ministers; reformers; philanthropists; organisers of
humanitarian projects; conciliators; researchers; criminologists;
healers; archaeologists; actors; painters, writers or sculptors of an
intensely serious nature. Capsule Summary Ruling 9s are responsible; extremely
honest; idealistic; ambitious; humanitarian; very poor at saving
money; with a serious attitude to life. Personality Example Joan Sutherland, born November 7, 1926.
There has probably never been a more powerful or richer
31 soprano voice to grace the stages of the world’s opera houses
than that belonging to Australia’s Joan Sutherland. The
combination of her musical and acting talents has guaranteed
her a unique place in the musical history books; but it is only
fair to say that she could never have achieved such success on
her own.
Possessing the idealism, honesty and seriousness characteristic of a ruling Mercúrio person, Joan Sutherland must have always
combined these with a ceaseless ambition to reach the top. Yet
for so many years she appeared unable to make it. This
situation illustrates the typical traits of ruling 9s, together with
their affinity for the tragic, so in evidence in Joan Sutherland's
most famous role as Lucia di Lammermoor, a role which was
instrumental in bringing her worldwide accolades.
However, these qualities were insufficient in themselves.
A very necessary driving force was absent, as seems to be the
case with many ruling Mercúrio people. This inherent insufficiency is
further indicated by the lack of any arrows on the Birthchart
(see Stage 7). Certainly, her name gave some assistance, but
insufficient for her to travel such an arduous path as was
necessary to reach the top of her chosen profession without
the guidance of a dynamic manager.
The entry of Richard Bonynge into her life brought to Joan
Sutherland every quality necessary for her to succeed. His
unique attributes were ideally supplementary to hers — his
creative idealism and vast wealth of knowledge have been her
godsend. However, she must take care that, in this
relationship, he does not deprive her of the satisfaction she
must derive from the acceptance of deep personal responsibility. Creative genius can unthinkingly assume such total
command that no room remains for others to exercise their
special talents. Joan Sutherland must recognise her abilities and
choose her roles accordingly — this responsibility is important
to her personal satisfaction. All the same, she is not a good
judge of character and is often quite gullible — indicating the
area in which she will always need the astute guidance of one
who is not a ruling Mercúrio . RULING NUMBER 10
Most Ruling Numbers can be expressed in a variety of ways,
depending on the degree of awareness of the person. But there is
probably no greater range of expression than that found in people
with the Ruling Number 10. They vary from most likeable,
personality plus people when living positively, to lost, floundering, 32 insecure people, when existing negatively. However, they are
essentially the most adaptable of people which favours them with an
excellent ability to adjust to life’s contingencies. The Ruling Number
10 applies to birthdates which have number totals of 19, 28, 37 or
46. Purpose Ruling 10 people have incarnated with two prime
purposes — to learn to readily adjust to life’s many vicissitudes, and
to help others to adjust. As life becomes more complex, human
adaptation becomes the more vital. Yet to the Ruling Number 10, the
adjustment presents no problem. This quality greatly facilitates their
helping others, both in mediating between people and in assisting
them to harmonise with external circumstances. Best Expression If ever we are looking for somebody to help
us enjoy the light-hearted pleasures of life, we would generally find no
better person than a ruling 10. They express best when allowed
the freedom of what they regard as the bubbling excitement of life.
But when they are suppressed or feel emotionally hampered, they become most despondent without realising why. It is as though the joy
of their expression has been lost forever and this gives rise to much
frustration in their dealings with people, especially evident by
short temper and irritability. The minority of ruling 10 people who
have discovered the true depth to their personality and the real
meaning of their life, will recognise it and are not so reactive —
although they will find they are not as light-hearted as those just
described, they are invariably consistently optimistic in their
approach to life, expressed through a buoyant personality.
Distinctive Traits Their innate power of adaptability to
people and circumstances makes ruling 10s popular in almost every
walk of life. They possess a natural ability for making people happy
although — because they prefer not to delve too deeply into other
people’s problems — they do not always realise why others lapse
into disharmony. In fact, they do not delve deeply into their own
lives, contenting themselves more with the pleasures of the
moment, while their air of self-assurance can easily mislead others
into thinking they have total command of themselves. This selfassurance is usually based on their physical and social aptitudes
(such as in sports and at parties), noticeably diminishing where
emotional involvements are concerned. In a lighthearted manner,
they are artistic in expression, with a sensitive touch which makes
them good instrumentalists and capable judges of quality in clothing
and materials.
Negative Tendencies to be Surmounted Their selfconfidence can sometimes lead these people to dominate others,
but they dominate unwisely, invariably creating instead of
33 overcoming disharmony. This tendency is best avoided by keeping
the ego under control. When not engaged in creative or constructive
activities for any significant period ruling 10s tend to lapse into
superficiality, expecting life to be just one big ball, complaining if
things do not go well for them, but doing little to improve
themselves. Unless they are surrounded by bright company, they
can easily become melancholy and emotionally insecure. They must
be taught to practise the most reliable means of finding themselves
and of achieving inner peace — the discovery of silence through
meditation. Recommended Development The most important aim
for a ruling 10 is training to strengthen their individuality. They must
not allow themselves to get lost in conformity or mediocrity but,
rather, expand their powers of awareness by a conscious application
of discipline and self-expression. To everyone, the Pythagorean
disciplines are indispensable exercises in self-enlightenment; to a
ruling 10, they are doubly beneficial. Based on silence and
meditation, these exercises cover such essentials as memory
training, moderation, fortitude, compassion, harmony and order.
Most Suitable Vocations These people are suited to work
as interior decorators and designers; buyers of fabrics and materials;
salespeople; politicians of the loyal party type, but not statesmen;
town planners and architects; light entertainers; professional
sportspeople; charity fundraisers. Capsule Summary The ruling 10 is confident; debonair;
bright, with a general happy disposition; possesses an extremely
sensitive touch; very capable in buying and selling.
Personality Example Rupert Murdoch, born March 11,
1931.
Very few Australians have made their mark on the competitive
world of international commerce to the same degree as has
Rupert Murdoch. His ventures into the hallowed portals of fleet
Street and the corporate publishing world of New York City
astounded even the most hardened media executives around
the world. But Rupert Murdoch was not to be intimidated.
Skill in buying and selling, his debonair and sensitive
attitude, his abundant self-confidence, and his ready adaptability have combined to make Rupert Murdoch an example of the
heights to which a ruling 10 person can aspire. Most ruling 10
people are inclined to be happy-go-lucky, content to be
average, popular people who enjoy a good time, but who never
appear to achieve much in life. Yet, when they recognise their
latent abilities, ruling 10s can become dynamic individuals,
especially in activities where skills in buying and selling and 34 where personal persuasiveness are demanded, for here they
excel.
Life has not always been a pattern of success for Rupert
Murdoch. Nor will it always be one. But his adaptability will
always stand by him, allowing him to exercise exceptional
flexibility. If he attempts a business proposition which
eventually turns sour he will not stubbornly persist against the
impossible, but will about-face and develop a different
approach or even undertake an entirely new venture.
Murdoch’s acute mental alertness has its roots in the two
3s on his Birthchart. These also significantly contribute to his
literary ability, but he must take care that he does not become
so mentally hyperactive that he fails to relax. If he would learn
to meditate, his mental abilities would have a far longer life
expectancy and he would maintain a better balance in his
attitude towards other people. Because of his hypersensitivity,
Rupert Murdoch occasionally over-reacts to the two extremes
of people — those who appear to challenge him and those who
are mentally lazy. Tolerance is an important factor in his
success in relating to people and will help to attract cheery
people about him, their presence being a necessary palliative to
melancholy and emotional insecurity. RULING NUMBER 11
An especially high level of spirituality surrounds this Ruling Number,
offering those born to it a unique potential for the development of
their intuition, clairvoyance and similar metaphysical faculties.
Unfortunately, more people fail to live up to this potential power
than develop it, but this pattern is changing with the approach of the
new age of awareness. In practice, we do not find so many ruling
11s, for only two birthdate totals currently qualify — 29 and 38. Purpose These people are among the few who are potentially
best equipped to guide mankind into the emerging new age. It is a
very responsible incarnation they have chosen. Unfortunately, many
find that as life’s physical attractions become recognised by them
they are diverted from their higher purpose. As man moves into the
new age he is becoming aware of those profound metaphysical
forces which express themselves through the faculties of
clairvoyance, intuition, E.S. Plutão ., psychometry, spiritual healing, etc. A
high proportion of ruling 11 people will be found forging ahead in
the developments in this field.
Best Expression As lovers of refinement, beauty and the
cultural virtues of life, people with this Ruling Number gravitate
35 towards such an environment because it liberates them to express
their innate spirituality. Material life, for them, is demanding and
uninteresting, but they have to learn to balance it with the ideal they
seek within. That is why we are here on Earth Plane; for the noblest
of spiritual virtues is of little value unless it can be transmitted into
practical application, unless it can be employed to improve the
quality of life. No finer expression can be found than in doing this. Distinctive Traits There are extreme differences between
the lifestyles of the ruling 11 who lives positively and utilises his
exceptional spiritual powers and his negative counterpart whose life
appears difficult and colourless. An uncompromisingly high level of
morality, profoundly reliable intuitiveness and inspired driving force
are clearly in evidence when these people are involved in spiritually
oriented pursuits. They are extremely dependable, honest and just,
with a deep love for family and friends, together with a sincere
compassion for all life.
Negative Tendencies to be Surmounted Temptation
to abdicate our responsibility for virtuous living becomes stronger
as modern commercialism seeks new and more devious ways to sell
its overproduction of often unnecessary commodities. Life is meant
to be far less complicated, far more harmonious than many people
now find it. Such complexities can easily confuse and misdirect
sensitive people from their Path. When this happens they can
become bitter and spiteful, often indifferent in their attitude toward
other people and to their work. Special efforts should be made by
ruling 11s to avoid these pitfalls and elevate themselves above the
enticement of material wants, recognising how foreign those wants
are to their own real needs or the needs of others. This step will
demand more than average effort of will. It might even alienate them
from other materially motivated people.
Recommended Development Spiritual faculties do not
mix well with commerce for the ruling 11. Consequently, their best
avenues for development lie in those professions which can
facilitate growth in spiritual awareness, as well as providing
adequate monetary rewards. Their natural generosity and
spontaneous habits of assisting people in need — admirable virtues,
indeed — create a more-than-average demand on the financial
resources of ruling 11s, so they should learn to recognise priorities
and be guided by their intuition, rather than any desires for
recognition. They are often tempted to reject assistance for
themselves when in need, but must learn to be more receptive and
recognise the benefits which can accrue to the giver and receiver of
such practical co-operation.
Most Suitable Vocations Ruling 11 people often excel
as educationists; social workers; religious or art teachers; architects; 36 explorers; geologists; designers or inventors; artistic performers (so
long as there is an underlying moral value). It is important to realise
that ruling 11s rarely succeed in business, although they have a
great capacity for supporting any business in which the common
good is served. Capsule Summary These people are highly sensitive; love
refinement, beauty and all things which have a deep cultural
substance; intensely honest and compassionate, often preferring to
avoid the life of hard business.
Personality Example Wolfgang Mozart, born January 27,
1756.
Any visitor to the quaint Austrian city of Salzburg could not
help but feel saddened that the most famous citizen of that city
should die in such abject poverty after enriching the world with
the most beautiful of musical compositions. No composer has
ever rivalled Mozart for the sheer brilliance, beauty and
diversity of his musical genius. Even so, many contemporaries
patterned their developing styles on his (the great Beethoven
being no exception, for his First Symphony is almost
Mozartian), recognising in Mozart a depth of spiritual beauty
which captured their very souls.
No lover of refinement, beauty and culture could help but
be enthralled at the sensitivity of Mozart’s musical
compositions, a sensitivity characteristic of the ruling 11.
Sensitivity is the soulmate of compassion, and we know that
Mozart’s life was directed in this vein. His dedication to work
precipitated an untimely end, for it so depleted his health that
he died at the age of thirty-five. He left no money, for he barely
earned sufficient to feed himself and his family. This is not
uncommon among those ruling 11 people who have discovered
a vital essence to their lives; for money, to them, is never an
end in itself.
Personal hardship is apparent when there is a heavy
incidence of 7s in such people’s numbers. Mozart had two 7s
on his Birthchart (as did Beethoven — in fact, they had rather
similar Birthcharts). These 7s imply the depth of personal
sacrifice each had to endure in order to achieve his life’s
ambitions. History confirms these assessments. Sacrifices occur
invariably in the areas of health, love and/or money, the
intention of such great masters being to develop a level of higher
understanding which is to be shared with those who are ready. RULING NUMBER 22/ Júpiter This is the master number. People born with the Ruling Number
37 22/ Júpiter possess unlimited potential and often make their mark in life
by achieving seemingly impossible goals. But there are two distinct
types of ruling 22/ Júpiter — the aware and the unaware. The difference
between them is extreme. The former benefit from the successful
mastery of any aspect of life into which they are directed; the latter
drift into a lazy indifference and become almost useless misfits. The
number 22 occupies a special place in symbolic philosophy. It
represents the circle which encompasses all. the nothing and yet the
everything, the infinite. In the science of numbers, 22 represents a
doubling of the highest spiritual power, (double 11), complemented
by the intense practicality of the Júpiter — a unique combination of the
utmost benefit in earthly life. Because of its special combination of
spiritual and physical powers, this Ruling Number is always written
as 22/ Júpiter and verbally expressed as twenty-two four. Of all the Ruling
Numbers, 22/ Júpiter is the most seldom found. Only one total of
birthdate numbers can result in 22, and the exceedingly high
responsibilities this brings with it are such as to attract only the
most evolved souls seeking reincarnation. Experience indicates that
only around one percent of the population possess this Ruling
Number. Purpose As human life continues to evolve through stages of
progressive enlightenment there will always be people of
outstanding leadership whose purpose is to guide such evolution.
This they achieve in much the same way as some outstanding
directors guide the unfolding of a movie or a play — they might take
a minor role in it themselves, but never the starring role, preferring
to guide from behind the scenes where the decisions are made and
the entire all-over design is formulated. In whatever walk of life they
find themselves, if 22/4s are living positively, they are invariably at
the core of the organisation. With the approach of the new age the
role of these people is particularly crucial, for their personal
enlightenment is a beacon whose light will illumine the Path and
guide countless others, many of whom will not realise from whence
came the guidance and encouragement. It is generally not
characteristic of ruling 22/4s to be found in the limelight of human
affairs; in fact, they work far better in partial anonymity, so long as
they gain sufficient recognition by way of respect and co-operation
to facilitate their work.
Best Expression To achieve any semblance of their potential,
ruling 22/4s need a first-rate education. Many of them spend a great
deal of their time in studies, always seeking to better themselves.
They realise that by this means they are better equipped to help
others. These are people who must be allowed to work without
constrictions, for they become most frustrated if they work under
38 direction for too long. The rate at which these people learn is quite
surprising, as though they have done most things in previous lives
and are merely reacquainting themselves with the current modes of
expression. Little wonder they constantly rise to leadership in
whatever they do.
Distinctive Traits One of the most noticeable traits of ruling
22/4s is their apparent lack of emotion. They regard complete
emotional control as being fundamental to their purpose. So it is for
this reason that they adopt it, rather than from any desire to be
exclusive or difficult to understand. Actually they are very sensitive
people, with deeply loving natures, although only their closer
friends come to realise this. Ruling 22/ Júpiter people rarely fail to accept a
challenge, especially if it involves human welfare. They will be found
in some of the most difficult and seemingly dangerous
environments, but are usually cool and careful in the execution of
whatever work they are directing. Their capacity for responsibility is
limitless and, because of this, others come to depend on them, too
much perhaps, producing both an unfair burden on the 22/ Júpiter and
encouraging a little laziness on the part of the other person. Negative Tendencies to be Surmounted Most 22/ Júpiter people readily recognise many of their strengths and capably
employ them. The few who do not, or who are drawn into a
materialistic environment, take on all the negative aspects of the
ruling Júpiter , but worse. They become little better than misfits, with an
obsession for money, in the quest for which they will brook little
interference. They become unhappy, aloof and insensitive to
refinement. This often creates deep loneliness and excessive selfcentredness in such people, whether they are found at the head of a
large organisation or doing manual work under direction.
Rehabilitation from these depths demands great patience,
understanding and unstinting loving tenderness. As all ruling 22/ Júpiter people are fond of art, rhythm, dancing and most forms of music, the
use of these avenues of expression will be found of great help in
bringing about balanced emotions and a more positive attitude. Recommended Development For all ruling 22/4s it is
important to ensure that life provides a balance of work and
pleasure. To be sure, they have such a considerable aptitude for
work that they often dismiss pleasures as a waste of time. Their
development along artistic and cultural lines through hobbies —
such as singing, dancing, painting, writing or similar pursuits — will
greatly help them to express their feelings more capably, and loosen
up emotionally. They must always endeavour to have good
academic training and are never too old to get it. (Lack of opportunity in childhood is never a valid excuse).
39 Most Suitable Vocations These people are suited to work
as leaders in business and cultural organisations; artists; teachers or
reformers; writers; diplomats; efficiency experts; administrators.
Capsule Summary This is the master number; whose
bearers have the most extreme levels of personal responsibility;
they are highly intuitive, with a very tight rein on their emotions and
an intense concern for human welfare. Personality Example Margaret Thatcher, born October 13,
1925.
The choice of Margaret Thatcher for this example was made for
a very important reason: she is a very powerful person who has
assumed control of an ailing country. She is probably the only
person who has the ability to steer Britain back to a sound
economy — as though she were the ‘last chance.’ May she be
only one of many women who have the courage of their
convictions to enter the field of government and correct the
inhumanities that so many thoughtless men have perpetrated
upon this beautiful planet.
Margaret Thatcher typifies a ruling 22/ Júpiter . She is charming,
highly intuitive and, in fact, possesses all the virtues in the
above capsule summary. And she will need them in her
onerous task. Indeed, she has to believe herself to possess
almost limitless strength and managerial ability to achieve any
measure of success in restoring Great Britain to a position of
world leadership. Her sense of fair play will be guided by her
acute intuitiveness so that she will not be hoodwinked into
leading her country further along the road of useless
compromise to placate the selfish demands of those warring
factions which have hitherto fuelled the conflict. She is a person
of resolve who will get her way to the ultimate benefit of all
the people.
Strong determination is reinforced by the arrow 1-5- Mercúrio on
Margaret Thatcher's Birthchart. This is intensified by the Arrow
of the Planner (described in Stage 7), so she has a unique
power base upon which to develop her plans for Britain’s
recovery. Her Day Number Júpiter and her balanced Mental Plane
(the 3 and Mercúrio on the Birthchart) are further aids in this direction.
In summary, this is a unique person. No world leader is
better equipped to undertake such a momentous task than
Margaret Thatcher. Undoubtedly, she will prove to the world
that the talents of women in government should not be so
shamefully overlooked. For what the world needs now, more
than ever, is compassion, intuitive guidance and leadership by
selfless example. In short, every country needs a Margaret
Thatcher. 40 STAGE 5
The Birthchart–Your Formula The medium through which the essential characteristics of a person
are obtained is the date of birth written in terms of its component
numbers. Individual numbers of the birthdate are then placed on a
simple chart for analysis. This we call the Birthchart, for it portrays
from birth the pattern of basic strengths and weaknesses — the
inherent formula, so to speak, of the person’s individuality. Choose
a few birthdates and practise the following method: Step 1 The birthdate must first be written in its full numerical
terms. January is 1, going through to December, which is 12. Thus,
July 25, 1968 is written 7-25-1968. Step 2 The Birthchart is now constructed of four lines — two
horizontal parallel lines intersected by two vertical lines, similarly
spaced, to form nine spaces of equal size. The Birthchart is always
drawn in the same way, thus: Step 3 We must now place the numbers of the birthdate on the
Birthchart. (When empty, the chart represents a person not yet born
— its nine spaces as yet have no numbers.) Each number always
occupies the same space, no matter how often it occurs in the
birthdate or how many other numbers are missing from the
birthdate. The full Birthchart, if one of every number were present,
would appear thus: 41 This chart represents a perfect person, one who has complete
balance. Of course, this can never be, any more than it is possible for
one birthdate to provide these numbers in this or any other era. In
practice, a Birthchart will always have some empty spaces — at least
two, and up to seven spaces can be empty. Inevitably, there will be
some duplication of numbers as well, although a very small
percentage of birthdates will be found to have no duplication. For
example, a person born on July 25, 1968 would have his birthdate
represented thus:
7-25-1968
This would result in the following Birthchart, seen to have seven
spaces occupied and no duplication of numbers: At the other end of the scale we occasionally find a birthdate
with only two spaces filled on the Birthchart. This will be found to
contain a heavy concentration of at least one particular number. An
example is a person born November 10, 1911. The birthdate is set
forth thus:
11-10-1911
Now we see a very different Birthchart to the previous example: 42 Please note that the zero is omitted when setting up the
Birthchart, as it has no value in this phase of numerological analysis.
Its presence does, however, reduce the number of numbers
appearing in the birthdate and on the Birthchart. To this extent we
can see that zero sometimes implies certain modifications; at other
times its presence can help avoid too much concentration of
numbers on the Birthchart. In practice, the zero will be found to
provide a valuable balancing factor in the personality. Step Júpiter With the Birthchart complete we are now ready to
analyse its general meaning, to discover the plane upon which the
person basically expresses most fluently. This should precede the
analysis of the component numbers of the Birthchart. If the
Birthchart is well balanced such expression might expand over two
planes, or even over all three. To comprehend the three basic planes
of expression let us again refer to the full Birthchart and observe the
positions of these planes:
Mental Plane (thinking, intellect)
Spiritual Plane (feeling, emotion)
Practical Plane (doing) Each of the three horizontal sets of spaces forms a separate
plane of expression. If a person’s Birthchart has an equal distribution
of numbers over the three planes his basic expression should be
similarly balanced. If a particular concentration of numbers on any
one or two of the planes is apparent, we can recognise the general
nature of the person’s inherent expression and motivation from the
characteristics of the plane(s). 43 Mental Plane The numbers on the top line of the Birthchart
indicate emphasis in the direction of the mind and mental processes,
including thinking, analysing, imagining, creating, etc. They are the
numbers of conscious awareness, when used in combination with
the positive spiritual powers; of facts, figures and prejudices when
used in combination with material powers. The difference between
the two applications becomes apparent when we recognise the
distinction between intelligence and intellect — the first manifesting
in the former, the second evident in the latter application.
Definitions, by their very nature, tend to limit. Therefore, we
shall not attempt to define intelligence but rather to explain it as
being the wise use of universal knowledge, applied with awareness
and understanding. Intellect is more easily defined because it is
more limited, being the accumulated memory bank of worldly
notions gathered by the experiences of the senses and by parental
and academic training. The intellect can certainly aid in the
development of the intelligence if it is directed toward improving the
quality of life. When employed negatively the intellect can be an
encumbrance to the intelligence, thwarting its development by
befogging the issues and leading to incorrect and shallow
conclusions.
Spiritual Plane The centre line of the Birthchart represents
the realms of feeling through which the mental is related to the
practical. It is called the Spiritual Plane because if embraces qualities
of a spiritual or metaphysical (beyond the physical) nature such as
intuition, feelings and emotions. At this point, it is helpful to
understand the meaning of emotion. Emotions are really reactive
expressions of somewhat uncontrolled feelings. Literally, the word
emotion means backward motion. Thus, for the duration of their
expression, emotions imply reactions to circumstances outside us
which, for that time, overwhelm us because we have let them gain
control. For that period we have lost self-mastery, our individuality
being submerged by the external factors to which we are reacting.
These reactions need not be detrimental so long as they provide
purpose or pleasure. The most appropriate use of emotions is to
lend variety to the scale of human expression.
Practical Plane The nature of man's physical expression is
generally revealed by numbers on this plane. These numbers – 1, Júpiter and 7 — are his ‘doing’ numbers. When employed positively they
facilitate tangible expression by word and action, efficient
organising, instruction and practical involvement. Negatively
expressed, they indicate egotism, self-aggrandisement, materialism
and, inevitably, sacrifice. 44 STAGE 6
Meanings of the Individual Numbers
on the Birthchart THE NUMBER 1 ON THE CHART
Located at the beginning of the Practical Plane, the number 1 refers
to the expression of the physical body in terms of its relationship to
the outside world. It is usually a very good indication of the extent to
which a person reacts to other people and circumstances (the
immediate environment). This denotes to the thinking person the
degree of his self-control — or its lack. As the key to self-expression,
this number is the foundation of the personality. One 1 Birthdates with a single 1 belong to people who have
some difficulty in self-expression. This does not mean that they
cannot speak well, but rather the difficulty lies in their inability to
give clear explanations of their real selves, their inner feelings.
Although they are often good orators, an argument concerning
their own feelings causes them to fare badly, as they fall short of
being able to put into words their attitudes or conduct. Until they
develop adequate self-mastery — a product of maturity and understanding — self-expression will not come easily to them.
They will sometimes say the wrong thing intentionally, to hurt
or to offend or to create an early defence, whether or not the need is
present. They must learn to think before speaking — the spoken
word is hard to retract and hurt feelings are so difficult to mend. Two 1s These people have the gift of self-expression. This is a
most valuable possession and one which should be used wisely.
Care should be taken to avoid intolerance of those who are not so
blessed.
These people have a balanced outlook which enables them to
see both sides of a situation or proposal. They can support either
with equal enthusiasm, giving them an extremely broad
understanding. Three 1s There are two distinctly different types of people
here.
Chatterboxes are the people with three 1s most frequently met — 45 always bright and interesting people who involve themselves in
many activities and generally find life to be most enjoyable, seeking
to share that enjoyment with others.
The quiet people with three 1s will generally be found to have
no numbers on the Spiritual Plane (the Arrow of Hypersensitivity),
making them introspective and somewhat shy. Their natural
tendency to be bright and breezy is inhibited by this sensitivity,
except when with their closest friends. These people will find their
best expression in writing, where their thoughts flow more freely,
unhampered by other people or situations. Four 1s These are quiet and sensitive people. Due to their acute
inability to verbally express themselves as they would like, they are
easily misunderstood. This brings much pain to their highly sensitive
natures, but they quickly learn to hide this with a smile, although
inwardly their emotions cause them to suffer.
They have deep feeling for others, but do not voice such
thoughts easily, due to their emotional constraints. It is important
for their own happiness that they attain emotional control by
realising that emotions are basically the reactions of a
misunderstanding sensitivity. As they learn to know their Inner
Selves they will feel less inhibited and become freer to express,
rather than suppress, their inner feelings and their appreciation of
life and of people.
Five and More 1s With five, six or seven 1s on the
Birthchart, an increasingly heavy imbalance is created to compound
the difficulty of vocal self-expression. Their young lives can indeed
be quite sad, due to being so misunderstood, often creating an
aloofness, an inner loneliness. This tends to make them overly
attentive to their personal selves, making them obsessive about
their appearances and actions. Such egoism can lead to mental
unbalance. It must be especially guarded against by those in charge
of young children who have this heavy concentration of 1s. It is
vitally important for all these people to elevate their consciousness
by becoming involved in communicating through writing or one of
the other expressive arts such as painting, music and pottery. (It is
interesting to note that the occurrence of seven 1s in a birthdate is
extremely rare, fortunately, appearing only once a century. It last
occurred on November 11, 1911 — the last occasion for 200 years).
Some Personality Examples It is important to note that
the number of 1s present on their Birthcharts bears no
relationship to the degree of success achieved by people during
their lifetimes. Of the twenty-five famous people chosen to
illustrate this book, a rather even sprinkling of varying numbers
of 1s appears on the Birthcharts; up to five 1s. Each has 46 something of importance to convey about the self-expression of
the bearer.
A classic example of one 1 is shown on the Birthchart of
Senator Edward Kennedy. From this, we learn that a person can
hold a very important place in his country’s government, even
to the extent of being recognised as a powerful orator, yet
possess an inherent difficulty in expressing his innermost
feelings to those with whom he is most intimate. On such
occasions, he finds that his words do not flow so freely,
especially when called upon to justify or explain a personal
desire or action. This often creates misunderstandings, for his
defensiveness will be expressed in an evasive or aggressive
manner, unintentionally offending others.
The effectiveness of two 1s in providing a well-balanced selfexpression can be recognised in the vocal and literary outputs
of Germaine Greer. In her role as a reforming feminist, she has
accepted constant exposure to demands to justify this intensely
personal mission. Her mastery of interviews and the fluent
expression of her cause have brought her world-wide
recognition.
Many famous people possess three 1s on their Birthcharts; in
fact forty percent of the personality examples chosen to
illustrate this book have three 1s. They tend to be more egomotivated people than those with one or two 1s, and are
generally bright, interesting people with an engaging public
image. This helps to make them excellent media personalities,
as is exemplified by Caroline (ones. Compare her friendly mode
of interviewing with the more abrasive style of Michael
Willesee and you have an illustration of the difference often
encountered between three 1s (Jones) and one 1 (Willesee) in
similar roles. Each is an excellent interviewer, but on different
levels of communication — the former is encouraging; the latter
is challenging, especially when his inner feelings are involved.
When Birthcharts reveal five 1s or more, we should seek
the best means whereby guidance can be directed to help
these people maintain balance in their outlooks. Discover in
which direction their aloofness tends to manifest itself and you
tap into their egocentricity and can assist them in recognising
the source of their loneliness. In the case of Joh BjelkePetersen, his emotions tend to make him aloof because he
finds great difficulty in expressing them in a controlled manner
which will bring pleasure to all parties involved. Thus he often
constricts his emotions until they burst out in an unpleasant,
egocentric way. His best avenue for gaining control of this vital
aspect of expression is to commune more with nature, by
hiking, gardening, etc., especially with a helpful and 47 harmonious companion. In this manner, the exceptional
strength of the five 1s will be directed towards balancing the
unprotected Spiritual Plane and its acute sensitivity. THE NUMBER 2 ON THE CHART
Located as the first number on the Spiritual Plane, 2 is the key to
sensitivity, intuition and feeling. After 1 and Mercúrio , 2 is the most
common number found in birthdates, appearing in fifty to sixty
percent of those encountered in this millennium. A 2 can be quite a
blessing because it provides us with a reliable guide to the degree of
our sensitivity and our intuition. As these faculties develop we
acquire an improved understanding of ourselves, of people, of life
and of all creation.
In the next millennium (the years 2000 to 2999), no birthdate will
be without a 2, an indication of how much more sensitivity and
intuition will then prevail in human affairs. No 2 in the birthdate does
not imply total absence of these traits, but rather the need of a
greater personal effort to develop them to the point of reliable
guidance — so helpful in human relationships. One 2 Birthdates with a single 2 indicate an increased degree of
sensitivity and intuition, but sometimes not enough for adequate
protection of individuality in the highly competitive, somewhat
artificial social and commercial world of today. It is not uncommon
for these people to have their feelings hurt, but they do have a basis
for building self-control and can learn to be less reactive.
They need guidance onto the path of best expression for their
nature in a direction which will easily be found from their Ruling
Number. Life will be easier for them if they try to avoid the rat race
and learn to be themselves without the intensity of competition. Two 2s These people are blessed with the prospect of balanced
sensitivity and intuition — so long as they are prepared to apply
these gifts. (Any virtue not used invariably deteriorates).
Their innate perception places them among the most intuitive of
all people. This generally gives rise to a high intelligence, based on
an acute ability for understanding people and circumstances. They
have a very reliable guide in their first impressions by which almost
instant and accurate opinions of people and concepts are made.
Sincerity or insincerity in others is thereby easily detected.
Such balanced abilities tend to draw these people into becoming
very involved in human affairs. Three 2s Here we find an imbalance leading to hypersensitivity. This can become quite a load to carry if not properly understood. 48 Spending so much of their time in a world of their own feelings,
these people can become quite aloof. They are inclined to suffer
deeply because they are easily hurt and cannot always understand
or express the feelings thus created. This can cause them to become
quite reactive, unless they have learned to master their emotions.
Otherwise, they can impulsively say hurtful things or make fun of
people without actually meaning to be harmful. Such are their
attempts to defend their feelings and allay their fears of being hurt.
As children, these people often become great imitators in an
attempt to hide their keen sensitivity and avoid having their feelings
hurt. Parents should be especially careful to recognise this situation
and help these children to attain control of their emotions by
developing self-confidence. This is best achieved along the Path
indicated by their Ruling Number. Four 2s This exceptionally high level of impressionability has to
be carefully and continuously disciplined or it will easily erupt into
severe misrepresentations which are invariably accompanied by bad
temper, sarcasm and spite.
These people are often extremely impatient, with an unreliable
intuition which acts to confuse and mislead them into placing
confidence in the wrong people. They have a tendency to
spontaneous over-reaction which can make them quite volatile and,
if not checked, lead to unbalance.
Extreme patience and understanding must be shown by friends
(of which they often have very few) and especially by immediate
family. Although these people comprise only a fraction of one
percent of the population they feature in a much higher proportion
of marital breakups, homes for the needy and refuges for the
disturbed and homeless. Their lives are often very lonely, but this
can be avoided if they open themselves to wise counselling and
guidance by one who is trained to recognise the nature of the
imbalance and its purpose — to learn to firmly apply self-control in
the emotional arena, to relax and flow with life, rather than be at
variance with it. Five 2s An extremely rare occurrence, with a frequency of only
twice a century. It last occurred on December 22, 1922 and this
writer has met only one person with such a birthdate. (The contact
was in the course of business, but it was clear that this person was
hiding a deep heartache and avoided any conversation which so
much as alluded to his personal self.) Such individuals are potentially
likely suicides, with lives of bitter disappointments, frustrations and
disillusionments. They need extremely concentrated and devoted
guidance, for they will try others’ patience to the extreme.
Some Personality Examples As the number of sensitivity
and intuition, it is not surprising that 2 is found on the
49 Birthcharts of many famous people, especially those associated
with the arts and culture. This is not to say that people without
a 2 are never found among such luminaries, but rather that
those with a 2 have the distinct natural advantage of
heightened awareness potential. But many people without a 2
learn to develop such awareness — an important achievement.
Women invariably succeed best at this for by nature they are
more intuitive.
Caroline Jones affords a timely example of how a woman can
capably develop her intuition and sensitivity, yet possess no 2
on her Birthchart. Rupert Murdoch, on the other hand, has not
been so successful in this regard, although he relies on his two
3s, for they provide him with a sagacious cunning by means of
which he achieves results far different from those people often
predict of his methods (especially apparent in his corporate
raiding).
Michael Willesee, Bob Hawke and Don Dunstan all possess
two 2s and all have this balanced intuitiveness counterweighted by the Arrow of Scepticism (see page 70). This does
not detract from their deep-rooted sensitivity other than in
their expression of it — it causes them to investigate and assess
things prior to acceptance. This makes Willesee such a perceptive interviewer, Hawke an excellent negotiator and Dunstan so
successful with his audiences — whether from the political
stage or the entertainment one.
As the manuscript for this book was being completed
Senator Edward Kennedy announced his long-awaited intention
of running for the 1980 U.S.A. presidential nomination. He has
a very strong chance of being ultimately elected fortieth
President of the United States and would commence office with
a flourish of creative activity, but it would be shortlived —
indeed, this author cannot see him in office for more than a
year, for his life comes to a crisis in 1981 (probably in July).
(His Personal Year 7, under these circumstances, implies a
special danger to his life). In spite of his seeming national
popularity, Teddy Kennedy has made some avowed enemies.
Most probably his four 2s have caused this, for he has not used
this tremendous power of intuition wisely. When combined
with the lack of a Júpiter (impatience), the one 1 on the Birthchart and
the aspect of overt criticism of the ruling 3 used negatively,
this force can be seen to manifest itself in such extremes of
bad temper, biting sarcasm and spite that forgiveness by those
so offended is out of the question. He does not use his
intuition wisely, often placing confidence in those who least
justify it. These factors will lead to his downfall unless rapidly
recognised and checked.
50 THE NUMBER 3 ON THE CHART
Not only is this the first number on the Mental Plane, the 3 is also the
most powerful of the mind numbers. Whereas with 1s and 2s the
most ideal balance and power were found to be when either was
represented on the Birthchart as a pair, with the 3 and higher
numbers on the chart right up to Mercúrio , the single number generally
implies the most balanced strength. The concentrated power of
these higher vibrations when compounded invariably creates an
imbalance, demanding extreme self-discipline to a degree to which
few people will apply themselves. The absence of a 3 from a
Birthchart does not necessarily imply mental weakness. Rather, it
indicates that the person needs to exert greater effort in the mental
spheres, especially if their Ruling Number is not a mind number
(Stage Júpiter ), or their Sun Sign is not a Head Sign (Stage 11). There is
often a tendency towards mental laziness when a 3 is absent from
the chart. One 3 These people have the blessing of higher thought analysis, mental deductive powers and retentive memory, especially
when balanced with one Mercúrio on the chart. The power of the single 3 is
such as to strengthen these attributes, and encourage their most
balanced expression.
As mental strength is a vital foundation for the cultivation of a
balanced, optimistic understanding of life, these people generally
have happy dispositions and can readily apply themselves to most
tasks with the prospect of success.
Two 3s With this increased mental alertness comes a strengthening of the imagination and intensification of literary ability.
Such power has to be carefully disciplined to facilitate its most
useful and most balanced expression. This potentially high level
of mental expression could otherwise lead to such imbalances
as antisocial behaviour or a persecution complex (imagination
allowed to go uncontrolled). To facilitate self-discipline, the practice
of meditation is a very valuable exercise, together with memory
training, the comprehension of moderation and the development of
the intuition. This will enable wisdom to guide these people’s
thought processes for the benefit of all concerned. Otherwise, their
highly active brains will place too much significance on imagination,
to the detriment of objective planning, investigation and deduction.
In so doing, they tend to lose track of reality. Three 3s With even greater emphasis on mental activities and
expression, these people often lose contact with reality, inducing an
isolation which brings loneliness into their lives. Their fertile
imaginations are so intent on thinking ahead and planning that they
find difficulty in relating to other people. Consequently, these 51 people rarely develop close friendships. They are sometimes so
absorbed in their own mental adventures that they become quite
oblivious to people speaking to them or to things about them. This
can be infuriating to others and potentially dangerous to themselves
should they be in a hazardous situation.
Such unbalanced concentration does not equip these people to
see things in true perspective. Their introversion makes them
distrustful of other people and often quite argumentative. The best
way to help these people is to encourage them to give their
attention to the world around them through the increased use of
their hearts and hands, thereby expressing their imaginations in a
practical, considerate way. This vital form of help demands great
patience and understanding from the helper. Four 3s This unusual combination can only occur on five days
during one month in a century — it last occurred on March 31,
1933.
Excessive imagination and mental hyperactivity of these people
can bring them to the point of intense fear, worry and confusion.
They do not care for physical concerns and are generally quite
impractical in outlook — a very serious weakness.
As understanding them demands so much of others, they rarely
have close friends. Yet these people have the utmost need for the
help of a patient and wise person who can guide them in directing
their emphasis away from their intense mentality. This will help
them to become more balanced individuals. These people are often
plagued with phobias and obsessions when allowed to dwell too
much within themselves. They must be encouraged to make more
use of their hands in pragmatic expression, such as in dressmaking,
hairdressing, landscaping, interior decorating, etc. THE NUMBER. Júpiter ON THE CHART
Symbolically, the Júpiter represents containment and regularity, as
depicted by the square. It is a practical and material number, located
squarely in the centre of the Practical Plane. People with this number
on their Birthchart are generally tidy and meticulous. Birthcharts
without a Júpiter indicate a degree of impatience in those people, but this
is easily overcome by conscious attention to detail and to other
people’s needs. One Júpiter These individuals have a natural identity with the practical. This can be capably expressed over a wide range of activities,
including organisational, technical, financial and/or physical
activities (such as gardening, manual arts and building). The particular avenue of expression will be indicated by their Ruling Number.
52 Preferring to work with concrete rather than theoretical
concepts, these people are often sceptical of obscurities. They prefer
practice to principle.
Too much emphasis on the physical can make them somewhat
materialistic, allowing a hardness to develop in their personality.
They must use their natural patience to avoid an unbalanced
materialism by nurturing concern and compassion for others in their
daily contacts. Only in this manner will they attain lasting
friendships and happiness. Two 4s Greater weight in this material direction can lead to an
unbalanced outlook which relates everything to the physical.
The strong utilitarian abilities of these people must be trained
for capable expression by balancing a sound mental concept with
appreciation for things aesthetic.
If their Ruling Number is spiritual or mental these people will
find greater assistance in rising above the physical than if the Ruling
Number is also physical (a Júpiter , 7 or 10). A well-chosen name will also
be of help (Stage 12).
The more 4s in the birthdate, the greater care must be exercised
in choosing friends. These people will benefit from the company of
others who enjoy the beauties and cultural qualities in life, thereby
developing better balance in outlook and diminishing harshness in
themselves. Especially should they endeavour to steer clear of the
hard-drinking, heavy-smoking style of person. Three 4s Even greater difficulty is experienced by these people
in rising above materialistic and physical involvements. Those who
recognise this need must employ great effort and will need diligent
guidance.
Many people with this aspect feel the pull towards hard, manual
work and persist with it, not realising that their lesson is to master
it, then to rise above it to acquire necessary balance through mental
and spiritual expression. They must guard against relating
everything to the hard and callous physical, and going overboard
about such concerns as neatness. It is important to be neat and tidy,
but not to make a fetish of it and allow it to assume the dimensions
of an obsession.
These people have a tendency to weakness in their lower limbs,
generally about the knees. Special care should be taken in work and,
particularly, at play to avoid exposing knees, legs and feet to
unnecessary hazard. Four 4s This is another extremely rare occurrence, happening
only three times a century — on the 4th, 14th and 24th of April
during the forty-fifth year of each century. It last occurred on April
24, 1944.
53 Due to the extreme weight of the physical thus created, very
special care must be exercised in the activities of these individuals.
There is a critical weakness in the lower limbs and. of the few people
with this number grouping, most are, for some period of their life,
crippled.
Extreme patience is demanded with these people as they are
highly sceptical of non-physical (metaphysical) concepts, taking
notice only of cold, hard facts. Never tell them about numerology or
the occult, as both are beyond their ability to comprehend. Some Personality Examples In practice, we find that
around twenty-five percent of all birthdates have at least one Júpiter in them. Yet in our twenty-five examples of famous people,
only two have a Júpiter on their Birthchart. This is not to imply that
one needs be devoid of a Júpiter to become famous in life, but it
does reveal to us that the impatience indicated by the lack of Júpiter on the Birthchart can become a very real driving force in the
attainment of one’s goals. To be motivated by impatience will
result in a drain on nervous energy. These people must ensure
they do not become enervated: they should take sufficient time
to relax during the course of each day. The consequence of
omission will be chronic illness in later life, a time when their
years of earlier effort should be rewarded.
The two examples of Júpiter on the Birthchart are Ita Buttrose
and Michael Willesee. (Interestingly, another of the media
personalities chosen, Kerry Packer, is a ruling Júpiter .) Both people
are known to prefer concrete concepts, as opposed to
hypothetical ones, both are very practical and extremely
capable organisers and both give the occasional appearance
that a certain hardness is creeping into their manner — a
tendency with this number which has to be guarded against. THE NUMBER 5 ON THE CHART
The special position of this number in the centre of the chart created
an important need for its understanding, for it governs the intensity
of human feelings. As the second number on the Spiritual (feeling)
Plane, 5 exerts a strong influence on the intensity of the feelings and
the strength of will required to translate them into action. One 5 This helps to create a balanced emotional control by
which the sensitivities develop as reliable instinctive guides in
choosing suitable courses of action, rather than responding to
situations by thoughtless reactions.
In providing a valuable protection to their sensitivities, one 5
strengthens the disciplines of fortitude and compassion noticeably,
54 creating what many people regard as strength of character.
In understanding their own feelings these people, (especially if
they also have two 2s on their Birthchart) develop a deep
appreciation for the feelings of others. Two 5s These individuals are frequently recognised by their
driving inner intensity, expressed in their powerful staring eyes and
furrowed brows. Intensified determination gives them an air of great
confidence and self-assurance which is often more wishful than
factual. As they grow into maturity, this self-assurance tends to
diminish to mere bravado as if they find it difficult to cope with
emotional, domestic and/or vocational troubles.
To the annoyance and exasperation of those with whom these
people are closely associated, the drive and enthusiasm stimulated
by their two 5s can become overbearing. This provokes misunderstandings and some troublesome situations in their home and work
environments. So intense will their attitudes become that a state of
deep emotional turmoil often develops, creating ulcers and
associated health problems in the region of the solar plexus.
Special care must be taken by these people to exercise
emotional control, or they could easily become dependent on drugs
or sexuality for the release of their pent-up emotional energy.
Particularly during the period preceding mealtimes, they must make
certain that their emotions do not take charge or they will suffer
from acute indigestion. A cup of naturally soothing herbal tea, such
as chamomile, taken about half an hour before the meal, and some
soft relaxing music with the meal, will be greatly beneficial to them. Three 5s Such power as this is too difficult for most people to
effectively handle. Fortunately, few are born with this extreme
intensity of drive and feeling.
Very special and careful training in self-discipline has to be a
part of the early lives of these people, placing unique responsibilities
upon the parents (who, rarely equipped for such a task, often throw
up their hands in despair through failure to understand this type of
child).
Such a heavy abundance of power must be used constructively
or it will become an egocentric barrier to social happiness by making
other people look painfully insignificant. Extreme care must be taken
to think well before speaking or acting, especially where there is any
risk to people’s sensitivities. Four 5s The rarity of this combination (occurring only three
times a century, the last being on May 25, 1955) is fortunate as it
indicates a life of great risk and overwhelming intensity of feeling.
Severe accidents often beset these people, the purpose being to
slow them down and force them to think deeply and carefully, so
55 that they react less and act with more care.
They find life very difficult to understand without extremely
sensitive and patient, yet firm, guidance. Some Personality Examples Although it occurs no more
frequently in birthdates than does the Júpiter , the 5 is found in six of
the twenty-five birthdates of famous people chosen for this
book. This is not surprising when we recognise that the 5 is a
powerful aid to the development of the will and to aspiring
towards personal freedom.
The personal intensity created by the double 5 in the
centre of the Birthchart should always attract the immediate
interest of the numerologist. This is exemplified in the birthdate
of Xavier Herbert. It will be found that the double 5 often
inspires enough personal forcefulness to create friction in
personal dealings with others, especially on matters concerning
individual freedom.
His compassionate and tireless work for the Australian
Aboriginal cause illustrates and utilises the potential indicated
by Xavier Herbert’s Birthchart. This is complemented by his
prodigious literary output, for he is recognised as one of
Australia's leading authors of today.
Of further special interest in his Birthchart is the presence
of only a single arrow (of determination) and the fact that all
his numbers are to be found only along this arrow.
Determination, pivoting around a double 5, is under the control
of spiritual sensitivity and is related closely to the solar plexus.
With his birthdate numbers revealing him to be a ruling 22/ Júpiter ,
Xavier Herbert (born May 15, 1901) is a man possessed of a
powerful mission.
The emotional intensity of the double 5, under the
powerful control of the ruling 22/ Júpiter , indicates how easily Xavier
Herbert will either suppress his feelings or will spontaneously
react if he thinks the situation is under his control. To many, he
will thus appear unpredictable and mysterious. For others, this
apparent capriciousness stimulates interest and even
fascination, for it gives rise to a lively personality. However,
care must be taken that such oscillation of moods does not
lead to nerve-induced illness. Hypertension, strokes, heart
attacks and the like are not uncommon consequences of
suppressed or ragged emotions. One must learn that emotions
are intended to be used, not to use us in uncontrolled
reactiveness. 56 THE NUMBER 6 ON THE CHART
Located in the centre of the Mental Plane, the 6 occupies a unique
position of mental power which can be as constructive, when used
positively, as it is destructive, when used negatively. Its primary
control is over the power of creativity, by which the five senses are
brought into a fertile union with mind power. One 6 This potent number of creativity finds its most common
expression in a deep love of the home. However, its higher
expression is found in artistic creation of a more personal nature,
such as in pottery, painting and similar disciplines where all senses
harmonise to form beauty.
These people generally have a very close tie to either their own
home or the home of someone dear to them. They revel in domestic
responsibilities, creating with ease the atmosphere of harmony and
love in the home.
As they grow in awareness, they are readily able to elevate and
expand their creative powers toward broader fields of social
expression, such as in art and human welfare. Two 6s Doubling of this creative power can easily cause an unsetting in people who have not learned to understand and
discipline themselves.
Worry and overanxiety about the home and loved ones is made
more intense for these by the double 6, inducing adverse reactions
upon the nervous system. Their interests must be directed beyond
the limitations of the home so that their attention is taken away
from that which devitalises them. Their vocation must be a creative
one which permits them full expression. In that work they greatly
need to be inspired with confidence by understanding direction.
They must be guided, never pushed or threatened. Love and
appreciation are vital to them, acting as balm to their nervous
system.
These people require much more rest than most. They must
learn to meditate before going to bed to ensure that their sleep is
deeply restful. When possible, they should take a siesta during the
afternoon.
Some important dietary guidance, which is of general help to
people today, is especially beneficial to those who are inclined
towards worry and anxiety. Their foods should always be fresh and
free from chemicals used for preservation, flavouring or colouring.
Artificial chemicals added to foods often cause severe irritation to
the nervous system, as proven in research on hyperactive children
by Dr Ben Feingold and others in the field. One cannot go wrong
with a diet based on fresh fruits and vegetables, primarily
vegetarian, for modern meats contain far too many chemicals to be
considered natural foods. 57 Three 6s With the multiplying of 6s on the Birthchart come increasing home worries, often causing situations of utter domestic
confusion.
Acute overprotectiveness of their children and the fear of their
growing up and departing from the home usually cause these
individuals to become extremely possessive parents. This can only
be avoided by directing the attention away from the home at every
opportunity. Art or music are especially suited to help in achieving a
necessary diversion.
Their intense powers of creativity are usually too difficult for one
mere mortal to handle, hence the vital need for devoted
understanding from the spouse.
Special care must be taken to avert the occurrence of a nervous
breakdown which, for most people in this group, is a warning from
the body that it cannot take any further emotional turmoil. Again,
special attention to rest and diet will be of invaluable assistance. Four 6s This accumulation of 6s occurs only three times a century, on |une 6, 16 and 26. In this century the year was 1966.
It indicates quite exceptional creativity but, human nature being
as unthinkingly emotional as it is, such power cannot be properly
expressed until these people are well into the mature years of life;
and only then if a spartan self-discipline has been practised during
the earlier years.
For the most part, this combination indicates severe emotional
problems which often lead to a neurotic incapacity to handle life,
demanding very special counselling and extreme tolerance from
others. THE NUMBER 7 ON THE CHART
As the last number on the Practical Plane. 7 represents a special
function of human life. It indicates the amount of learning one must
amass by that form of personal experience known as sacrifice.
However, its broader, more metaphysical meaning implies a
detachment from possessions as being necessary for the unfolding
of the soul. One 7 As part of the vital learning process, sacrifices in matters
of love or money or health will be encountered when this number
appears on the Birthchart.
Those whose charts contain one 7 are obliged to adopt the
precept that from every experience in which some loss is sustained a
most important lesson will emerge to assist them on the endless
Path towards perfection, the course of the soul's unfolding. Of
course, man is rarely aware of the ultimate purpose for which all his
58 lessons are intended; consequently, these sacrifices are often
bemoaned when only their materialistic implications are considered.
It is therefore important to gain every measure of understanding
from each lesson, thereby avoiding its repetition and further losses.
Development of such understanding of life generally brings with
it an increasing interest in the occult, the study of metaphysical
truths which are so often erroneously regarded as mysteries. Two 7s The compounding of this number implies the increased
intensity of the lessons to be undergone, and often generates in
these people a deep philosophical understanding of life and keen
interest in the occult.
Sacrifices are usually experienced in two of the three categories
of love, money and health to underline the value of the lesson
concerned. These heavier losses bring with them greater
unfoldment, preparing these people for taking on enlightened
powers for healing, guidance and compassion.
When not living positively, these people fail to develop that
indispensable philosophical understanding; instead, they lament
their losses, accuse life of being unfair and become grumpy,
complaining individuals. Three 7s Superficially, this weighty accumulation of 7s appears
to result in particularly sad lives brought about by losses in love,
money and health.
Such losses test these people's powers of fortitude and
enormous strength can be gained from these experiences. This
can make for the emergence of truly remarkable people, valuable
friends whose outlook on life grows with maturity, achieving almost
infinite depths of wisdom.
There are others to be found in this group and they (unfortunately, the ones more commonly encountered in this
affluent society) can develop into manic depressives or become so
dejected as to be encumbrances to family, friends and society. They
are extremely negative and feel life to be a huge burden. To them,
the sun is always obscured by a heavy cloud. Four 7s Lecturing in Toronto, Ontario, during the month of July,
1977, I was feeling deep compassion for the parents of infants born
on the 7th, 17th and 27th. Unexpectedly, I received word that a dear
friend back home had become the proud father of a first-born on July
27. It goes without saying that this family will need exceedingly
careful help with a child who has some deep and critical lessons to
learn, choosing, as it did, the last possible date in this century to
incarnate for such a potentially intense experience. Some Personality Examples Curious as it might appear,
Mozart, Beethoven and Kerry Packer have something special in
59 common: each has two 7s on his Birthchart. Each, in his chosen
profession, has been through some severe lessons from which
losses of a deep, personal nature have occurred. The first two,
even though their lives were comparatively short, gained a
deep level of personal understanding and spiritual awareness
from their sacrifices. Kerry Packer is only now beginning to
gain his.
With Mozart, losses in health and finances were the
sacrifices he had to endure. In the life of Kerry Packer to date,
losses have been largely to do with people, for he has
experienced many acute disappointments and frustrations in
his personal relationships. The other avenue of his sacrificing is
indicated as his health — he must be especially careful as he
approaches his next Personal Year Júpiter (in 1982), for this will be a
year of exceptionally heavy demand on his nerves (see page 101).
Beethoven's losses were in all three areas of human sacrifice —
love, health and wealth. His two 7s of the Birthchart were
compounded by his Ruling Number 7, resulting in Beethoven’s
life appearing as one of the saddest in the musical world. But
to Beethoven the experiences were necessary and quite
philosophically accepted. This is invariably the case with people
in possession of multiple 7s in their numerology — their lives
appear to be far sadder to observers. Deep within, people with
multiple 7s recognise their need to learn by personal
experience and they are not satisfied unless they have the
freedom to so do. THE NUMBER 8 ON THE CHART
This number exerts a somewhat unusual influence from its position
at the end of the Spiritual (feeling) Plane. By symbolic
representation, the 8 appears as the double Júpiter , being one square
atop another. This elevates some of the organisational and practical
aspects of the Júpiter (along with some of its confining nature, if the
person is living negatively) onto a higher plane of expression, as the
following explanations reveal. One 8 These people are usually most methodical and meticulous when living positively. On the other hand, apathy and
instability prevail when they live negatively.
Tidiness, with considerable attention to detail and a feel for
efficiency, is natural to those possessing one 8 on the chart. This
orderliness combined with a perceptiveness which characterises the
positive aspects of spirituality, gives them remarkable deductive
ability.
60 If living negatively, these people will become restless and
emotionally irritable, resulting in frequent changes of abode, job
and interests. They must learn to stabilise and this can only happen
with a positive outlook. Two 8s The sharpened power of assessment conferred by two
8s on the Birthchart can be either extremely beneficial or highly
unsettling, depending on these people’s command of positive
thinking.
In matters demanding special care to detail, these people can
excel like no others. But their perceptiveness must not be allowed to
make them dictatorial from overconfidence. This would arouse
emotional conflicts within them, thereby diluting their abilities and
causing instability and restlessness.
These people will react to materialistic environmental
circumstances by becoming unsettled. This is customarily expressed
in their wish to travel, especially when young. If this desire is
frustrated, it can lead to a feeling of confinement and uncertainty
which could take years to dissipate. Travel can become their
important lesson book and should be encouraged whenever
possible because it will help them to gain equilibrium and eventually
choose a life of peace. Three 8s This combination has occurred only three times each
decade so far this century (in 1988 it will occur more frequently, of
course). It is most unusual to meet such people, but if they are
encountered we can be of particular help to them.
They must be made to realise that life is not pointless and
frustrating once they amend their outlook. Until then they will be
exceptionally restless.
For them, life really does not appear to begin until they enter
their forties, by which time they appear to rapidly mature and
establish a more balanced, positive outlook. Yet careful guidance
can assist this change at a much earlier age, thereby allowing life to
be much more rewarding for them. Four 8s Not since 1888 has a person been born with this intensity of 8s. (In that year a few were born with five 8s, and what
restless lives they led!) It will occur again in 1988, during the month
of August on the three days in which the number eight appears. As
the science of numbers is independent of the limitations of time,
here is some guidance for those to be born with this compounding.
They will invariably find an extreme restlessness impeding their
progress in life and will have great difficulty applying themselves to
a set job or to serious studies.
Until the turn of the century, they will want to be free to wander.
It is best to let them do so, rather than induce frustration by
61 confining them. They will begin to stabilise in their late teens or
twenties. Some Personality Examples The admirable traits of
attention to detail and of being methodical are shared, within
our group, by three people who possess an 8 on their
Birthcharts, and one who possesses two 8s. Napoleon
Bonaparte, Caroline Jones and Sir Mark Oliphant are probably
as diverse as it is possible for three famous people to be; yet
they all have the strength of the single 8 on their Birthcharts.
Thus, they evidence a methodical orderliness which has
brought them considerable strength and benefits in their
chosen professions. Whether soldier/ruler,
reporter/interviewer or scientist/governor, meticulousness is a
great asset.
By comparison Birthcharts with two 8s are rather rare. But
when a person does possess them, we see evidence of an
unsettled attitude to life. This proved so in the life of Lord
Bertrand Russell, the famous British philosopher, historian and
academic who achieved almost equal fame by turning his
attention towards anti-government protests over policies which
were unacceptable to his personal moral code. In his personal
relationships he possessed a most penetrating perceptiveness
which tended to make him appear overconfident, even
dictatorial in his manner, especially with strangers. These are
typical attributes of the double 8. His extensive travelling and
the vehemence with which he protested his often radical
viewpoints combined to ensure that Bertrand Russell achieved
wide recognition. These expressions of his personality are
related to his double 8 and his ruling 5, both of which are
strengthened by his Arrow of Emotional Balance (Stage 7). THE NUMBER Mercúrio ON THE CHART
As the last number on the Mental Plane, at the same time being a
number common to every person born this century, Mercúrio exerts a
strong influence over human affairs. It is the number of idealism and
ambition. In classical mythology it is related to Mars, the god of war.
This combination of influences has become very pronounced in the
history of our century to date. Let us hope that man has now learned
the futility of seeking to burden others with his ambitions and his
ideals through acts of aggression. One Mercúrio Common to every birthdate in this century are the attributes of idealism and ambition to a degree previously unknown
in the history of human life. Idealism and ambition have been the
62 driving forces by which man has propelled himself into everexpanding vistas of science and technology at a rate unknown since
the height of the Atlantean cultural period 12,000 or more years
ago. This is preparing mankind for the coming Aquarian Age (the
new age of awareness, as many prefer to regard it); and as it draws
closer, man will question more and more the reasons for his
ambition and the chaos it has created. A considerable amount of
culling will ensue.
The tendency to pursue the goal of high purpose for its own
sake will diminish as the century nears its end and the universal
awareness of the next millennium grows stronger. In time to come
more wisdom will prevail in research and development, with
harmony and environmental impact being vital considerations in
determining what is appropriate to improve the quality of life.
Care must be taken to keep the reach for perfection in practical
balance and not allow it to dominate to the point of fanaticism. We
see examples of this obsessiveness today in the fervour of many
environmentalists as they tend to overcompensate for previous
environmental blunders. Hopefully the balance will soon be reached
so that important ecological issues can be judged without emotional
overtones. Two 9s An intensity of idealism and zeal, coupled with serious
thought, characterises these people. But they must maintain careful
balance in their ideas.
The inclination to become critical of others with a lower level of
idealistic intensity must be watched and overcome if they are to find
happiness in life.
In spite of their outward criticisms, these people are deep
thinkers and really mean to be helpful. They must learn to express
their intentions clearly and unemotionally, always guided by
balanced practicality. Three 9s This exceptional power of idealism and ambition is
extremely difficult to handle and can, at times, produce mental
unbalancing.
Special care must be taken in the training of children with this
aggregation of 9s because they relate everything too exclusively to
the mental level.
It is not uncommon for small things to become mentally
exaggerated out of all proportion, resulting in outbursts of temper
which can be frightening to witness. These outbursts could
precipitate loss of control that threatens mental balance.
A vital lesson here is to learn to look at things objectively,
thereby developing a solid basis for comparison. This will improve
the level of judgement and permit them to accept deviations from
their rigid concept of the ideal.
63 Four 9s This combination occurs during three days ( Mercúrio , 19 and
29) of September during the last year of every decade in this
twentieth century. We are. therefore, unlikely to meet many people
born with this extreme concentration of mental power.
They will either live in a dream world of vague unreality or
portray a somewhat belligerent attitude, unless they have mastered
this great power and translated it into practical living.
As these people can easily become mentally unbalanced, they
must be treated with the utmost patience and guided in a way which
will allow them to express their alert mentality in practical terms.
Guidelines for such can only be defined with an understanding of
their Ruling Number and their name — from these we can recognise
their purpose in life and how it is intended to be fulfilled. Some Personality Examples With the exception of Bertrand Russell, each of our twenty-five famous people is an
example of the Mercúrio on the Birthchart directing us along the path
of idealism and/or ambition. Bertrand Russell also had these
traits, even without a Mercúrio on his Birthchart, for he had a Day
Number Mercúrio .
Of special interest to us here are the characteristics
revealed by the presence of three 9s on the Birthchart. Two of
our personality examples have these — Germaine Greer and
Bob Hawke. Both can be regarded as extremely idealistic, as
evidenced by their public activities. One would perhaps
hesitate to say that either is overly ambitious, except in their
desire to support the causes for which they work. Bob Hawke's
declared intent, at the end of 1979, to enter Federal politics
might indicate a strengthening of personal ambition, for surely
it could not be to gain personal recognition — he possesses
more than any Australian now living. Perhaps this extra
impetus derives from his Day Number Mercúrio . Even so, he must be
careful that he does not overdo his ambitiousness, as already
indicated in connection with his Ruling Number 6.
Germaine Greer is so wedded to the feminist cause that
she has no time for any other personal ambition. As a ruling 7,
with the Arrow of the Planner (page 83), she possesses an
enormous capacity for promoting the ideals which are so
precious to her. Her supportive literary successes and the deep
seriousness which underlies her writings take much of their
power from this formidable accumulation of 9s. But she must
be especially careful to control her temper, for outbursts of
rage will become mentally disturbing to her, possibly inducing
her to lose credibility with those she seeks to convince.
The foregoing characteristics of individual numbers on the Birthchart
form a reliable basic guide to the analysing of people's strengths and
64 weaknesses. We are now in a position to undertake further
development of the Birthchart so that a more complete picture will
emerge. But first it is wise to gain a real understanding of the
methods thus far developed by practising their application on our
own birthdate and those within the immediate family. This will
provide a better mental grasp of the method and the people
involved. Please remember when practising self-analysis, that it
should be undertaken objectively, recognising that we all have
strengths and weaknesses, yet we all need to find balance. This can
only be properly achieved when we know what we are doing and can
see ourselves as we really are, not as we imagine ourselves to be.
You will find that, as you commence to use the foregoing
system, your progress will be initially speedy. You will discover
surprising new facts about your own and other people's
personalities very quickly. Then you will reach a plateau. Gradually,
as your intuition develops, you will achieve another break-through as
the individual numbers of the Birthchart take on a new meaning. You
will recognise in the Birthchart a formula, a pattern, so to speak,
created by the impression of all the numbers working together to
form a unique key to the personality under analysis. From then on,
your expertise will develop amazingly. 65 STAGE 7
The Twelve Arrows on the Birthchart It will be found in practice that where any three numbers exist in
succession on the Birthchart a strength of special significance
prevails. The presence of such an arrow throws an important light
upon our knowledge of the Inner Self.
Another significant sequence we must consider is the absence
of any three successive numbers from a line on the Birthchart,
leaving a line of three empty spaces. These always highlight some of
the lessons life intends us to comprehend, for they appear as
weaknesses which must be balanced by whatever strengths we
possess.
The expression “any three numbers" means a straight line
series of either full numbers or empty spaces. Reference to the
Birthchart will show that there are three vertical lines and three
horizontal, of which any one or more can be full of numbers. There
are also two diagonal straight line series, either or both of which can
be full of numbers. This gives eight possibilities of full number
straight lines. When we consider the possibilities of empty straight
lines on the Birthchart, we find there are only four during this
century — every birthdate will have a 1 and a Mercúrio in the 1900s. Thus,
mankind in general has potentially twice as many possibilities for
additional strength (from the full lines), as for weaknesses (from the
empty lines).
These twelve straight lines of full numbers or empty spaces,
which we are now about to analyse, were named arrows by their
most recent discoverer, Dr Hettie Templeton. It is quite likely that
Pythagoras also used these arrows when numerologically analysing
birthdates; however, their modern application had been overlooked
by numerologists until the early 1930s. No other numerology book
will be found to give such detail on this important series of traits,
especially those related to children.
We should always give credit where it is due. And no one is due
more esteem as a numerologist and counsellor than the late Dr
Hettie Templeton. Born in Australia on March 25, 1887, Hettie
Templeton struggled through her early life with a very large family
66 and very little money or guidance. In her thirties, she discovered
numerology through the teacher of a friend and was astounded at
the assistance it gave her in rearing eight children. Twenty years
later Hettie Templeton commenced to gain nationwide recognition
as a competent numerologist. She lectured in Hawaii in 1938 and
was again there in 1939 when she predicted the outbreak of the war
in Europe for September of that year. Hettie Templeton was awarded
a Doctorate in Science for her research into personality problems
with children, a subject with which she had years of counselling
experience. During the 1930s, she wrote two books on the science
of numbers, the most famous, Numbers and Their Influence,
undergoing numerous printings in Australia and the U.S.A. It was in
this book that the Twelve Special Types of Charts, each identified by
its particular arrow, were first published. The book is now out of
print, but that introduction formed the basis of my own research and
subsequent development of this important yet hitherto overlooked
aspect of the science of numbers.
As we investigate the characteristics of each arrow, each will be
defined by a key word. Special interpretation will also be given of the
aspects of each arrow to help parents to better train and understand
their children.
In most birthdates encountered at least one arrow will be found,
if not of full numbers, then of empty spaces. Very often two, and
occasionally three, arrows will be present in a birthdate. If they are
arrows of full numbers, they usually indicate that the person being
analysed has a strong character. But it is unwise to draw hasty
conclusions in this work, for experience shows that many people
achieve more with a limited chart than others who have much going
for them. It is far more a case of what you do than what you have —
of course, the combination of both is unbeatable.
As we consider each arrow, a birthdate will be chosen to
illustrate it. In each case, care has been taken to ensure that the
arrow appears in its simplest form, without any compounding of the
numbers involved and without any other arrows to detract from the
significance of that under consideration. THE ARROW OF DETERMINATION
Birthdate of May 22, 1970: 67 Everyone born in the 1950s has this arrow on his or her Birthchart.
The consecutive diagonal numbers 1, 5, Mercúrio on the Birthchart indicate
the dominant traits of determination, persistence and endurance.
Determination underlies almost everything they undertake,
coupled with a persistence and patience to overcome obstructions in
executing their plans. If necessary they will wait until obstacles
disperse. This is fine training for the development of endurance, but
it could also prove futile. Sometimes stumbling blocks advise us that
a planned course of action is unsuitable. If we heed that advice we
could avoid later disappointment. Those who do not heed such
indications can, after repeated frustration, become ruthless in their
determination to have their way at all cost. This may give rise to
cruelty which alienates others and ultimately rebounds upon
themselves.
Determination must be combined with wisdom and awareness
or its virtues will become vices. Moderation is a vital discipline for
these people to embrace. If multiples of any number occur on this
arrow, they will indicate the direction in which determination usually
manifests. An accumulation of 1s will draw the determination
towards ego and self-motivation; multiple 5s will increase the
emotional intensity of the determination (often causing outbursts of
temper from frustration); groupings of 9s increase idealism,
ambition or demands of responsibility. If no Júpiter is present on the
Birthchart the tendency towards impatience calls for extreme care
and discipline in the presence of this arrow.
Children with the 1-5- Mercúrio arrow express very decided tastes with a
strong spirit of determination, and need to feel free enough to
express it. They should never be driven against their wishes, but
need to be led with loving kindness and firmness, tempered by
flexibility. Otherwise, they will be very hard to discipline, for they
must be allowed opportunity to assert themselves.
Their determination strengthens them for their purpose in life
and must not be confused with stubbornness. It gives them very
decided likes and dislikes which they set about to satisfy. These are
generally very intelligent children and can therefore be reasoned
with. They will argue if the reasoning does not measure up to their
level of logic and rarely do they hesitate to endeavour to make
others understand them.
It is interesting to note that this spirit of determination gave rise
to the emergence of the counter culture movement during the mid
and late 1960s, when peaceful protests were successfully used to
curtail the Vietnam war, the nuclear race and other ill-conceived
counter-ecological activities. Determination in Action To attain positions of authority
and leadership in their countries, politicians usually require a
68 considerable degree of personal campaigning. For this, they
must possess strong persistence and determination. What a
significant advantage politicians would have over their
opponents if they were to possess the Arrow of Determination
on their Birthcharts.
Such an advantage is shared by two current
Commonwealth prime ministers — Malcolm Fraser and
Margaret Thatcher. Both have reached their positions through
relentless determination; both are poignant examples of
endurance in action, for the fierce competition they
encountered in their climb has thwarted many a less
determined politician.
Birthcharts of both these prime ministers indicate confident
self-motivation, encouraging them to undertake as much as
they can physically and mentally handle. Their determination is
directed by careful planning, for they also both possess the
Arrow of the Planner (1-2-3). Both are noted for their
determination to put into effect plans which they deem
important, often in the face of severe opposition. The resourceful pair overcome resistance by adopting a variety of ploys.
Although the histories and geographical aspects of
Australia and Great Britain are widely different, the two
countries have more in common now than possibly ever before.
One aspect of their present parallel is the conflict between their
governments and their respective trade union councils. Both
prime ministers appear committed to limiting what they
consider to be too powerful trade unionism. It will be
interesting to watch developments on this front, for if they are
to succeed both prime ministers will need to employ all the
resourcefulness and determination they can muster. THE ARROW OF SPIRITUALITY
Birthdate of January 5, 1973: 69 The arrow formed by the second diagonal on the Birthchart links the
most powerful numbers on each of the three planes — the Mental 3,
the Spiritual 5 and the Physical 7. This arrangement creates a deep
spiritual awareness which is the vital basis for a balanced, practical
philosophy of life. Such awareness encourages growth through
personal experience because these people ordinarily do not heed
advice from others. Where life’s lessons are concerned, they much
prefer practice to theory. This inclination will often bring sadness
into their lives, inspiring fortitude and aiding the further unfolding of
their philosophic understanding of life. Actually, their lives often
appear sadder to the onlooker than is felt within themselves.
Experience brings them an inner serenity as they mature
spiritually. It will often be said of them: “Their presence brings
peace”.
It is important to note that in this century every Birthchart with
the Arrow of Spirituality also has the Arrow of Determination. Thus,
the two should be read together for a more thorough understanding
of these prominent traits.
Children with this arrow have an almost naive trust and deep
sense of natural justice, so they must be carefully guided in spiritual
(religious, philosophical and ethical) matters.
Parents must always be sincere and never anything but honest
with these children. If not, they will undermine the children's trust
and respect, which can often give rise to petty childish deceptions
and dishonesties. This would be unsettling to them for they would
be unaware of its cause — as often are the parents.
These children have a surprising ability for noticing what goes
on about them, so strong are their powers of perception. However,
their immaturity limits their ability to evaluate and express, tending
to make many things in their young lives difficult to handle.
Encouragement to read well-chosen books, instead of watching
violence on TV, is especially helpful in developing their spiritual
awareness and the understanding of their psychic faculties, such as
intuition and E.S. Plutão . THE ARROW OF SCEPTICISM
Birthdate of April 2, 1968: 70 The absence of the numbers 3, 5 and 7 creates a diagonal arrow of
emptiness. This generally indicates a scepticism towards anything
metaphysical; yet these people emphatically embrace the more
orthodox attitudes towards religion and science.
Although their feelings are no less loving and their sense of
fairness no less just than those with the numbers 3, 5 and 7, the
absence of these numbers indicates a more superficial
understanding of human nature, creating occasional uncertainties.
This gives rise to scepticism and worry often takes over. If allowed to
magnify, worry causes headaches and other nerve problems
(sometimes affecting the eyes and ears), of which these people often
experience more than their share.
Worry and anxiety can cause unexpected reactions and lead to
accidents in which the head will constantly figure. A sound
philosophical understanding should be developed therefore
realising that there is far more in life than can be recognised by
man's five physical senses alone. This scepticism is best overcome
by a developed sense of purpose which can lend meaning to life.
There are many avenues by which this may be achieved. One of
particular value is self-expression through art, writing or music.
If orthodox religion has, for any reason, disappointed these
people, they tend to become agnostic in outlook. Again, any of the
arts can help overcome this limiting attitude.
Children with this arrow express their scepticism in moodiness
which can be trying to parents who do not understand. It is important
for parents to realise that children with this arrow require peace and
solitude. When anything upsets them they turn inward, finding in
their isolation a means for retrieving mental and emotional balance.
When children are antagonistic the cause is often traceable to an
inadequacy in their parents’ expression of kindness and love.
Parents must be loving, extremely patient, yet firm — at the same
time encouraging their children in artistic participation to detract
from influences beyond their present limits of understanding. If
parents withdraw their love in reaction to the children's attitudes, a
deep rift will develop between them which drives the children to
spitefulness and aloofness. Scepticism in Action Bob Hawke and Sir Mark Oliphant are
two famous people in whose Birthcharts the Arrow of
Scepticism prevails. Neither man is unaware of his abilities for
each has made his mark in his profession and gained worldwide
recognition. Both men are involved in different aspects of the
material world, one in human relationships, the other in the
physical sciences, but both profess an orthodox outlook on
human life and its purpose.
People with this arrow are inclined to deny the value of 71 intuition. Any hunch they might receive would not be accepted
as of value until it had been tried, tested and conclusively
proven to be worthy of application. Certainly this is the
accepted approach of physical science and it is probably this
tendency to be methodical which has raised Sir Mark to such a
high level of academic recognition. He is at home with scientific
or other orthodox procedures, but would be quite lost with
metaphysical concepts. This matters little so long as he
achieves satisfaction in his work and succeeds in bringing some
small improvement to the quality of human life on this planet.
(For those not prepared to accept metaphysical concepts on
this Plane, adequate opportunity awaits in the ultimate realms
of timelessness!)
Bob Hawke reveals a slightly different aspect of this arrow.
A ruling 6, he is inclined to worry. This emotion is also
associated with the Arrow of Scepticism, compounding its
tendency to create headaches and extreme anxiety in Bob
Hawke's life. His definite need is to adopt a deeper, more
philosophical outlook — a requirement which his intuition has
undoubtedly revealed to him long before now. In fact, we see
some evidence of this outlook developing in his recent series as
the 1979 Boyer lecturer. His new and refreshing approach to
the philosophy of government has unmistakably precipitated
his decision to enter federal parliament. But he must allow his
philosophic studies a further advance, embracing, for instance,
such profound principles as those developed by Pythagoras
2500 years ago when he too undertook the reformation of
government but went even further — his reformation inculcated
a completely new cultural epoch we now call ‘western culture’. THE ARROW OF INTELLECT
Birthdate of March 10, 1968: The presence of all three numbers on the Mental Plane indicates the
importance of intellect and the dominance of mental activity in the
72 expression of those with this arrow. Such a fertile intellect offers the
potential blessing of a very good memory. Some people, however,
will be found to possess this arrow on their charts and not exhibit a
good memory — this undeniably implies laziness and wasted or
abused talents.
People with this arrow show a preference for things intellectual
and tend to ignore the importance of feelings (to what extent
depends on their Ruling Number and the pattern of numbers on their
Spiritual Plane). Surprisingly, they can be quite emotional without
actually being aware of it.
There is a tendency for these people to become snobbish by
seeking the company of only those people with high intellectual
qualities and showing irritability towards those with lower IQs. They
can master this by developing tolerance and compassion, realising
that weaknesses are latent strengths yet to be made manifest. Life
brings more responsibilities to these people than to most. But they
handle their obligations well and are often happiest when
performing duties for others. They are gregarious people who are
rarely lost for words, but they tend to drive themselves to a point
beyond natural tiredness. This is when their irritability becomes
particularly noticeable. They must learn to balance mental and
physical activity, with periods of relaxation and recreation.
Children with this arrow are, as a rule, brilliant at school,
especially in mathematics and the analytical sciences. But their
mental talents demand special tutorial care. They have very
analytical brains, always investigating and planning, so these
children should be given engaging and absorbing projects to suit
them.
These children are inclined to be restive and headstrong,
especially when they have insufficient to interest them. They
respond well when called upon for assistance and appreciate praise
for their efforts.
They must be always kept calm and never allowed to become
over-stimulated. Should they become highly excited, their brains
will slip into top gear and their thoughts run wild, pulling them in
many directions at once. This could lead to hyperactivity if the diet
contains sweets, white bread and preserved foods. Occasionally
these children suffer from stuttering, fits and exhaustion due to
over-stimulation.
They will detect attempts to deceive them and lose all
confidence in the offender, for they are always analysing, evaluating
and assessing. Intellect in Action When the Olympic Games commenced in
776 bc a gigantic impetus was given to sports, taking them
out of the realm of disorganised games into the competitive
73 arena of spectator engagements. Since then steady progress
has been maintained in man’s athletic challenge of the clock.
With the advent of scientific method and its application to
human activity, methods of sports coaching came under
review. The new approach to athletic training led to the
accelerated breaking of world sports records.
For most of this century, Australia has been a leading
nation in many forms of athletics. In swimming we have been
most successful, especially from the 1960s, and much of this
success has been due to the creditable work of a former
Olympic athlete, Forbes Carlisle.
Born June 3, 1921, Forbes Carlisle has a Birthchart with a
most significant arrow, that of the balanced intellect. He is the
only member of our group of twenty-five famous people with
this arrow; but his life is one which exemplifies its
characteristics conspicuously. In his own sports career, Carlisle
achieved a remarkable level of personal discipline by his
thoroughly intellectual approach to training. He rigidly adhered
to his programme, irrespective of his bodily feelings. In fact, he
almost drove himself to a state of irrecoverable exhaustion on
more than one occasion. As a result of his own experiences,
Forbes Carlisle developed a programme of training for
swimmers from several months' old, right up to the age of
competition in Olympic events. His methods embrace much
more than physical training, including a total lifestyle
consideration of diet, sleeping habits, drinking, smoking, etc.
His plan is a total approach to athletics from a balanced,
intellectual viewpoint. Also possessing the Arrow of the
Planner, Forbes Carlisle had no problem in organising his
methods into practical application. His entire numerological
pattern, in fact, denotes balance, for he also possesses the two
1s, giving a balanced form of self-expression, and is a ruling
22/ Júpiter , with the masterly balance between the practical and the
spiritual aspects of life. Whatever he turned his hand to, Forbes
Carlisle would make his efforts successful. We should be
especially thankful that he has recognised the need to teach
young people the life-saving activity of swimming and, with his
wife Ursula, has devoted so many years to the organising of
these classes. 74 THE ARROW OF POOR MEMORY
Birthdate of May 1, 1887: The absence of all three numbers from the Mental Plane is a rare
phenomenon today. Everyone born since the beginning of 1889
possesses at least one number on this plane. Yet we include it in our
lessons, for we are approaching the year 2000 and it is fascinating to
speculate about twenty-first century man. The absence of these
numbers does not imply that such people have no minds, but rather
that their mental faculties are less active.
Unless they have been kept mentally stimulated, these people
will suffer from a poor memory, commencing as forgetfulness but
deteriorating to noticeable loss in later years. Life, then, seems very
empty for them and they lapse into childish attitudes. They learn
slowly and rarely rise to public prominence. Any exceptions are
especially worthy of your investigation, for these people have
mastered great handicaps and their lives should provide valuable
lessons. Such people will appear quite witty and mentally alert —
help having come through their Ruling Number, name and/or Sun
Sign.
Children with this arrow will appear to be intellectually slow during their infancy and must be trained to concentrate and develop mental alertness. It is only a comparatively short number of years before
infants will again be among us with Birthcharts containing this
arrow. In anticipation of this book being available during that
period, the following points will be of special importance.
Infant training must commence with creative interests, such as
the arts and the sensitive awareness of nature. They should not start
school early and should never be forced into academic study prior to
the age of seven. Failure to observe this will invariably result in the
children developing severe headaches, but these can be outgrown
once the cause is recognised. Introducing academic studies to these
children is a patience-demanding process. They are far more
interested in natural phenomena and find the laborious training of
75 their memories tedious. Care and patience will win, so long as their
interest is maintained. Overcoming Poor Memory in Action To find a person
born prior to 1889 who has made a mark in the world and who
possesses no numbers on the Mental Plane was not an easy
task. The result of the search was a great surprise, for it
uncovered a person whose fame is universally regarded as
being based on mental prowess. Our example is Lord Bertrand
Russell, whom we considered (page 62) when exemplifying the two
8s on the Birthchart, and shall consider again here, both for
this arrow and the Arrow of Emotional Balance (which follows).
Born May 18, 1872, Bertrand Russell possesses a Birthchart
which indicates a unique form of balance, yet is devoid of mind
numbers 3-6- Mercúrio . None could regard him as being of low
intelligence; nor could he have achieved as much as he did
without a better-than-average memory. So what gave him the
intellectual prowess?
Whenever people achieve success in a field which
apparently lies outside the powers indicated by their Ruling
Number or their Birthchart, we must look at other aspects of
their birthdate to discover under what influences they have
tapped their power source. In our present example, we find
that Bertrand Russell operated often under the power of his
Day Number Mercúrio . Added to this is the mind power conveyed by
his Sun Sign, being Taurus, and its proximity to the cusp with
Gemini. These are strong mental influences and their power
has been obviously effective for Russell. But they do not
provide sufficient sustaining strength when the Ruling Number
is so unhelpful and the Birthchart evidences such a handicap as
this Arrow of Poor Memory.
Bertrand Russell was gaoled in 1918 for the pacifism he
displayed during the Great War of 1914-18. It also cost his
lectureship at Cambridge. This did not trouble him, for his
strong emotional control (indicated by his Arrow of Emotional
Balance) encouraged him to devote his efforts to his favourite
activity, mathematics — while in prison he wrote his famous
Introduction to Mathematical Philosophy. Bertrand Russell’s
title was an inherited one; his actions against many British
governments would not have tempted them to flatter him with
such recognition. When we look closely into the life of Bertrand
Russell, we see many instances of mental unbalance and, as
age overtook, a rapid decline in memory. These are to be
expected with the absence of numbers on the Mental Plane and
would have probably occurred earlier in his life were it not for
his name containing so many mind numbers. ‘Bertrand Russell’
contains three 3s and three 9s, as well as a triple Arrow of
76 Determination. These were obviously powerful in his life’s
work, but were not strong enough to sustain him for the full
duration of his years. Nonetheless, we can recognise, from this
example, that no matter what numbers are missing from the
Birthchart, their qualities can be developed by a judicious
application of whatever strengths are present. This is how we
achieve balance and grow that step closer to the ultimate
purpose — the recovery of perfection. THE ARROW OF EMOTIONAL
BALANCE
Birthdate of August 2, 1965: The completely full Spiritual (or feeling) Plane shows that these
people have a natural balance in their emotional life and a depth of
spiritual understanding which can be especially beneficial in this
emerging new age of awareness. They see life as a balanced union of
physical and spiritual elements, the former temporary and the latter
permanent. It is this intensity of awareness which underlies their
attitudes and which lends an air of constant seriousness.
They should seek bright company and the occasional pleasures
of light entertainment to guard against becoming overly serious and
withdrawn. They understand balance in spiritual terms but tend to
overlook its wider expression, embracing as it does both the
physical and the mental. This strong spiritual balance brings with it a
natural healing ability which should be properly trained and
developed. With fundamental coaching in anatomy, physiology,
biochemistry, nutrition, etc., these people can be of inestimable
benefit to mankind. Care must be taken that their training does not
place too much emphasis upon dogmatic intellectual learning of
such remote subjects as languages, formal logic and history. When
they feel the need for these they will voluntarily embrace them. But
in academic life such subjects would confuse, rather than assist, the
77 natural healer.
Their balanced sensitivity helps them to perceive readily other
people’s points of view. This can be put to excellent use in their
healing work since counselling is an intimate part of healing.
Children with this strong spiritual power can be so absorbed in
their world of impressions that they are often regarded as dreamers.
They are especially susceptible to emotional conflicts, preferring to
withdraw than become involved. This tendency to withdraw is
inclined to make them seem backward. Indeed it can hamper their
early education. Parents should recognise the real cause and try to
correct it, rather than express displeasure with the children. Some
parents are selfish in this regard for, if the truth were told, they are
more concerned about their own pride and family prestige than the
welfare of their children.
Depth of feeling can create setbacks in the health of these
children. It would be highly beneficial if their parents recognised the
need for simple meals accompanied by light, pleasant background
music. Noisy television programmes must be avoided always. The
best foods for these children are fresh fruit or vegetable salads
during the day, with little or no meat at the main evening meal —
raw nuts or seeds are far more easily digested, as are cheese and
eggs.
These children are deeply loving and need their love to be
returned. There is no better way for parents to prepare these
children to cope with life and its many demands.
During this century every Birthchart with this arrow will also
possess the Arrow of Determination. These two major influences will
either harmonise or conflict, dependent upon the overall pattern of
the chart, the Ruling Number, given name and Sun Sign. THE ARROW OF HYPERSENSITIVITY
Birthdate of June Mercúrio , 1971: 78 In contrast to the previous arrow, when no numbers appear on the
Spiritual Plane of the Birthchart, problems of acute emotional
sensitivity prevail. These people are so easily hurt, offended or upset
in early years that they turn inward and become very shy. This
creates an inferiority complex, causing them difficulty in social
contact and a loss of trust. Most people outgrow this with maturity,
overcoming it by steering conversations away from the personal, by
achieving fame in some recognised field of endeavour, or simply by
developing the practice of attack as their best line of defence.
Nonetheless the absence of these numbers from the Birthchart
implies an ultra-sensitive, tender and loving nature. They learn,
usually by deep personal hurt, to become discriminatory in showing
their feelings. Some rarely find happiness in love due to their manner
of misrepresenting themselves.
Sometimes they appear stubborn, other times bold (to cover up
their shyness), but always these people have an emotional
vulnerability which few really understand or master. Yet emotional
control is one of their important lessons in life and must ultimately
be embraced.
Those who seek to overcome their hypersensitivity must first
recognise the difference between reaction and positive action. They
must cease being the victim of circumstances or reacting to others'
opinions. Instead, let them learn to become the initiators, or the
inspirers of endeavours. They will learn to recognise their strengths
and use these to balance their personality and to achieve some
measure of success in life. This gives them a basis for accomplishment and recognition. As a consequence, their understanding will
grow and their faith in humanity be restored.
Children with these numbers missing are exceptionally shy and
sensitive; yet with patience can be guided to overcoming the
problem. Parents should recognise that the little tribulations in the
mind of children with this arrow are very real and significant. They
should take time to listen and give their love and encouragement
generously.
These children crave love and seek every opportunity to serve
those upon whom their love is centred. Thus, parents should always
endeavour to find interesting little activities in which these children
can help. And when they do a good job be sure to show approval
and appreciation, for that is their manna from heaven. If these
children do a job badly, or if they show anything short of perfection
in anything else (for parents often expect perfection from their
children), they ought not to be scolded or criticised in front of
others. This is a certain way to entrench inferiority complexes and to
lose the trust and respect of these children. Any chastisement or
correction needed can always be given in private — and you may be
79 assured that the message will be quickly recognised. Hypersensitivity in Action With this arrow appearing on
the Birthcharts of four of our personality examples, we have
some interesting observations to make regarding its
relationship to the achieving of fame. Those under
consideration are Joh Bjelke-Petersen, Indira Gandhi, Lang
Hancock and Rupert Murdoch.
We have already looked into the erratic personality of Joh
Bjelke-Petersen and discovered some of the reasons for his
poor public image. Yet this image is not so unfavourable
amongst the electors of Queensland, many of whom regard him
as a sensitive, considerate person. Indeed, the presence of this
arrow indicates he could be so, were he to learn to improve is
self-expression.
The same can be said of Indira Gandhi. There is little doubt
that she would command the largest personal following of any
politician in India, yet the world’s media appears to be in
conflict with indigenous public opinion. She, too, appeared to
have the interests of her country at heart, although from this
distance we might easily take issue with her methods. But as
we are not in her place, nor even in her country, are we in a fit
position to judge? Of this there is no doubt; Indira Gandhi is an
idealist (with her two 9s), has a strong personal ego (the five
1s), and is highly sensitive to her elected role. In fact, she
shares most of these traits with Joh — ‘what a pair’, did
someone say?
Lang Hancock might be said to have dug his way into fame
with a shovel. His mineral discoveries have been primarily
responsible for his national recognition. But wealth and ‘luck’
(as some would unthinkingly call it) are not the factors which
have really brought this man into prominence. His wise and
introspective comments about Australian attitudes and his
recognition of the disastrous direction of business in this
country are cogent and timely. They indicate a highly sensitive
person, but one who, when he realises that insufficient people
are interested or believe in what he says, closes up. This is the
inner nature of a hypersensitive person. Let us not overlook
that this man is a ruling 8 (that powerful number of strong
commercialism and independence), has two 1s to give balanced
self-expression and two 9s indicating a balanced and powerful
idealism, combining with a 6 to give creativity and compassion.
Indeed we should listen more to him.
As with those we have just considered, Rupert Murdoch
(and most others possessing this Arrow of Hypersensitivity) has
learned how to master his inner feelings as he attracts more
publicity. The lack of these numbers of ‘soul protection’, or
80 inner feeling control, implies only that these people are in very
definite need of a lesson in emotional self-management. Once
having achieved this discipline, they will find that many
advantages await highly sensitive people, whether in business,
politics or any other form of interpersonal relationship. THE ARROW OF PRACTICALITY
Birthdate of February 6, 1974: With all numbers of the Physical Plane present on their Birthchart,
the basic outlook is one of intense practicality. The best expression
of these people will always be related to the physical which, in many
cases, means materialism.
These people are usually clever with their hands, but just which
direction their talent should take them is best indicated by their
Ruling Number. If this Ruling Number is Júpiter , 7 or 10, their emphasis
towards the material is strengthened, for it is here that their purpose
has to be fulfilled. With the Ruling Number of a spiritual or mental
vibration they will rise above material limitations and may become
capable artists or musicians. Although they are kind and ever ready
to help others, this heavy physical emphasis makes for poor judges
of character.
Often they are motivated by worldly desires, unless intensely
involved in creative work. Care should be taken that they do not
become too caught up in the material but, rather, learn to utilise
their power in a constructive way, either as tradesmen or
organisers.
Children with this vibration exhibit a strong desire for material
things, yet are much happier being with nature and learning to
appreciate the higher qualities of life. They are apt to take things for
granted, so the virtue of appreciation and the value of sharing
should be encouraged in them.
These children should never be forced into activities they do not 81 like. Kindness will always win the day with them and they will not
object to physical tasks, for that is where they feel most capable.
Unreasonable insistence will only arouse in them resentment which
could develop into obstinacy. If this occurs often it might lead to an
attitude of destructiveness which can be exceedingly harmful to
themselves and others. To avoid their mixing with children who
might already be of a disruptive nature, parents should exercise
great wisdom — but it must be done subtly. Little friends with gentle
natures, such as those children who appreciate and enjoy being with
nature and who love to share things, make their best playmates.
Never bribe with money or gifts because the aim should be to
direct their thoughts away from the material. Love and appreciation
are by far the best rewards. Practicality in Action If ever we needed evidence that a
woman could become extremely capable in business or
influential in the media, we need look no further than the
editor of Australia’s largest circulation magazine. Ita Buttrose
has directed the rise of The Australian Women’s Weekly with a
talent which is typical of the power presented by the Arrow of
Practicality, especially when related to as strong a Ruling
Number as her 7. This arrow is the only strength of significance
indicated on the Birthchart of Ita Buttrose, but its power has
provided the impetus she needed to undertake the enormous
challenge which justifies her inclusion in this list of exemplary
people. She is determined to maintain her magazine in the
forefront of circulation figures and, in this direction, has added
strength from her name with its Arrows of Determination and
of Intellect. Coupled with these powers are her Day Number 8,
her Capricornian nature and the general balance to her
Birthchart given by her name chart.
As far as domestic chores are concerned, it would be hard
to believe she had the inclination for them, yet there is no
doubt that she has very definite ideas as to what should be
done and when, what should be put where and how. But her
concerns are of a material nature, in accordance with her
powerful ambition.
To a large extent, Ita Buttrose is a lone worker. She prefers
to be the ruler of her domain and does not readily accept
anyone else into it. But she is successful and, because of that,
she is allowed free rein. With this freedom, she will grow in
strength so long as she recognises the guidance offered by
her intuition and does not take things too much for granted.
In her position she is especially vulnerable to health problems
arising from a highly acid-forming diet. Any Capricornians
involved in business entertaining are inclined to suffer so.
82 THE ARROW OF THE PLANNER
Birthdate of August 2, 1943: Due to the myriad occasions on which the numbers 2 and 3 occur
together in birthdates, this arrow is one of those most frequently
found. Joining, as it does, the initial numbers on each of the three
planes, the first vertical arrow brings with it the special quality of
adroit planning. Some numerologists regard this arrow as one of
thought power, but it is more than that. It reveals a unique
combination of thought, intuition and personal expression, giving
rise to many inspired plans, varying from those of little importance
to many of significant consequence.
An inherent love for order, method and the scheme of things is
present here. However, the planner prefers to concern himself more
with organisation than with practical details. If his Ruling Number is Júpiter , 7, 10 or 22/ Júpiter , or if he has a Júpiter or 7 on the Physical Plane, this
tendency is greatly minimised; otherwise, it could develop into
laziness. With such excellent capacities as planners, these people
must guard against the temptation to overlook the importance of
the smaller things in life, such as giving small tokens of
appreciation, consideration of others' feelings and those little
kindnesses which are often thought about but rarely expressed.
Children with this arrow are also happiest when organising
some little plan of their own, but often this runs counter to the plans
of their parents, causing disappointments which only love and
patience from the parents will help them to understand.
In their planning world, these children are inclined to be
detached and to take much for granted, so involved are they in their
own thoughts and schemes. This detachment causes an aloofness
which often results in unawareness of others’ needs. Loving but firm
discipline is needed to teach them the need for co-operation. They
should never be bullied or threatened, but instead gently taught to
respect the ideas, possessions and habits of others.
83 These children have a trusting, gentle nature and are often slow
to realise when injustices have been perpetrated upon them. This
naivete is charming, but could make them gullible until they get hurt
often enough to realise that not everyone is as guileless as they.
There is sometimes a nervous restlessness in their earlier years,
resulting from the inclination to reflect and speculate, but not
knowing quite how to translate this mental energy into the physical.
Encouragement to read illustrated travel books is an excellent way
of satisfying this feeling, for it absorbs this love of investigating and
exploring the unknown. Planning in Action Not surprisingly, the Arrow of the
Planner is one found on the Birthcharts of many successful
people because planning is the foundation of success in life.
Planning has become such a vital activity in the life of
Richard Bonynge that we shall use his birthdate as our
example. Born Mercúrio -29-1930, he has become one of the most
recorded orchestral conductors of the 1960s and 70s. His strict
ideals of musical expression are based on the power of the
three 9s on his Birthchart. His highly creative expression
derives its power from his Ruling Number 6. These attributes
would be of little value without the talent to plan them into
production. This Bonynge does with great skill, thanks to the
well-balanced arrow formed by the numbers 1-2-3 on his
Birthchart. However, the one 1 does not give him the ideal
balance in his verbal self-expression, causing him to prefer to
express himself through music to avoid misunderstandings.
Occasionally he finds himself being severely misunderstood and
often makes statements he wishes afterwards he could retract.
More use of his planning ability will minimise this. By putting
as much planning into his verbal expression as he does into his
musical he will learn to think carefully before making a strong
comment. 84 THE ARROW OF THE WILL
Birthdate of April 5, 1968: The vertical line created by the three numbers running up the
centre of the Birthchart links the physical with the creative. Its presence represents the power of the will, the force by which thought
is translated into action, symbolising the spine and the life force
(Kundalini) which ascends it. Abundant activity and strong willpower are embodied here. When these traits are combined with
determination (because of the presence also of the 1-5- Mercúrio arrow), we
find the makings of very dynamic people.
So intent are these people on pursuing their courses of action
that they can become oblivious of the feelings and wishes of others.
This tendency arises from their strong desire for personal
involvement, although it is sometimes mistaken for disinterest.
Misunderstandings of this nature arise from breakdowns in
communication — the result of their taking the concurrence of
others for granted without consulting them or without the guidance
of their own intuition. Often strong willpower can override
instinctive knowledge if the two are in conflict. This will occur from
time to time for those possessing this powerful arrow. These strongwilled people must learn to place more faith in the guidance of their
intuition.
Children with this arrow are also very strong-willed, but their
greatest pleasure is derived from expressing themselves in deeds of
kindness. They must be trained to understand other people's points
of view and accept guidance so that their kind deeds are beneficial
to others. There can be a tendency towards self-interest which, if
allowed to gain control, can lead to acute stubbornness. Parents
must guide these children with patience, love and understanding.
Never push them or impatiently command them, for this would only
increase their stubbornness and cause continual clashes of will.
As well as prompting these children to be thoughtful, parents
85 must always show appreciation with loving praise. This carries far
more weight than any other form of appreciation. Too often parents
resort to the easy and quick way of showing approval or giving
encouragement — bribes of sweets, money etc. This is a guaranteed
recipe for spoiling children by warping their sense of values,
frequently resulting in the development of very mercenary natures.
There is no substitute for the pure expression of love. THE ARROW OF FRUSTRATIONS
Birthdate of January 20, 1972: In the post-war years of the 1940s, 1950s and 1960s birthdates with
this arrow of emptiness did not occur. The presence of this arrow
applies only to some people born before the end of 1939, or since
the beginning of 1970. The arrow indicates a divided Birthchart; the
absence of numbers Júpiter , 5 and 6 from the birthdate reveals some
special lessons to be experienced. Absence of all numbers from the
Will Arrow implies the need to strengthen the ability of conscious
and deliberate action, the willpower. The absence of these numbers
does not indicate lack of will, but rather a reluctance or hesitancy to
act purposefully.
These people often expect more from others than they
themselves are prepared to give. Expectation is a basic cause of
frustration. We should realise that frustrations could be avoided if
only we learnt to appreciate people for what they are, rather than
what they can be or should be. No-one is everything they could be
because we are all in a state of evolving. Personal growth is very
slow and can never be forced. Accord to everyone the respect to
which they are entitled for the progress they have made thus far —
such appreciation is the best encouragement for further
development.
86 Life has many different ways of ensuring that its lessons are
learned. People with this arrow are aware that the various losses,
separations and disillusionments life presents to them (and there
can be quite a few), are vital steps in their evolution. They often
experience great disappointment in others, from which they must
develop an understanding of the reasons for life’s many trials. Until
this awareness develops they feel sad, and sometimes lonely and
dejected. Such people can derive immeasurable benefit from
studying and applying the science of numbers to their lives.
Children with this arrow need special love and attention, for life
to them can often seem unfairly victimising. Disappointments in
their friends and loss of faith in others can cause them to lose
confidence in themselves. This creates moods of dejection which
they do not understand.
Parents must be especially careful to maintain a strong bond of
friendship with these children and never do anything which could
undermine their trust. It should be understood that their moodiness
comes from feelings of betrayal and, if called upon to explain
themselves, they could be drawn into depths of depression from
which they might take days to emerge. Patient understanding and
almost limitless love from the parents will provide the bulwark by
which these children will regain confidence in themselves and faith
in other people. Overcoming Frustrations Experience shows that it is a
matter of what you do with what you have, rather than what
potential is available to you to create a success of your life.
This is illustrated well by the lives of our twenty-five famous
people. Not one of them has the Arrow of the Will, yet ten of
them possess the Arrow of Frustrations.
It would be generally thought of people who have achieved
a significant level of fame that they possessed a high potential
in terms of personality traits but often this is not the case. It
appears that those with the greatest challenges to overcome
will succeed by employing the strengths they possess to
balance out their weaknesses, whereas those with a readybalanced Birthchart of considerable potential strength often do
little with it.
The Arrow of Frustrations divides the Birthchart into two
and implies that only intense personal application will see plans
carried through into actions. As this purposefulness is practised
with increasing success, greater encouragement attends
continued perserverance. This is the recipe for success for
people whose Birthcharts embrace this arrow, as we see in the
lives of Joh Bjelke-Petersen, Richard Bonynge, Indira Gandhi,
Germaine Greer, Bob Hawke, Caroline Jones, Senator Edward
87 Kennedy, Rupert Murdoch, Sir Mark Oliphant and Kerry Packer.
Germaine Greer is extremely responsive to this arrow. With
no help from her Ruling Number or her Day Number, and only
a little help from her Name Numbers, she typifies a life in which
many varied frustrations play a continual role. This could be a
primary factor in determining her attitude towards what she
regards as sexual inequality.
By contrast, Rupert Murdoch, with the same Arrow of
Frustrations, has the power of adaptability conferred by his
Ruling Number 10 to enable him to adjust readily to
circumstances which might otherwise become extremely
frustrating. We see this in action in his various attempts at
corporate raiding — in some he is spontaneously successful, but
often he meets with considerable frustrations which cause him
either to abandon the attempt entirely or to make a later one.
He no doubt regards these frustrations as ideal opportunities to
reassess his position. That indeed is their purpose and it
would save many disappointments in people’s lives would they
but realise this. THE ARROW OF ACTIVITY
Birthdate of June 8, 1972: The last full arrow on the Birthchart is composed of the three
numbers joining the most expressive aspects of each of the
horizontal planes. The combination of higher learning by sacrifice
with perceptiveness (the 8) and ambition (the Mercúrio ) can cause
hyperactivity. In children hyperactivity is easily vented in
spontaneous physical expression, but adults use more restraint,
preferring to suppress their actions, resulting in nervous irritability.
Man is by nature an expressive creature. This arrow on his
Birthchart indicates a higher than average desire to express himself
88 through action. The constraints of modern society conspire to inhibit
his freedom of expression to such an extent that he becomes
agitated by the accumulation of suppressed nervous energy. The
result is often extreme nervousness which may induce any number
of illnesses, including asthma, diarrhoea, headaches, migraine,
hypertension, strokes and toxemia. Social disturbances, such as
arguments, are particularly distressing to these people. Peace and
harmony are necessary to their constitutions and for this reason
they should spend as much time as possible with nature. They are
not happy city dwellers. On the contrary, they often find the
tensions of the city to be most stress-inducing.
The desire to commune with nature and to be active implies the
enjoyment of bushwalks, hiking, farming, gardening and any sports
or activities requiring plenty of fresh air and open space. Pure,
natural foods are vital ingredients in the diets of these people. Their
digestive systems do not take well to processed or highly seasoned
foods, preferring instead simple fresh fruits and vegetables, nuts,
seeds and grains. Pure foods and plenty of outdoor exercise are the
best medicines, in fact the only ones to which these people will
unfailingly respond when enervation overtakes them.
It is important for highly active people that their thoughts be
uplifted to noble levels. They should attempt to improve their
expression through writing, especially on subjects related to the
wonders of nature.
Children with this arrow are especially susceptible to high levels
of noise, demanding peace, love and harmony in all they do and
wherever they go. Being highly excitable and impressionable they
demand the outdoors and always should be allowed to commune
with nature. If possible they should sleep, eat and play out of doors,
for this will give their high level of activity far more scope for
expression and will calm their emotions.
Noisy or disturbed conditions can cause serious setbacks to the
schooling of these children, as well as impeding their social
adjustments. Their great need is for peace and anything short of this
will interfere with their mental and emotional dispositions. Special
care must be taken if exposing them to television to avoid violent,
suspense and thriller programmes. They will be far happier and
healthier if they can totally avoid that square-eyed monster.
Early bed at night is important for these children; so too is
harmony in the home. There must not be arguments and tension,
else serious health problems with arise, even if the children are not
directly involved in the conflicts. The mysterious infantile disease
known to result in cot deaths can often be traced to psychic
disturbances which prevented the development of adequate
harmony between the soul and its new body. Such problems would 89 be far more serious to infants with this arrow because they are ultrasensitive to disharmony and noise. Activity in Action There are two distinct aspects of activity
indicated by this arrow both of which stem from the normal
desire to be expressive. The most natural is the desire to feel
free, to feel the limitlessness of the gigantic space which
surrounds us. This maintains personal calmness and a state of
permanent peace and contentment. But this is often far from
possible in this hectic world. The second aspect of activity
comes into being when the first is frustrated. It is then
recognised as hyperactivity, resulting from the suppression of
personal freedom. The body seeks to rebel, leading to all sorts
of curious actions.
Prince Philip tends to conform to the first aspect. This is
not seen in his Birthchart, but in his name (see Stage 12). We
have already recognised him as a peace-loving man with a
strong family love, but when we analyse his name, we find that
‘Philip’ is almost totally along the Arrow of Activity. (Sharing
this name, but with an additional ‘1’, the author is very aware
of its power in this direction!) When related to his ruling 2, we
can see why this man will always seek the peaceful approach,
yet enjoy the freedom of being able to express himself
physically.
By contrast, the Birthchart of Napoleon Bonaparte, with its
Arrows of Activity and of Determination is a classic example of
the second aspect of the arrow which is recognisable as
hyperactivity. History indicates to us that he was a man who
must have suffered many frustrations in expressing himself
physically during his earlier life. His later actions were
consistent with a disturbed nervous condition resulting from
extreme suppression. That this led him to conquer huge tracts
of land confirms that he felt constricted, becoming so
exhilarated with his initial successes that he did not know when
to stop — a common symptom of hyperactivity. His strong
determination fueled his enthusiasm for expansion, but at a
heavy penalty to his nerves and with frequent illnesses.
Napoleon enjoyed the outdoors but millions suffered at his
pleasure. 90 STAGE 8
The Day Numbers–Your Other Self Throughout all life we find balance, and, in the abse‘’nce of balance,
the effort to restore it. Winds are created to balance atmospheric air
pressures; night and day permit man’s energy balance to be effected
between rest and activity; and karma creates the balance between
what we actually do and what we should do.
Human personality also has its balance in the grand scheme of
things. We know that man is intended to discover his singular
pathway in life and to grow in that direction by personal experience.
That is life's purpose. But we must also recognise that he is not
intended to proceed in that direction unremittingly without some
balancing periods of controlled diversion. Without these man could
become so intense that his nervous energy would be exhausted early
in his lifetime. As a result, a state of mild monomania could develop
from his obsession with growth and progress. In extreme cases, man
could become so preoccupied with his progress as to cause
premature disability. This would totally negate his real aim: to
develop an understanding of his sensitive, eternal being, the Inner
Self. For this a strong, alert attitude is necessary.
Intimately related to our studies of the Inner Self is our
understanding of the expression of the outer self, the personality.
Our understanding of the Ruling Numbers and the numbers of the
Birthchart gives us an excellent outline of a man’s basic personality.
So let us now look at his diversionary personality, his other self, to
enable the complete picture to be developed.
Most, though not all, people have this diversionary aspect
clearly indicated in what we call the Day Number. The Day Number,
however, offers a variation of influence when it differs from the
Ruling Number, as will be shown to occur with the vast majority of
birthdates. Some people possess the same Day Number as Ruling
Number. Their need to strengthen their Ruling Number is obviously
greater than the need to divert from it.
The Day Number, in its preparation for analysis, is regarded in
the same basic manner as the Ruling Number. Each double number
of a day on which a person is born is resolved to a single number by
91 simple addition, except in those instances when a person is born on
the 10th, 11th or 22nd day of the month. These numbers maintain
similar properties to those we found when considering their Ruling
Number counterparts.
The only Day Number which does not exist as a Ruling Number is
the number 1. A person born on the first day of the month has the
Day Number of 1. This is analysed differently to the Day Number of
10 ascribed to those born on the 10th, 19th or 28th day of the
month. To ensure we know exactly what Day Number applies to
each day of the month, here is a checklist:
Day Number 1 — persons born on the 1st day of any month;
Day Number 2 — persons born on the 2nd or 20th day of
any month;
Day Number 3 — persons born on the 3rd, 12th, 21st or
30th day of any month;
Day Number Júpiter — persons born on the 4th, 13th or 31st day
of any month;
Day Number 5 — persons born on the 5th, 14th or 23rd day
of any month;
Day Number 6 — persons born on the 6th, 15th or 24th day
of any month;
Day Number 7 — persons born on the 7th, 16th or 25th day
of any month;
Day Number 8 — persons born on the 8th, 17th or 26th day
of any month;
Day Number Mercúrio — persons born on the 9th, 18th or 27th day
of any month;
Day Number 10 — persons born on the 10th, 19th or 28th
day of any month;
Day Number 11 — persons born on the 11th or 29th day of
any month
Day Number 22/ Júpiter — persons born on the 22nd day of any
month.
Now that you have checked your own day of birth and noted
your Day Number, you will be ready to discover what part it plays in
your life and how it influences your personality. But first a few
interesting points should be explained.
The Day Number will always be found to possess similar
properties to the Ruling Number, although at a lower level of
strength. This is an important consideration, for since the role of the
Day Number is that of guide to man's other self, it should never be
regarded as indicative of the actual Pathway a person is intended to
follow (which is more correctly revealed by the Ruling Number).
Around one in every twelve people possesses the same Day
Number as Ruling Number. Realising nothing happens by chance, we
92 must seek the reason for this occurrence. It is to be found in that
person’s apparent need for additional strengthening in his
personality to enable him to more successfully fulfil his purpose in
life and to overcome exceptional challenges on the Path. With the
strengthening of the intensity of the Ruling Number comes a
reduction in any diversionary aspects of this person's personality to
the point that such diversion primarily must derive from changes in
the Personal Year Numbers. These we shall analyse in the following
stage.
Let us now look at the general characteristics indicated by each
Day Number to understand how they influence the personality. Day Number 1 People born on the first day of each month
always do their best when allowed to work on their own. They
require ample freedom to best express themselves and to permit
maximum scope for the development of their initiative. The direction
in which this expression is best achieved is indicated by their Ruling
Number, although they will sometimes depart from this direction
and become involved in some diversionary project for a limited
period. This is their release valve. Because of their preference for
individual effort, these people might seem to become aloof or
detached for certain periods — this will be especially noticeable in
children, and should cause no alarm for it is merely their other seif
enjoying its seclusion.
Day Number 2 The effect of this Day Number is to induce a
desire to work closely with someone who has a bright, happy
disposition. It also attracts towards light entertainment, especially if
humorous. These people most certainly prefer to be entertained
than do the entertaining. They are light-hearted, happy people,
preferring the natural to the artificial.
Day Number 3 Here we have the part-time entertainers — the
people who thoroughly enjoy all forms of humour, especially satirical
humour. They are generally bright extroverts with an active brain
and a ready answer. There is an underlying tendency to be critical of
more sombre people, without attempting to understand the nature
of these different personalities. Care should be taken to resist this
destructive urge and to be more helpful to such people by
introducing a little light-hearted, impersonal humour into their lives. Day Number Júpiter A practical and capable flair helps these
people to express themselves with their hands or feet. If their Ruling
Number is an odd number this Day Number will be especially
beneficial in creating balance with that predominantly artistic or
philosophical approach to life. Should the Ruling Number be an even
number, they must take care to avoid an undue emphasis on
materialism, learning to achieve best efficiency from their actions
93 with a balance between what is needed and what they wish to see
achieved. It is especially important to exercise such control if the
Ruling Number is Júpiter , 8 or 10, due to the strong element of
materialism and commercialism possible there. Day Number 5 The general characteristic of the Ruling Number 5, the seeking of freedom, prevails almost as strongly in this
Day Number. It creates in these people the desire to openly express
their feelings. Yet they often refrain from so doing for any number of
imagined reasons, such as shyness and fear of being misunderstood. Unless they become more unreserved and act more naturally,
they could develop an inner intensity, an uptightness, with all its
attendant nerve-oriented problems.
Day Number 6 The creativity with which the 6 is typically associated finds its particular expression as a Day Number centred in
the home. When applied in a positive, constructive manner, this
number strengthens the feeling for love and beauty in the immediate
environment, whether it be home, office or work area. Negatively
expressed, the Day Number 6 brings with it an over-dramatisation of
domestic problems and all sorts of fears, worries and dreary
complaining — in short, people whom most of us would try to avoid.
Day Number 7 The special purpose of this number is to induce a degree of personal involvement in experiences intended to
instill a deeper set of values. These lessons provide vital training
which, for many people, is only of value when it affects the pocket,
the heart or the health. Most frequently it is the pocket, for money is
the commodity upon which most people base their values. The
quicker they learn by such lessons the more temporary will be their
effect and the more progress they will make in understanding their
lives.
Day Number 8 People tend to work and act as part of a
group, so accustomed are they to being organised and directed. This
does not help to develop independence, however. When people
have a Day Number of 8 it indicates their need for periods of
independence, varying from occasional to frequent intervals,
depending upon their Ruling Number and the degree to which their
awareness has developed. Some self-direction is vital to the
development of higher self through awareness. Such periods should
not be utilised, as some tend to, merely for developing monetary
independence, for this is lopsided. Often financial security comes as
a natural consequence of attaining a high degree of self-awareness
through mental independence.
Day Number Mercúrio The level of expression for this Day Number is
the mental. All who possess it discover that, from time to time, their
94 efforts are directed towards an idealistic improvement of human life.
Consequently, their own level of responsibility is increased. In turn
this benefits their personal development but it must not be
mistakenly limited to personal ambition. Ambition is a noble trait
when exercised with wisdom and directed towards the common
good, but when directed toward selfish gain it becomes a savage
taskmaster, leading to dissatisfaction, aggressiveness and possibly
mental unbalance. People with a Day Number Mercúrio should select their
priorities carefully, avoiding enslavement to an unbridled ambition. Day Number 10 The power of adaptability characterised by
the Ruling Number 10 is seen here in a more superficial expression.
People with a Day Number 10 are gregarious, energetic and easy to
please, usually immensely liked by those who meet them. But they
have a tendency to be superficial, sometimes to the point of
inconsiderate glibness. They must avoid wasting their lives by
recognising that the purpose of this Day Number is to balance their
more serious side. The Ruling Number will always direct their higher
development, while the Day Number is merely intended for
occasional relief.
Day Number 11 The high level of spirituality with which this
number is identified usually finds expression on the emotional level
as a Day Number. It brings with it a degree of intuitiveness well
above the average, but unless those with a Day Number 11 have
learned how to handle it they could become involved in emotional
extremes. This occurs if they have not developed adequate selfmastery, the result being wildly fluctuating moods. If not controlled
such nervous demands will exhaust the body, leading to an
enervated condition and depleted health. This will significantly
contribute to premature old age. Yet when these people have
mastered their emotions the power of this Day Number is extremely
valuable in their intuitive development.
Day Number 22/ Júpiter The power of this number is second to
none. Its influence as a Ruling Number is dynamic and only slightly
diminished when it appears as a Day Number. The power felt by
those whose Day Number is 22/ Júpiter often induces them to rely upon it,
rather than living their Ruling Number. This creates problems for
they do not possess the inner sustenance to live at this pace, as do
those with the 22/ Júpiter Ruling Number. Under such circumstances the
power of this Day Number is fragmented between its physical and
spiritual counterparts: materialism and the spirit of love. This
produces an imbalance which they find difficult to comprehend,
especially if their Ruling Number is an even one and particularly a 2, Júpiter or 10. Until they have firmly planted their feet upon the Path (as
indicated by the Ruling Number) the strength of the Day Number
95 22/ Júpiter will not be channelled beneficially. For this reason it is of the
utmost importance that they learn to balance the physical and the
spiritual aspects of life.
It is important to remember that your Day Number is the key to
your other self. It should never be relied upon as the primary
Pathway. Those who have attempted to do that have placed
themselves in a state of confusion, uncertain of their direction and of
what life holds for them. This has resulted in many cases of mental
and emotional instability.
Often people are motivated by desires which have been
stimulated by their reactions to other people, to advertisements, to
unrequited appreciation or love, or to any number of emotional
factors. By so reacting, they are no longer themselves and often flip
over to adopting the alternative characteristics of their Day Number.
Here we see the root cause of many cases of instability which has
created discontented and unhappy lives. I have often lamented the
ignorance evidenced by those in charge of mentally handicapped
and mentally deranged people of this highly reliable method of
getting to know the inner world of the patient. The understanding of
the personality, and of the qualities shown by the Ruling Number
and the Day Number, provide invaluable guidance in how to treat
the patient. Not only is the personality symbolised correctly by the
numbers, but when this system is regularly used it will produce an
ever-increasing development of the practitioner’s intuition so that
the innermost desires, motivations, fears and even karmic
influences of the patient are revealed. 96 STAGE Mercúrio The Personal Year NumbersYour Cycle of Change
‘There is a tide in the affairs of men.
Which, taken at the flood, leads on to fortune’.
William Shakespeare.
(Julius Caesar, IV, iii)
From Stage 8 we have seen that most people possess diverse aspects
to their personality. These are required to balance their individuality
to more successfully fulfil their purpose in life. But there is another
important variation for us to consider now. Although not related
directly to the personality, it is directed to the same end — the
achieving of one’s purpose. This phase is the cycle of the Personal
Year Numbers.
We have all found that some years of our lives stand out for
their exemplary progress, others for their time-consuming
frustrations. Our memory seems to cling to these extremes. Were
the memory more reliable and more cognisant of other than
extremes we would also recall other years of stabilising quietude
when no material progress or frustrations of discernible note
occurred. We would have also detected cycles of change running
through our lives. These cycles allow an important balancing in
overall growth. There are, in fact, cycles of change in the life of every
person which can be readily analysed, recognised and applied to
each year through which we pass while on earth. (These can, of
course, only occur while we are in the physical body, for it is only
while we are a part of these earthly vibrations that time, as we know
it, prevails).
Once we arrive at this point of recognising our cycles of change
we shall become aware of their purpose and act more wisely in cooperating with them. These changes are necessary to allow man
suitable periods for growth on each of his three vital levels —
physical, spiritual and mental. These must always be followed by
periods of stabilisation during which the preceding period of
development can be properly assimilated.
These cycles are not haphazard occurrences. They are very care- 97 fully planned, as is everything in nature. By our recognition of them
we become more aware of the divine plan of life, learning not to
expect every year to be one of dynamic progress and material gain.
If we come to recognise each year for its particular purpose we can
select our activities in accordance with our need for physical,
spiritual or mental development. More progress is always achieved
by swimming with the current than by fighting against it.
Why should such cycles of change occur in human life? In true
Socratic manner, the reply is: Doesn’t everything on earth, even
earth itself, move in accordance with planned cycles; so why not
man? Divine order regulates the universe — nothing and no-one is
excepted. In strict compliance with divine order, growth, i.e.
evolution, takes place in spiralling, ever-opening cycles. The twentyfour-hour cycle embracing day and night is designed to facilitate
alternate growth and rest over a comparatively short period. The
four-season year facilitates growth and rest in a larger cycle. Both
cycles, we know, are governed by the sun and that, too, has cycles
of change in its intensity.
This astronomical abode we call earth has its annual cycles as
well. Its years of change will come to be recognised as following the
same pattern as the nine-year cycle which applies to human
evolution. Every nine years a complete cycle is made with changes
occurring each year within the cycle, following a pattern of
analysable variation. For man and his planet the nature of the
influence of each year is symbolised by successive year numbers.
For man these are called Personal Year Numbers; for the planet, they
are known as World Year Numbers. Let us first take a look at the
pattern of World Year Numbers.
We must, of necessity, concentrate our studies upon our
calendar system, but we will have no difficulty interpreting other
calendar cycles if we so desire. We know that all numerical systems
of time measurement are in harmony with each other and with those
they have succeeded. With our own system of numbers (which,
happily, is employed by the vast majority of countries), we find that
the nine-year cycle continues relentlessly through this current (or
Christian) era in exactly the same manner as it does in the older
Roman, Greek and Hebrew calendars. There is a slight variation of
meaning in the numbers, but this is to be expected when we
consider the modification in lifestyles, attitudes and consciousness
brought into being with the advent of Christianity.
Analysing World Year Numbers alone provides an interesting
exercise, but they will not tell us very much about the world on their
own. We can readily see that the year 1979 was an 8 (1 + Mercúrio + 7 + Mercúrio = 26/8), but of far stronger influence on world affairs are the Ruling
Numbers and Personal Year Numbers of national and international
political, financial or cultural leaders. Only when we undertake a
98 deep analysis of world trends involving detailed analyses of world
leaders would we consider it worthwhile analysing the World Year
Number and setting up the chart of each year to ascertain the
influence it plays on world trends. But as it is an influence only, and
not a cause, we shall not delve into it in this book, for our primary
interest lies with the Inner Self.
The Personal Year cycle of nine years commences for each
person on the day of birth. Your Personal Year Number for that year
is the same as your Ruling Number. But your Ruling Number remains
constant throughout your life, although its influence is modified
somewhat when you come onto the Pyramids (Stage 10). However,
variations in your thinking and in your emotional and material
influences follow a pattern of cyclic change of nine-year duration.
These cycles are readily analysed. We calculate our Personal Year
Numbers by reducing the individual numbers of our birthday in the
year under consideration.
As an example birthdate, let us again use April 21, 1926, for it
belongs to one of the best known and best loved people in the
world, Queen Elizabeth Gêmeos . To calculate her Personal Year Numbers
over this decade we shall list the dates of each of her birthdays,
commencing with her year of birth, then jumping to 1971.
April 21 1926 = 25/7 — Personal Year Number and
Ruling Number 7
April 21 1971 = 25/7 — Personal Year Number 7
April 21 1972 = 26/8 — Personal Year Number 8
April 21 1973 = 27/ Mercúrio — Personal Year Number Mercúrio April 21 1974 = 28/10 — Personal Year Number 1
April 21 1975 = 29/11 — Personal Year Number 2
April 21 1976 = 30/3 — Personal Year Number 3
April 21 1977 = 31/ Júpiter — Personal Year Number Júpiter April 21 1978 = 32/5 — Personal Year Number 5
April 21 1979 = 33/6 — Personal Year Number 6
April 21 1980 = 25/7 — Personal Year Number 7
It can be readily seen that the years of the 1970s decade, and
the first of the 1980s reveal a smooth continuity of numerological
change to create the flowing cycle of Personal Year Numbers. This
cycle will be found to have its flood (as Shakespeare so capably
expressed it) and its drought, with intermediate stabilising periods.
These Personal Year Numbers move in cycles from 1 to Mercúrio , then
back to 1, repeating for as long as the person is on earth. Unlike the
Ruling Numbers, we do not use the 10, 11 or 22/ Júpiter as Personal Year
Numbers, for they do not represent special influence. Rather, they
tend to create confusion for the student in grasping the essence and
smooth flow of cyclic changes over the nine personal years.
99 Personal Year 1 This is the most powerful year for adjustment, as would be expected after the previous dynamic year
of change ( Mercúrio ). This vibration encourages us to develop confidence in
the power of noble convictions, to dare to be different and become a
little freer of the limitations society tends to impose upon thinking
people. It is an excellent time to break with old habits. Adaptation to
an improved lifestyle often demands such a break. It is an especially
powerful year for improving ourselves financially and for buying and
selling on a wide scale, such as with real estate, business interests
or investments. However, the most significant and permanent
successes will only be achieved when people’s motives are
genuinely for the common good, free of materialistic self-seeking or
any similarly unworthy attitude. When people are on the Path, living
a purposeful life, this is a year of exciting long-term progress
resulting from individual effort.
Ruling 10 people will find adaptation so effortless this year that
they can easily be lulled into an attitude of frivolity. They must be
careful to avoid recklessness, especially in financial matters, and
take heed not to succumb to egocentricity. With self-discipline, they
will find it a year of significant material growth. Personal Year 2 Spiritual development is the feature of this
year. It is not a year for major change, but rather one in which the
cultivation of improved spiritual awareness is undertaken with
success. The practice of meditation is especially beneficial this year
for it is a period in which personal evaluation should take place, a
year to take firm control of the emotions in order to discriminate
between actions and reactions. After the progress which usually
attends the previous two years there is a tendency to rest on one's
laurels or lapse into complacency. It is then that negativeness has its
opportunity to develop the reactive conditions of fear and
nervousness. Emotional upsets are not uncommon consequences of
such sensitivity. However, they should not be regarded as a natural
part of this year — rather are they unnatural, for they indicate that
one has temporarily lost control. Hence the importance of
maintaining command of one’s sensitivities, employing them
actively as guides to constructive living and being especially
responsive to their guidance during this Personal Year 2. Under this
vibration physical effort depends greatly on spiritual awareness.
Ruling 2 and ruling 11 people will, during this year, find an
increased level of psychic awareness as the emphasis shifts from the
physical and material to the spiritual. Their co-operation with this
development by allowing time for meditation and spiritual studies
will considerably improve their confidence through a higher
understanding of life, especially if combined with the helping of
others.
100 Personal Year 3 We now pass into a year when mental activity reaches a high point. Under this vibration our thinking and
observing faculties are attuned to an acute peak of alertness. It is a
year when the intellect thirsts for expression and knowledge. For
some it could involve studies of an academic nature; others might
prefer to investigate life and its philosophies; and others might seek
enlightenment through personal involvement. The usual means of
mental expansion in this year are either by the commencement of an
educational course or by extensive travel. Both would be beneficial,
the choice being determined by people’s Ruling Number, age,
environment and personal requirements. March is the best month for
the start of such activities and June the next most powerful. It is
unusual for a major change to occur during this year, although the
influence of the peaks of Pyramids of Maturity (see Stage 10) can
rule otherwise. On the lighter side of the Personal Year 3 we should
recognise the need for balance by ensuring that time is allowed for
humour and happy occasions; bright friendships are of primary
importance. Towards the end of this year, especially after
September, care should be taken to obtain plenty of rest to ensure
the body's nerve energy supply is maintained at a high level. This
enables us to more capably handle the trials of the year to come.
Ruling 3 people must control the high level of mental alertness
prevailing this year and direct their thinking along new or advanced
educational paths. If they fail to do so they could become
destructively critical of almost everyone and everything around
them. This will neither improve their popularity nor their state of
happiness. In studies they make exceptional progress during this
year provided they do not succumb to distractions.
Personal Year Júpiter Physical influences are the most prevalent
under this vibration. It must be recognised as a year of
consolidation, vital to the state of people’s health. Following the last
few years of progressive change, we must now allow the body to
catch up, to rest and recharge its nervous system. Characterised by
the figure of the square, symbolising the Júpiter , this is a year when a
feeling of confinement prevails, indicating that the contemplation of
change could be unwise. Those who do not follow the need for
treading water, allowing time for relaxation and adjustment, could
find themselves in a state of disharmony, leading to frustration,
confusion and fear. Any attempt at major changes in our affairs or
lifestyle during this year are rarely successful, leading instead to
material losses in either finances or health, or both. Only adequate
rest and relaxation will ensure that our nervous energy is not
depleted to a point of chronic enervation. People who are normally
regarded as highly strung, whose nerves are ever tense and whose
sensitivity is naturally acute, should be especially careful to avoid
101 any disharmonies in their dealings with others. A relaxed vacation
during this year is most beneficial. No new financial ventures should
be contemplated or commenced by anyone in their Personal Year Júpiter .
nor should any major change be undertaken in vocation or place of
abode. This situation will ease after the month of August, but only if
the need for ample relaxation and time for adjustment during the
year has been respected; otherwise, the nerves could suffer well
into the following year.
Ruling Júpiter people cannot be blamed for feeling very frustrated
under the personal Júpiter vibration. Invariably they will fail to recognise it
as a year of consolidation, trying instead to perpetuate the progress
achieved during the previous few years. As a result their nerves take
a severe battering. They must be prepared to increase their rest
period in bed each night and avoid too many nerve-depleting
experiences such as TV thrillers. The inclusion in their diet of
adequate B-complex vitamin-rich natural foods (such as wheatgerm,
yeast, raw seeds and nuts), or B-complex vitamin tablets (a less
desirable alternative) is of considerable benefit to restoring nerve
energy. Ruling 22/ Júpiter people should accept the same advice, but with
the additional suggestion that they recognise their more spiritual
essence and organise their daily routines to permit periods for
meditation and relaxation in silence. They must assiduously avoid
personal conflicts for the sake of health and nerves, concentrating
their attention on organisational activities at which they easily
excel. Personal Year 5 Again, this is no year for material progress
or for major changes in people's financial positions. But it is a year of
strengthened psychic abilities, especially the control of emotions
and the conservation of nervous energy. Heightened awareness in
spiritual and compassionate matters can mark this year as one of
artistic progress. Indeed, it is an excellent opportunity to engage in
the development of artistic talents or to embrace studies of a
spiritual nature. Although generally not a year for major change, it is
nonetheless one in which a decision is often taken to move out of
the city and away to the country. So long as it does not involve a
huge financial outlay or commitment beyond that already existing,
such a move would generally be highly successful, especially during
the months of May through October. Whenever possible, the peace
of the countryside should be enjoyed during this year to harmonise
and nourish the nerves and to calm our spirits in the atmosphere of
tranquility and freedom.
Ruling 5 people will find this a year in which their desires for
freedom become noticeably stronger. However, they must realise
that it is not always physical freedom they need, although it is
sometimes easy to believe it to be so. Their primary need is for
102 freedom of expression. This can best be achieved through the arts.
Singing, playing a musical instrument, painting, making pottery or
any similar form of artistic expression provides excellent release for
the nerves, helping these individuals attain an all-important
personal calmness. Personal Year 6 This is a year for creative development. New
projects undertaken during this period of creative value and for the
common good will succeed. It is an especially successful year for the
formation of public-spirited corporations and important business
associations. Under the vibration of the 6 considerable personal
emphasis is directed towards the home and the loved ones. It is
often a year when deep friendships are made or cemented into
marriage and when the home features prominently. It is also a very
conducive vibration under which to develop our creative faculties. If
people are living negatively this can be a most difficult year. Their
emphasis on the home can become one of intense anxiety, leading
at times to arguments and broken homes. Yet when living simply
and constructively we can make this year one of beauty and creative
achievement.
Ruling 6 people could find this a very difficult year to handle unless they are absorbed in a suitable creative activity. When so engaged their natural abilities will be strengthened in the course of the year.
It then becomes a very progressive year. But those who worry or
become overanxious, especially with regard to the home, will find
this a very burdensome year which severely drains their nerves and
their patience. When this occurs they must realise that balanced
creative expression has been missing from their lives and that
efforts to remedy this omission will significantly improve their
emotional state.
Personal Year 7 Similar to the Personal Year Júpiter , this is one
of consolidation when no major progress should be expected. It is a
year of learning, as can only occur through personal experience. For
many this means sacrifice. When we fail to accept the guidance of
the higher powers and, instead, live reactively and thoughtlessly,
we expose ourselves to the need for firm corrective measures —
prompt karma, we might call it. Such sacrifices invariably mean
losses in material effects, in love, or in health. But these all have
purpose, for they are designed to awaken us and return us to our
Path so that we may improve our understanding of life. It is
especially important to avoid any large scale business dealings or
financial investments during this year. Realise that this is a year of
consolidation, of placing in perspective the experiences of recent
years to prepare for the forthcoming cyclic peak under the next
Personal Years Mercúrio and 1.
Ruling 7 people will often suffer seemingly severe hardships
103 under this vibration. But their experiences will invariably appear far
worse to the outsider. These people are not unfamiliar with sacrifice,
as this is their established pattern of learning; and will be until they
attain a significant measure of awareness. Once this is achieved,
they become excellent teachers and helpers to mankind, thereby
fulfilling the purpose intended of their Ruling Number. Personal Year 8 During this year we emerge from the consolidating trough of our nine-year cycle on the rising wave of
growth and prosperity as it approaches the next peak. Many new
opportunities appear under this vibration, although it is often well
into the second half of the year before they are recognised and not
until the following year that they reach their zenith. The lessons of
the previous four years have done much to prepare for the
independence which this year has to offer us. For some it will be in
the form of a significant improvement in financial affairs, especially
likely during the period from August to December; for the majority,
there will emerge a spiritual independence whereby they recognise
how much emotional control and understanding of life they have
achieved and how much more emphasis they now place on living
(acting), rather than existing (reacting).
Ruling 8 people already have an appreciable measure of
independence. When compounded by the vibrations of this Personal
Year, they may become aloof, often finding it difficult to
communicate fluently with those near and dear to them, whom they
often take for granted. They must learn to be more expressive, for in
so doing they will achieve a measure of happiness they had not
previously known. Such sharing will not minimise their
independence; it will help others to understand it.
Personal Year Mercúrio The Personal Year Mercúrio is always found at the
crest of a cycle. It is very much a year of change, although the
changes are sometimes not fully recognised during that year. They
can be of such nature as to delay physical manifestation until the
following year. These changes will vary considerably over the
lifetime of each person, becoming especially pronounced during the
twenty-seven-year duration of people's Pyramids. This important
year is usually highly suited to travel, long journeys being the most
successful if commenced or planned in March, June or September. It
is also a year for the making of new and exciting friendships and the
termination of those older friendships which have been outgrown.
Further, it is a year for the squaring of debts and for extending
forgiveness to anyone with whom you are at variance. A strong
sense of humanitarian responsibility, tolerance and improved
understanding will noticeably prevail during this year.
Ruling Mercúrio people will be under no doubt as to the importance of
this year for they will feel its vibrant power in their every action. It
104 should be their year of most notable success. For them it is clearly
the crest of a cycle and of increased responsibility in whatever
humanitarian field they express themselves. For those with intense
ambition, special care should be taken that they do not allow their
enthusiasm to become overly demanding. Remember, all ambition
must be tempered with wisdom — just as a fire must be contained
for beneficent warmth, for if unrestrained it causes destruction. 105 STAGE 10
The Pyramids–Your Years of Maturity Ancient Egyptian priests knew it. Greeks of the Golden Age
following the Pythagorean methods were taught it. The early
Christian' fathers recognised it. But modern man is only slowly
discovering it — that his maximum potential of physical, mental and
spiritual fulfilment can only occur when he matures to a point of, as
Pythagoras so succinctly expressed it, ‘acquiring empire over the
self’. This is the goal of life's middle or mature phase, that vital
period of growth now symbolised by a group of four Pyramids.
So important is this second phase of life, the period of real
maturity, that the ancients related it symbolically to their inimitable
Pyramids. In our study of human life through numerology we follow
the same tradition and represent this period in Pyramid form.
To the ancients, Pyramids had profound significance. Symbolically they represented man’s aspirations towards his creator
and perfection; materially they were so constructed as to attract
and concentrate great power, as well as to perpetuate the secrets of
eternal life. The total construction was not meant to be merely an
impressive funereal edifice. It was instead a gigantic power source
within which the knowledge and wisdom of the buried leaders could
be amplified and then spiritually broadcast throughout the nation,
thereby perpetuating their omniscient influence over the affairs of
the people. Today, it is as though the ancient power of the Pyramids
is available to man in his living state of awareness. He does not need
a post-mortem structure to amplify his power. He can knowingly
achieve this as he reaches maturity in earthly life.
A special concentration of powers develops in human life once
adolescence concludes, when one's affairs become one’s own
responsibility. It is then also that people’s influence over the affairs
of others commences to gain strength. This is the period of maturity,
when the seeds of further karmic development are sown.
Provided neither karmic nor environmental influences decree
otherwise, human life expectancy encompasses three phases of
unfoldment: adolescence, maturity and fulfilment. The initial
period, adolescence, prevails from birth, through the many changes 106 in bodily development, until physical maturity is reached. At a
predetermined age it gives way to the development of mental
maturity. This continues for a period of twenty-seven years, by
which time people reach a level of fulfilment in proportion to the
success thus far achieved. The degree of maturity attained prepares
them for spiritual development during the third phase of life. Such is
the three-fold progression of natural earthly life.
To students of metaphysics it is no secret that certain karmic
obligations can be so demanding during the early years of a human
life that the life might be terminated prior to reaching its real
maturity. If this is the plan for a life its purpose is comparatively
simple and is fulfilled early. But such destinies have always been in a
minority and are becoming even rarer as karmic progress becomes
swifter (see Stage 14). With average human life expectancy now
around its highest in the history of this planet, we can usually look
to our life developing beyond its adolescent years through maturity
and well into the years of fulfilment. As a consequence, each time
souls now incarnate, their potential for higher evolution is markedly
increased.
During the period of adolescence human lives are primarily
concerned with physical experience. Even though their cycles of
change, as revealed by the Personal Year Numbers, indicate varying
degrees of influence of a mental or spiritual nature, the overriding
emphasis is essentially physical. Basically, it is by the five physical
senses that juveniles confront earthly life, are disciplined,
recognise their relationship to parents and environment, then
commence to gain some insight into the existence of their
individuality. Throughout their years of scholastic involvement,
young humans undergo such marked changes in physical
development that their whole existence is focused on physical
expression — their own, as well as that of others. The deceleration
of physical growth in the latter teenage years is usually succeeded
by accelerated mental and emotional activity. This is a period of
many hurts and many triumphs, but it brings people to the threshold
of real maturity when the physical playground is no longer the sole
centre of attraction.
Essentially a period of mental activity, the development of real
maturity is directed towards emotional control and the acquiring of
enlightenment and wisdom. Strong cyclic influences of varying
physical and spiritual activity will continue to prevail during this
period, while the in-dwelling individuality emerges and the Inner Self
is discovered. The level of success we achieve during our years of
maturity will generally determine the degree of fulfilment we may
realise during our third phase of life. No major change in lifestyle can
be made in these last years with the same measure of success as
during the years of maturity.
107 As the world proceeds toward the closing years of this
twentieth century, the increasing complexities imposed upon
human life make the need for a clearer understanding of its purpose
all the more essential. This is especially important if we are to
achieve the full potential of maturity.
Numerological analysis reveals to us that the period of maturity
is of twenty-seven years’ duration. It commences at different ages
for people with different Pathways, as indicated by their Ruling
Number, varying between twenty-five and thirty-four years. We
symbolise this period on a diagram of pyramids and, for this reason,
call it the period of the Pyramids. The twenty-seven years of the
Pyramids comprise three nine-year cycles. The age at which they
commence for each person is found by deducting their Ruling
Number from the number 36. Reasons for the use of 36 have their
origin, so far as we now know, back in Egyptian times (probably
even back to the Atlantean era). It was a number of important
esoteric significance in the building of the Pyramids of Egypt, an
importance which carries through into practical terms when we see
how it ensures that all people commence life on the pyramids at a
peak year, a Personal Year Mercúrio (which is 36 reduced to a single digit.
3 + 6).
Before we look at the ages at which people of different Ruling
Numbers attain their Pyramid Peaks, we should investigate the
numerological foundations for the construction of our Pyramids.
These foundations consist of three separate numbers, each derived
from the date of birth. They are the numbers of the month, the day
and the year (in that order), each reduced to its single digit. CONSTRUCTION OF YOUR
PYRAMIDS
The most unambiguous manner of describing the construction of the
Pyramids for analysing progress during the years of maturity is best
achieved by example. For this purpose we shall use the birthdate of
Queen Elizabeth Gêmeos — April 21, 1926. Step 1 Reduce birthdate to single digits, ensuring that the
month number is written before that of the day, thus April is
translated to Júpiter , the 21st day to 3, with the year 1926 adding to 18
and reducing to Mercúrio : Júpiter –3– Mercúrio Step 2 Build the first Pyramid on the first two numbers:
108 The Peak Number for this Pyramid is obtained by adding
together the two numbers at the base of the Pyramid and, if
necessary, this would be resolved to a single digit. But in this
example it is already a single digit — 7 is therefore placed inside the
first Peak unchanged. (If the base numbers were 7 and 8, the Peak
Number would be 6, the total of 7 and 8 resolved to a single digit.) Step 3 Build the second Pyramid on the second and third base numbers: The Peak Number for this second Pyramid is obtained by adding
3 and Mercúrio , the numbers at the base. These total 12, which has to be
resolved to a single digit by adding 1 and 2. Thus, the Peak Number
for the second Pyramid is 3. Step Júpiter Build the third Pyramid on the two existing Pyramids: The Peak Number for the third Pyramid is the total of the first
and second Peak Numbers. This is also resolved to a single digit,
except if the total is 10 or 11 in which instances it remains as these
full numbers. Our example shows that the Queen’s third Peak
Number is 10. Step 5 The final Pyramid is built around the other three because
109 its base numbers are the first and third – Júpiter and Mercúrio in this example: The Peak Number for this fourth Pyramid is the total of its two
base numbers, Júpiter and Mercúrio , being 13. As with the other Peaks, this is
resolved to a single digit, resulting in a Peak Number of Júpiter ; but if the
total were 10 or 11 they would not be reduced. It is important to
note that these two double numbers are only used if they appear on
the third or fourth Peaks, for here their stronger spiritual influence
achieves special importance only as the third phase of life is
approached. Step 6 We now have four Pyramids, diagramatically representing the Queen's current stage of life. The Peak of each
Pyramid indicates very important years in the period of the Queen's
maturity. The age at which she reaches the first Peak is the
chronological age of commencement of her maturity. This is found
by deducting her Ruling Number, 7, from 36. Thus the age of 29 is
placed adjacent to the first peak, together with the year at which
this age is reached, viz. 1955. Step 7
110 The ages attained at the remaining Pyramid peaks ad- vance in nine-year intervals. Thus, the second peak is reached at
age 38 in the year 1964; the third peak at age 47 in 1973; the fourth
peak at age 56 in 1982. When these numbers are placed on the
Pyramid diagram, it is completed thus: As an exercise to ensure you completely understand this important
method, take a large piece of paper and write on it the birthdate of
Prince Philip - June 10, 1921. Now close the book and set up the
diagram of his Pyramids; then check to see how much you have
learned.
Here is the complete Birthchart and the Pyramids for Prince
Philip: 6 – 10 – 1921 = 20/2 If your effort did not result in an identical diagram, it is
suggested that you recheck your methods step by step. It is
important that these methods be thoroughly understood before
further progress can be made.
111 We must also be certain of the year of commencement on the
Pyramids and the ages at which people of each Ruling Number arrive
at their Peaks. The following chart will be of material assistance to
those who do not wish to do their own calculation: 2 34 43 52 61 3 33 42 51 60 Júpiter 32 41 50 59 5 31 40 49 58 6 30 39 48 57 7 29 38 47 56 8 28 37 46 55 Mercúrio 27 36 45 54 10 26 35 44 53 11 25 34 43 52 22/ Júpiter 32 41 50 59 Now that we are familiar with the setting up of the Pyramids, let
us learn what they have to teach us. The most important set of
numbers to be considered are the four Peak Numbers on the
Pyramids. THE PEAK NUMBERS
Due to the contrasting conditions necessary for each of us to
112 achieve a well-balanced maturity, we need additional help to that
normally available from the Ruling Number. We get our
supplementary support from those four Peak Numbers on our
Pyramids. The object of the Peak Numbers is to provide a valuable
source of additional thrust at specific periods during the maturing
years. For all who have karmically evolved beyond the barbarian
stage (as has every thinking person), these numbers exert a special
influence which commences towards the end of the year prior to the
Peak year (Personal Year 8), and rises to its acme of strength during
the Peak year (Personal Year Mercúrio ). This influence can be sustained for
up to four years, significantly diminishing towards the close of the
Personal Year 3 following the Peak year. Peak Number 1 will only be found on either (occasionally on
both) the first or the second Pyramids. On the third or fourth
Pyramids, it becomes a 10. The 1 is an intensely practical number,
indicating that a period of individual effort is about to prevail, a
period of definite personal expression. For most it will mean
separation from previous involvements in which some degree of
disharmony was inhibiting personal development, such as in
marriage, business associations or social intercourse. You may be
assured that no marriage, business relationship or friendship will be
severed unless it had already served its purpose. Some people will
choose to avoid such separations with all possible effort, preferring
to maintain the status quo. Notwithstanding, they will doubtless
recognise a change in the nature of the relationship because they
begin to exert more of their own individuality and become more
expressive. The more spiritually advanced they are (in other words,
the older the soul), the more they will exert their individuality this
year and henceforth. The direction of their activities is usually
consistent with their Ruling Number; the manner in which they
express will depend on their personality strengths indicated by their
Birthchart.
Peak Number 2 introduces a period when stronger spiritual
values emerge. Life-style and habits will subtly embrace either a
more intuitive or a more emotional manner. Whether the spiritual
emphasis manifests as an improved state of awareness (its positive,
most constructive form), or as a state of heightened emotions (its
reactive and defeating form), will depend on the level of maturity
thus far achieved. Obviously intuitive ability cannot be expected to
develop if the individual is held captive by emotion. This is usually a
period of hard work and slow progress in material affairs, but we
cannot have it both ways. Remember, there is a right time for
everything and one of the most important applications of this
science of numbers is to learn what our needs are and the right way,
as well as the right time, to deal with them. To enforce material
113 progress when under the influence of the Peak Number 2 would be
to invite frustrations, conflicts and emotional enervation. Peak Number 3 is always a period when the emphasis should
be directed towards the intellectual. It is an important period of
learning, of reviewing and of analysing. Many people find the urge
for travel particularly accentuated under the guidance of this
vibration. At this period in their lives travel for such people assumes
a very important role as a means of learning and expanding their
insight into life. If they do not allow their mental faculties scope for
positive expansion, they run the risk of becoming destructively
critical, exacting and, not surprisingly, quite unpopular.
Peak Number Júpiter brings with it increased material power. This
might be expressed in any number of ways, depending upon the
general level of maturity, Ruling Number and Birthchart
characteristics. For those people who are prepared for hard work,
much can be achieved under this vibration. For those who need to
acquire additional knowledge in dealing with the faculties of sense
to round off their maturity and who are prepared to involve
themselves in physical work, vital development will reward their
efforts. But those who become overly ambitious, mercenary or
covetous will find this period one of loss, rather than gain. Even
though they might work harder, they will make no discernible
progress while their motives are so egocentric. This can lead to a
serious strain on their nerves and general state of health which can
only be corrected after they reassess their motives. Peak Number 5 usually introduces significant changes to
people’s emotional state. These are created through the emergence
of spiritual growth and understanding which leads to greater
personal freedom. It is a period through which the psychic powers
undergo considerable strengthening, thereby facilitating an
improved level of emotional control. In turn this reduces
reactiveness to people and to situations. As a consequence a greater
measure of personal liberty develops which prepares the way for
increased spiritual awareness. Those who in earlier years were
anxious about their financial security now have the means for
dispelling such worries with a more balanced view of their real needs
and environmental influences.
Peak Number 6 brings with it a very strong power for
creative development. It is a period when the highest spiritual and
mental faculties can combine to reveal to man his vital role in the
limitless plan of creation. Such sublime awareness will rarely
become apparent to any but the more mature, more highly evolved
people. For the majority, those who identify with physical
possessiveness, this becomes a period of intense home involvement
114 or, if unmarried, a hankering for settling down in their own home.
Tendencies to worry about the home or to rush into marriage should
be recognised as merely the procreative counterparts of what would
otherwise be a powerful creative drive. Wisdom and patience should
be exercised to avoid the need for the hurtful lessons which are
attracted when emotions dominate people’s affairs. Peak Number 7 can bring many surprising changes into
people's lives. It is the period when we are called upon to share all
we have learned thus far. By so doing we experience tremendous
progress in our own unfolding, for there is no better system of
learning than that of teaching. This is an intensely empirical period
in life, for it requires us to undergo much testing. If successful we
qualify for the higher teachings which await us during this year; if
we have not yet matured to a point of acceptable growth, we must
spend more time in preparatory development. Most people during
this period of vibrationary influence are called upon to undertake
some form of teaching, but not necessarily in conventional
scholastic fields. More often their teaching is associated with postacademic fields of human evolvement such as yoga, natural
therapies, spiritual awareness and artistic development. Peak Number 8 denotes independence as the prevailing
force during this very powerful period. Whether independence
develops through artistic or commercial involvements will, of
course, depend on the Ruling Number: if it is an even number,
financial success is indicated; if an odd number, success through
artistic (or for some people academic) expression is more likely.
Great care must be taken that the power of this vibration is used
constructively and that opposing individuals or limiting situations
are not allowed to inhibit its transmission. The result of such
influences will be clearly discernible in an uncharacteristic aloofness
— the effort of the soul struggling to achieve independent
expression.
Peak Number Mercúrio introduces a period of pronounced humanitarian activity. This vibration brings with it special opportunities to
serve mankind. It is also a period when intense mental involvement
is necessary for the greatest success to be achieved — analysing and
assessing the needs of others, planning for major changes in
vocation, and re-evaluating long-standing relationships and
environmental surroundings. Many people attempt to make
demands on your time and energy during this period. Some are in
genuine need and provide important opportunities to serve; some
will be artificially contrived to attract your sympathy. These latter
cases should be treated as individuals needing awakening. Our
discriminatory and analysing abilities will certainly be tested and
strengthened by such experiences. While some people under this
115 vibration will need to remain at home and be of service, others will
be moved to travel to undergo important lessons in development.
Everyone, during the first year of influence following the attainment
of this Peak, will find important changes occurring in their lives. If
not involving travel, they will almost without exception move
house, change jobs or form new circles of acquaintances. Any one of
a number of these alterations in lifestyle can occur, depending on
the nature of the responsibilities necessary to the prevailing stage in
growth toward maturity. Peak Number 10 can only occur on the third or fourth Pyramid Peaks, as maturity approaches its zenith. It brings a special
strength, a unique power for relating to the needs of others during
important periods of adjustment in their lives. This ability is the
happy consequence of people’s own living experiences and the
training instilled by them. With the emphasis on mind power, as
indicated by the Mercúrio in every birthdate this century, a considerable
amount of mental adjustment is needed to remould outlooks and
lifestyles as the new age approaches. Those older souls who have a
Peak Number 10 during this period assume critically important roles
in guiding and encouraging those in need. This is an exciting
responsibility which confers upon the giver as many benefits as
upon the receiver.
Peak Number 11 is the second of the two Peak Numbers
which can only occur on either the third or fourth Peaks. As with the
Peak Number 10, a high level of maturity is necessary to handle its
power. Peak Number 11 indicates that a considerable amount of
spiritual accountability is demanded. Yet the demand will never
exceed the individual’s capacity. It is a period of high intuitiveness,
when the most inspired actions become possible. However, there
are certain spiritual requirements necessary for the optimum
potential of this period to be realised. These involve compassion,
temperance, integrity and the practice of meditation. Compassion
means far more than its modern limited interpretation of
commiseration and comfort. It is the practice of philanthropy, the
sharing of love in its highest spiritual sense. In very practical terms it
implies thoughtfulness for, and harmony with, all life, especially
human life. Temperance is the expression of balance and
moderation in all undertakings, while meditation is an exercise in
enlightenment through a relaxed mind and body, restoring complete
harmony to the mind, the body and the heart. While these
disciplines are in practise, the virtue of impeccable integrity must
prevail throughout actions and thoughts, thereby ensuring that no
negative forces can impede spiritual unfoldment, the supreme
purpose of this period.
116 The qualities of maturity developed during this twenty-seven-year
period in life bring with them the mental and material independence
necessary for the expansion of wisdom during the third and final
period of earthly human life we call fulfilment. THE YEARS OF FULFILMENT
This third phase of life should complete the transition from our
younger worldliness to the wisdom and peace which accompany
realisation. No longer should our thoughts and actions be held
captive under the yokes of ambitiousness, anxiety and agitation of
those earlier years as a novice. Graduation has occurred. Private and
public expressions are now those of an initiate — relaxed, confident
and noble.
The sixty or so years thus far accumulated in the body should
have matured us to a realisation that only by the twin virtues of
truth and wisdom can we now attain the fulfilment intended of our
third phase of life. Our loyalties now become distinctly two-fold.
Outwardly we must do everything possible to share the benefits of
our own worldly experiences with the general aim of assisting the
renewal of our nation’s cultural heritage. Inwardly preparation must
be made for the inevitable journey beyond the Earthly Plane.
With growing richness in years, senior citizens offer to the
younger generations a fountain of wisdom unknown to those less
mature. Of this virtue Oriental cultures are astutely conscious,
evidenced by so many older people in government than we find in
the Occident. The west has yet to learn that youthful vitality must be
balanced by mature wisdom for lasting success in life. 117 STAGE 11
The Sun Signs and Their Elements This book is not designed to teach astrology, but astrological
influences play such a powerful role in understanding personality
and individuality that it would be highly negligent of us not to
investigate these important factors in self-analysis.
The close relationship between astrology and numerology is
evident to all who have studied both sciences. They both provide an
insight into life, yet we always find an explicit preference with
students and counsellors for one over the other. The basis for such
preference will not always be apparent, nor does the reason really
matter — an academic scientist might exert a similar preference in
his study of physics or chemistry, yet they are so related that he
must have a sound working knowledge of both. Actually, this
analogy between the two metaphysical sciences and the two
physical sciences is very illustrative, for it offers many parallels to
our studies here.
Numerology and astrology are the two most scientific and
reliable metaphysical sciences for the investigation into the Inner
Self, for the understanding of what makes up our individuality.
Chemistry and physics are two of the most essential physical
sciences for the study of the material universe, the understanding of
the outer self. (Even applied to nutritional studies and processes of
human digestion they fall within the category of the outer self, in
comparison to the spiritual and mental, the essential being of man.)
As one of the metaphysical keystones, astrology is more than
the mere study of heavenly bodies. It is the ancient science of the
study of the heavenly bodies and their relationship to human life. Its
origin far predates recorded history, lying possibly beyond the
remote Atlantean period. We know that the Atlanteans used it
extensively, conferring their knowledge upon their heirs on both
sides of that ocean named after them. Their influence was so
profound that it penetrated far beyond the shores of the Atlantic,
with traces of it being extant even today in Central and South
America, as well as in Lebanon, Greece, Egypt, Crete, etc.
The ancients were not scientific people, as we understand the
118 meaning of the word today. But they did recognise the powerful
influence over their affairs exerted by the sun and the moon, along
with the mysterious magnetism of the planets. Not only were these
influences apparent in the formation of the weather and the tides,
but also in farming and, most appropriately, in human personality.
Hence those early studies evolved, revealing the influences exerted
by the positions of various heavenly bodies at the time of a person's
birth. Those same wise ancients also observed the effect on human
nature of numerical vibrations.
With the establishment of the modern scientific system by
Pythagoras, those ancient observations (for even then they were
ancient) were expanded and the sciences of astrology and
numerology took a great leap forward.
Always, there have been people who would exploit the gullible.
It is not any worse today than in earlier times. But it was the
exploiters of astrology and numerology in ancient times, particularly
during biblical times, who gave these sciences a spurious
reputation. It must be emphasised that these disciplines are not
predictive arts to be used to hold the fear of a calamitous future over
those they seek to exploit, as did the astrologers of
Nebuchadnezzar's court.
Of immediate concern now is to recognise that we are not
dealing with quackery or the work of the devil when we discuss and
employ these metaphysical sciences. Indeed, we know that from the
study of the heavenly bodies and their relationship to human life
(astrology) was born the academically esteemed science of
astronomy. The metaphysical always predetermines the physical;
everything in life testifies to this. But again we are not primarily
interested in the physical — if the astronomers wish to restrict their
studies to the physical aspects of the heavenly bodies, we will leave
it to them. We find these studies most relevant when they relate to
human life. Each of the heavenly bodies has strong peculiarities of
its own. The astronomers study their physical character but we are
more concerned with how their more subtle peculiarities affect us.
That is what astrology teaches.
When a person is born we know that certain vibrationary
influences prevail which can be analysed numerologically to reliably
assess the individuality. The basis for this assessment, which has
been the subject of the previous ten stages of this book, is the
earthly date of birth. Now we will consider that, at the time of birth,
the earth itself received unique vibratory emanations from the sun
and the sun's position in relation to stellar constellations also
exercised certain significant influences.
Each of the twelve astrological Sun Signs exerts an influence
which lasts for a period averaging one calendar month, the twelve
collectively totalling a full calendar year — one complete revolution
119 of earth around the sun. So widely used is the science of astrology
that every person knows the name of his Sun Sign, whether or not he
understands what it represents in his life. The basic characteristics
of each sign are given in this stage, but it must be understood that
they are by no means exhaustive. The following are, instead,
summaries of the most salient aspects of each sign, with special
emphasis on their health factors.
Usually the twelve Sun Signs are represented in circular form,
but for our purposes they are better represented in chart form:
TRIPLICITY FIRE EARTH AIR WATER (Lesson) (Compassion) (Service) (Brotherhood) (Peace) HEAD
Intellect ARIES
Mar 21-Apr 20 TAURUS
Apr 21 May 20 GEMINI
May 21-Jun 20 CANCER
Jun 21 Jul 21 Thought Dynamic Steady Sensitive Protective MIDDLE LEO
Jul 22 Aug 22 VIRGO
Aug 23-Sep 22 LIBRA Emotions Sep 23 Oct 22 SCORPIO
Oct 23-Nov 22 Feeling Leadership Perfectionist Balance Sex & Healing FEET SAGITTARIUS
Nov 23-Dec 22 CAPRICORN AQUARIUS Dec 23-Jan 21 Jan 22-Feb 20 PISCES
Feb 21 Mar 20 Gregarious Cautious Knowledge Peacemakers Understanding Triplicities These are three major aspects of human
expression which effectively divide the twelve signs into groups of
four each. The first four signs, Aries, Taurus, Gemini and Cancer,
belong to the Head Triplicity, because of their strong emphasis on
mental expression. The second group of four signs, Leo, Virgo, Libra
and Scorpio, belong to the Middle Triplicity, owing to the strength of
their feelings and their strong emphasis on emotional expression.
The third group of four signs, Sagittarius, Capricorn, Aquarius and
Pisces, make up the Feet Triplicity because of their influence on
insight into the origin of things and the underlying philosophy
behind all creation.
It is highly beneficial to be aware of the general mode of
expression preferred by people with whom we are in contact. In my
practice as a counsellor and nutritionist, this has been found a
consistently reliable guide to which clients and patients most easily
relate: if belonging to a Head Sign, they are most receptive to reason
and logic; Middle Signs are guided most by feeling and have the
strongest emotions; Feet Signs seek the underlying principles, often
recognising their foundation in the metaphysical domains. 120 The Elements There are four basic human natures, each
relating to a general purpose in life. The twelve Sun Signs are divided
into these four groups. Each group contains three signs and is
assigned a symbolic name of very ancient origin. These names
convey essential characteristics and lessons which are common to
each of the three signs, yet are expressed by them in varying
manner. Fire Signs (Aries, Leo and Sagittarius) reveal fast-moving,
volatile, sometimes fiery people, with abundant nervous energy.
Their major lesson in life is to understand the meaning of divine love,
embracing compassion and philanthropy, by attuning to the needs
of others and by giving energies in loving support for the attainment
of those needs. Earth Signs (Taurus, Virgo and Capricorn) indicate very steady
and predictable people who are the most consistent and dependable
friends we are likely to find. Their karmic lessons are related to being
of service to their fellow man. In so being, they will elevate their
consciousness beyond the earthly to the spiritual, but this is rarely
achieved before the latter half of their years of maturity. Primary
motivations in their earlier lives are more related to the physical
world of playing, eating and doing, for it is through these
involvements that they acquire the early development they need.
Air Signs (Gemini, Libra and Aquarius) are the flexible people,
with quick brains and deep understanding. They are people who can
often think of many different things at once, but they must take care
not to allow themselves to become too involved in a wide diversity
of projects, else they will tire from enervation. Brotherhood is their
karmic lesson, through which they develop a deep philosophy of life
by mixing with and helping people. Water Signs (Cancer, Scorpio and Pisces) are the peaceful
people — the quiet, restful ones whose presence usually brings
comfort. At times, though, these people can be very emotional and
lose control of their feelings. They must guard against these
situations which create distress to all involved and noticeably
diffuse their natural peacefulness. They have great tenacity and are
exceptionally capable healers when living constructively. The Cusps Each of the Sun Signs discussed in the following
pages and shown on the preceding chart are given dates to indicate
the period of their influence. The commencing and concluding days
shown for each month should be regarded as being the average of
those given by a selected number of eminent astrological
researchers. 121 Birthdates falling within a six-day period, comprising three days
each side of the changeover date between any two signs, actually
come within the influence of both signs. This six-day changeover
period is known as the Cusp. During each Cusp period, the
relationship between the joint influences of each sign is generally
determined by analysing the exact position of the birthdate. For
instance, the Cusp of Aries-Taurus covers the period April 18 to 23,
inclusive. A person born on April 18, 19 or 20 will be influenced
more by Aries, less by Taurus, but the stronger aspects of the
Taurean nature will certainly prevail; anyone born on April 21, 22 or
23 will be influenced more by Taurus, less by Aries — here the
stronger aspects of the Arien nature will prevail. The Foods With the analysis of each of the twelve Sun Signs is
offered a list of natural foods containing researched estimates of
availability of the particular cell salt required. Nutrients in natural
form are by far the best means for achieving dietary correction,
whereas the administering of raw salts is only of value for short-term
therapeutic purposes. The human body cannot easily assimilate
mineral salts in their coarse form, but is designed to absorb those
which nature has finely triturated through its plant kingdom. Should
such foods be unavailable, or should the body be so devitalised as to
demand stronger potencies, it is recommended that finely prepared
biochemic celt salts in tablet or liquid form be taken for the needed
recuperative period. But it must be emphasised that combining a
corrected mental attitude with dietary correction is the only
permanent method for maintaining health.
Due to their high level of nutritional potency, some of the foods
appear in the lists of more than one sign. One cannot improve upon
raw unsalted nuts and seeds, soya beans, green vegetables and
many of the dried fruits and grains as sources of almost the entire
range of biochemic cell salts required by the human body. ARIES – MARCH 21 TO APRIL 20
Characteristic Expression Arians have very active brains,
always seeking to learn things, always thinking and planning. They
are high-spirited people, dynamic, volatile, courageous, witty and
potentially very good scholars. Learning is important to them, as are
bright social associations. They are rarely lost for words and ever
ready to verbally defend themselves and their actions. For those
who live constructively, responsibility is their second nature; in its
expression they find guidance constantly available from their acute
intuition. The other side of their nature is to be reckless, headstrong
and often quite fierce — this is when they live destructively and
122 become a liability to society. Factors which could swing the
personality away from its naturally constructive expression are
often traceable to a mineral deficiency in the diet, particularly of the
most vital cell salt for Arians, potassium phosphate. Negative Tendencies to be Surmounted Due to their
high level of cerebral energy Arians can be extremely impatient with
others. However, with a loved one they can show so much patience
as to be easily imposed upon. This will effectively reduce the
reliability of their intuition and cause them to make some
monumental errors of judgement. Even when living constructively
they should take care not to overestimate their capabilities or to
engage in repeatedly lengthy periods of mental activity without
balancing periods of relaxation; such neglect will lead to enervation,
headaches and recklessness. They must think well before speaking,
especially if they intend to be critical, for Arians have a sharp tongue
and a fiery temper when they lose self-control.
Health Aspects Aries relates to the cerebrum, the brain of
man. Hence a physical characteristic usually related to Arians is a
large head. They often have a larger than average brain and require
dietary emphasis which will provide extra nourishment to the brain
cells and nerve fluid. The biochemic cell salt most useful in this
regard is known as Kali Phos — potassium phosphate. It can be
consumed in a supplementary form as a powder or liquid following
Dr William Schuessler’s biochemic tradition. But if while taking this
supplement the Arian adheres to a conventional, high acid diet based
on processed and refined foods, a high meat intake, tea, coffee
and/or alcohol, his hyperacid condition will negate the alkalising
benefits of the cell salt. He is far better advised to alter his diet to
embrace natural foods, with special emphasis on those richest in
natural potassium phosphate, as listed according to availability:
yeast — edible brewers and torula varieties;
soya grits and, for those seeking milk, soya milk;
soya beans — soaked for twenty-four hours, then steamed;
wheatgerm and wheat bran — both must be fresh and raw;
sunflower seeds — either sprouted or as raw whole kernels;
chickpeas (garbanzos) and lentils;
raw, unsalted nuts — especially almonds, brazils and
pistachios;
rye — sprouted is best, next is freshly stoneground.
A deficiency of potassium phosphate can be generally
recognised as affecting mental processes manifesting in such
symptoms as migraine, extreme nervousness, frequent hysteria,
mental exhaustion, psychosis, paranoia, wild fancies and
forebodings, etc. 123 Karmic Lesson Arians must learn the meaning of selfless
love, recognising its marked difference to physical desire.
Compassion is the highest expression of universal love, so this
virtue must become a part of their every thought, word and deed.
Vital to the development of compassion is the mastery of emotions,
especially temper, anger and jealousy. TAURUS – APRIL 21 TO MAY 20
Characteristic Expression
Taureans are dominating,
strong and persistent people who find their easiest form of
expression to be through movement. They are extremely stable and
solid friends, highly reliable and predictable. They are also very
orthodox, which makes them slow to accept new ideas. Taurus
governs the cerebellum, the lower brain, actually the nerve centre
regulating physical movement; hence the initial response from a
Taurean is to do something, rather than think about it. This creates
reactions, rather than actions, giving rise to emotional involvement
and passionate expression. Nevertheless, this is an Earth Sign, a
stabilising influence which restrains the emotions unless some
extreme irritation persists. In the normal course of events these
people have kindly dispositions and are slow to anger. But when
ultimately aroused, they become volcanic. Once they explode it is as
though they have blown off excess steam from their escape valve,
allowing a return to normal action. A further influence of earth is
observed in the Taurean love for comfort, for financial security and
for the good things of life — especially rich food. They have to learn
that rich food is rarely a good choice for the body.
Negative Tendencies to be Surmounted Impulsive
desire plays too great a part in the life of Taureans. They must learn
to reason more, to think carefully before doing — then they will act,
rather than react so much. Their constancy should never be allowed
to become obstinacy; their kindliness should not prompt them to
become over-indulgent. Obstinancy and over-indulgence are
emotional reactions which are often resorted to when fear prevails
— fear of change, fear of being disliked, or of being insecure. The
cerebellum is often referred to as the animal brain, for it dominates
the unconscious, the body's movements and its passions. Special
care should be taken to avoid emotional excesses, for passion
cannot hear the voice of reason.
Health Aspects Taurus exerts strong influence on the ears,
neck, throat, liver and gall bladder. People born under this sign may
have large ears, a strong neck and powerful voice (many become
successful wrestlers or singers). It is not uncommon for Taureans to
124 have weight problems brought about primarily by their tendency to
over-indulge in rich food and to retain excess water in the body. The
biochemic cell salt, Nat Sulph — sodium sulphate — is allied with
Taurus, because this is the most efficacious expeller of water.
Deficiency in this salt will induce pains in the back of the head which
sometimes run down the spine, affecting the liver. As this cell salt is
vital to the body's elimination of excess water, its lack will cause the
body to resort to the next best means; it will produce nerve and
muscular spasms, thereby inducing feverishness from the violent
effort to throw off excess moisture via the bloodstream through
perspiration. This is also designed to effectively reduce the body's
toxicity level. The alternating fever and chill as the body cleanses,
then normalises itself, together with the muscular aches from the
spasms, give rise to the disease which continues to baffle physicians
who have given it the name influenza. Taureans in hot and humid
climates, where the breath is supercharged with moisture and
people drink more (which, in turn, impedes their digestion and
nutrient absorption), run greater risk of moisture retention. This
often produces biliousness and sometimes predisposes towards
malaria. The habit of adding common salt (sodium chloride) to foods
must be avoided as this chemical works against the body's efforts to
eliminate excess moisture. Contrary to popular opinion, common
salt does not avert dehydration or cramps — it is a mild poison,
which is the reason the body works to throw it off through its pores.
If you ensure that the diet comprises foods rich in natural sodium
sulphate many will also be found to contain adequate natural
sodium chloride to facilitate proper cellular chemical balance. The
diet should also be low in saturated fatty acids and cholesterol to
ease the strain on the liver, gall bladder and arteries. Some of the
most desirable foods include abundant fresh salad vegetables,
particularly celery and carrots. Dried fruits such as figs, raisins and
sultanas are also exceptionally nourishing to Taureans. One meal a
day of fresh fruits, eaten raw, is definitely beneficial, particularly as
the first meal of the day. Karmic Lesson To recognise the difference between
imprudent emotional reactions and balanced rational actions
provides one of the most vital experiences in the life of a person
born under the sign of Taurus. It is through service to mankind that
they will learn to acquire mastery over their desires and emotions.
Consequently, they will always be led into activities from which such
experiences are best obtained. 125 GEMINI – MAY 21 TO JUNE 20
Characteristic Expression
Here we are obliged to
consider two people in one. Symbolically represented by the twins,
the Sign of Gemini implies two personalities: one relates to the
innate individuality; the other relates to the personality of social
intercourse. Belonging to the Air Sign of the Head Triplicity, Gemini
people are extremely sensitive and subject to rapid change of
thought without warning. Their fast-moving brains tend to give
them a mercurial nature, but this also implies some very beneficial
abilities; viz. a reliable sense of discrimination and a gift of
communication. To be instantly able to discriminate between sense
and nonsense, between truth and falsehood, reality and unreality, is
characteristic of Geminis. So, too, is their ability to communicate
their ideas in writing, for in this way they convey their thoughts
more freely than they can usually do verbally.
Negative Tendencies to be Surmounted The twin
personalities of the Gemini have the disadvantage of confusing
people, and even Geminis themselves can be uncertain of how to
react to different situations. In general, they tend to oscillate
between their lower and higher selves, their emotional and spiritual
natures. Once they learn not to react, but to thoughtfully consider
first, they will not be so drawn to the emotional. Until then they will
find their power of concentration diminishing, with a corresponding
increase in uncertainty and nervousness. Rest and relaxation are
prime requisites in helping to keep their nerves under control. They
should become involved in the arts, singing or playing an
instrument, painting or pottery making, etc. This will provide
balance to their activities and an excellent balm for their nervous
systems. Health Aspects Usually the most noticeable features of
Gemini bodies are their strong shoulders, arms and hands. Their
major weakness lies in their respiratory passages, with congestion a
common problem. The most important of the twelve biochemic cell
salts for the Gemini is Kali Mur — potassium chloride. This is both an
essential blood nourisher and a vital nutrient for the proper
formation of fibrin, the elastic fibrous protein which controls the
formation of the skin and hair. A deficiency of potassium chloride
causes thickening of fibrin, menstrual irregularities, and/or
congestion when located in the respiratory passages. This might
manifest as pleurisy, catarrh, pneumonia, diphtheria or bronchitis. If
the congested fibrin is not thrown out of the bloodstream it can
create embolisms which might clog the auricles and ventricles of the
heart, ultimately resulting in its stoppage. The most satisfactory
manner by which to obtain adequate potassium chloride is through
126 the diet. Foods richest in natural potassium chloride are listed
below, according to concentration of this mineral:
kelp — powder and granules;
yeast — brewers and torula;
avocados;
coconut meat — fresh;
dried fruits;
most fresh vegetables, especially asparagus, cabbage,
carrot, celery, eggplant, kohlrabi, lettuce, parsnip and
tomato. Karmic Lesson All people born under the Air Signs are
motivated by a yearning for brotherhood, yet this is less obvious in
the expression of the Gemini than in the Libran or Aquarian. The
strong mentality of the Gemini, especially evident in their analytical
approach to life and to people, is inclined to make them appear more
egocentric than they are in reality. This is further aggravated by the
difficulty in verbal expression which is so often a part of the Gemini
nature. Deep within. Geminis know that they often misrepresent
themselves. Although this is not intentional, they do not know how
to correct it. They will gain release from this quandary when they
acknowledge the yearning in the depths of their souls for love,
companionship and understanding — in a word, brotherhood. As
Geminis mature, they become more aware of the finer feelings of
others, they relax more and allow the beauty of their higher selves
to have greater influence over them. Usually around the third Peak
of their Pyramids they become more aware of the importance of
compassion and their relationship with other people. CANCER – June 21 to July 21
Characteristic Expression The astrological term Cancer
derives from the Latin for crab and has no relationship to the
malignant disease. The disease was so-called because of its
tumorous
nature
and
unrestrained
reproductive
ability.
Symbolically, the crab tells us much about the motivation and
expression of people born under this sign. They are persistent,
cautious and prudent, with a deeply sensitive and tender nature.
Their perseverance is enforced by a cultivated hardness which is
their acquired protection for sensitive feelings. They are
homeloving, with a deep concern for their castle and for the
wellbeing of all within it. Their love for children is often satisfied by
producing large families, for which their robust reproductive organs
stand them in good stead. A further crab-like expression is the
127 fondness these people have of collecting things for which they have
no immediate use or prospect of use. Especially pronounced is the
protectiveness and tenacity of those born under the Sign of Cancer.
These traits underlie so much of their endeavour — physical,
emotional and mental. They possess naturally good memories and
strive to retain this important attribute (memory being tenacity of
thought). Cancerians are often drawn to health-related fields, for
they are natural healers with a deep concern for human welfare. Negative Tendencies to be Surmounted The acute
sensitivity of Cancerians must be recognised as vital to their spiritual
growth and to their loving solicitude for others. But unless they have
achieved a reasonable level of self-mastery, these people risk the
decline of their powers by becoming victims of their own emotions.
These are manifested by nervous outbursts and moodiness, creating
considerable drains on their energy reserves. Parents must be
especially careful to train their Cancerian children to gain confidence
in themselves and their feelings and not to react emotionally to
apparent thoughtlessness demonstrated by less sensitive people.
Unless they are carefully trained in self-discipline, these children
could become reclusive and very shy, especially if they have the
Arrow of Hypersensitivity (see page 78). In practice I have found
many people who believe they are suffering from hypoglycemia are,
in reality, suffering acute enervation induced by lack of control of
their extreme sensitivity and by worry. This applies particularly to
people born under the Sign of Cancer. They are inclined to worry
about things of a domestic nature, especially the home and the
welfare of their children when away from home. Fear of financial
insecurity is also a great source of worry for many Cancerians.
Unless these anxieties and torments are controlled, mental
unbalance could follow. Health Aspects The Sign of Cancer exerts its major influence
in the chest, spleen, solar plexus and stomach. People with this Sun
Sign must be very careful with their diet because they do not have
strong stomachs and easily succumb to gastric problems. When
associated with worry this gives a fine prescription for ulcers.
Simple, natural foods should comprise their basic diet because
Cancerians must assiduously avoid highly seasoned or highly
preserved foods, such as curries, peppers, pickles, strong cheeses,
heavily-spiced continental-type foods, etc. The most vital biochemic
cell salt for Cancerians is calcium fluoride, the cell salt which plays
an essential role in the development and maintenance of the brain
membranes, as well as the eyes, teeth, bones and internal cellular
structure of the skin. A deficiency of this mineral salt will result from
a diet lacking green vegetables, carrots, unsalted raw nuts or mild
cheeses (especially cottage). These foods are excellent sources of
128 natural calcium fluoride*. Such deficiencies can result in rough,
cracked skin (loss of cellular elasticity), especially between the toes
or fingers, around the anus or the mouth; early loss of memory
and/or the development of an anxiety complex; cataracts in the
eyes; for women, very painful periods and, ultimately, weakened
reproductive organs. Karmic Lesson By using the mind to attain emotional
control, and by conserving nervous energy, we achieve the most
precious of all possessions — inner peace. Such is the essential
lesson to be pursued by Cancerians. Self-control is not always easily
achieved, but then, neither is anything of lasting value attained
without effort. As soon as they learn to channel their sensitivities
into avenues of healing and human welfare, Cancerians will have
made significant progress in acquiring this harmonising peace. LEO - JULY 22 TO AUGUST 22
Characteristic Expression Leos are natural leaders and as
alert (sometimes as aggressive) as the lion by which they are
symbolised. They have considerable confidence in their own abilities
and are unhappy working under authority. They are affectionate and
possess enormous reserves of energy, which gives them exceptional
drive and intrepid expression. Leos can also be of two extremely
different natures — creative or destructive. By experience we find
that the majority of them are emotional, reactive, desire-motivated
people, with a reputation for instability and volatility. The more
enlightened Leos are as yet in the minority, although growing
awareness among new age people is swinging the pendulum. When
they discover the secrets of self-control, Leo people are able to
exercise their extremely powerful will for the common good and to
express themselves creatively as enlightened examples of divine
power in human action. They have a naturally deep sympathy for the
less fortunate or those in trouble — not unexpected from people
with such acute sensitivity.
Negative Tendencies to be Surmounted Care must
always be exercised in the handling of powerful sources of energy,
*lt is especially important to understand that calcium fluoride is not the fluoride
related to drinking water or tooth paste. That is sodium fluoride, a corrosive poison,
classified as toxic to the body if ingested or inhaled (refer to The Merck Index of 1977
and Hawley s Chemical Dictionary, also of 1977). Sodium fluoride is largely insoluble
and not found in man’s natural foods, but is obtained from bauxite and fertiliser
rock. Calcium fluoride is a soluble mineral salt present in small quantities in many
natural foods. 129 particularly fiery human energy. With their exceptional drive Leos
are inclined to overtax their heart and nerves unless they learn to
practice meditation or, at the least, to incorporate periods of
relaxation into their daily routines. They must expressly avoid
arguments and disruptive emotional involvements such as sordid
love affairs and any similar philandering for these will heavily tax
their emotions, considerably depleting nervous energy. While they
avidly enjoy emotional expression, Leo people must exercise
moderation to ensure they do not lose control of their feelings. They
are inclined to anger easily, but this will only further deplete their
nervous energy. Anger places enormous strain on the muscles of the
heart, far more than most people realise. Care must be taken that
their natural sympathy is not imposed upon by thoughtless people,
for if their sympathy is exploited it can cause such sensitive beings
to feel very let down, even bitter. Health Aspects The heart, motor nerves (which regulate
movement) and the blood are intimately related and are the most
vulnerable components of Leo bodies. Thus, they must ensure that
their diet is regulated to avoid too many acid-forming foods or
substances such as tea, coffee, excessive protein-rich foods,
chocolate, sweets, alcohol, white flour products, etc. In view of their
emotional tendencies which strain the nerves and the heart, it is not
surprising that Leos often suffer from a deficiency of the mineral cell
salt Mag Phos — magnesium phosphate. This is the important
nutrient involved in regulating nerve and muscle impulses,
especially those which govern the function of the heart. There is a
tendency for anyone suffering from an insufficiency of magnesium
phosphate to experience spells of crying, laughter, coughing,
sneezing, hiccoughs, cramps or to become quite reckless in manner.
These symptoms are highly enervating but will be greatly relieved by
the therapeutic application of a few grams of Mag Phos in a glass of
hot water. Many sufferers from angina pectoris and mild heart
spasms can overcome these acute discomforts by achieving better
emotional control and by the addition to their diet of foods known to
be natural sources of magnesium phosphate, particularly the
following, listed in order of richness:
wheatgerm and bran;
raw, unsalted nuts and seeds;
yeast, brewers and torula;
soya beans, soya milk and soya grits;
wholewheat and rye — as cereals or in wholegrain bread;
rolled oats;
millet and buckwheat;
brown lentils — especially nourishing when sprouted and
eaten raw;
blackstrap molasses. 130 Karmic Lesson Every person born under the Sign of Leo is
aware of his strong inner drive. Those who have not learned to
channel this tremendous energy are often impatient and difficult to
live with due to their frequent emotional eruptions. Life is the tamer
of the lion, taking the wild animal nature and gently transforming it
until it becomes a moderated, harnessed force, willing and able to
be directed by the supreme intelligence. Then will the lion allow
divine order to be established in all his affairs. Deep within, they are
warm and compassionate people, but many Leos are not ready to
exhibit this beautiful side of their nature until they reach the third
phase of life (fulfilment). Life will be much more rewarding for them
and for those with whom they associate when they learn to be more
compassionate in their earlier years. This is the Leo's major lesson in
life. VIRGO – AUGUST 23 TO
SEPTEMBER 22
Characteristic Expression The symbol of Virgo is the
virgin, meaning pure, perfect and impeccable. This accurately
relates to both the nature and the body of those whose Sun Sign is
Virgo. They are perfectionists, with an all-consuming concern in
matters of health, yet with bodies which often experience
elimination problems. In their search for perfection, Virgo people are
discriminatory and analytical, demanding accuracy and detail. They
never cease striving for these qualities. Virgos make firm friends,
often seeking to help others improve their own lives. At times this
makes them appear critical, but rarely is there anything of a
condemnatory nature in their criticisms. As a rule they are more
critical of themselves than of others, for they recognise that
perfection must develop from within. Virgos have a natural ability
for healing, but must guard against becoming overanxious about
their own health. Such anxiety can give rise to an hypochondriacal
tendency, with its resultant morbidity and mild depression. This
negates the natural healing ability of their bodies, defeating their
aim of improving the quality of life for all.
Negative Tendencies to be Surmounted The tendency towards overanxiety is very prevalent with Virgo people, yet
they rarely have any real cause for worry. A similar response is also
found in their work lives where, if compelled to accept considerable
responsibility, they become apprehensive of their ability. This has
the effect of undermining their self-confidence. Virgos work best
under encouraging, appreciative direction — and they actively seek
to become involved in work. But their straining after perfection can
131 become quite obsessive, that is until they sensibly relate it to
practicalities. Virgos must guard against becoming emotional as a
result of frustrations, for indeed they will experience many
frustrations until the essence of matter of fact moderation is
learned. Some younger souls will be tempted to seek gratification
through the sexual organs, excusing this desire for sensation as
their right to love. Such justifications might temporarily satisfy their
ego, but their real motives never escape the Akashic Records, that
total karmic history of experiences transmitted through the higher
self. Health Aspects Some schools of astrology relate the
procreative organs to Virgo but this can be misleading. Such a
relationship only exists when Virgos live negatively and seek escape
from frustrations arising from experiences intended to be their
lessons. When living positively Virgos actually place less emphasis
on the sexual side of life than do many other people. The organs of
the body most influenced by this sign are the solar plexus nerve
region and the organs of elimination (bowels, pores and nasal
passages). The bowels and skin play a vital role in the health of
every person but they are especially important for the Virgo. There is
a tendency for them to suffer from clogged pores, creating a dry skin
and impeding the elimination of toxic matter through perspiration.
The skin’s seven million pores also regulate the body's temperature.
This function, too, will be inhibited when the pores are clogged by a
thickening of the skin's tissue oil. This obstruction is caused by a
deficiency in the mineral cell salt Kali Sulph — potassium sulphate.
Those toxic wastes which the body cannot adequately eliminate by
perspiring are turned back within and must then be processed by the
respiratory tract or the bowels. The blocking of the pores also tends
to raise the body’s temperature, forcing the body to work harder to
reprocess the waste matter. This double action further increases the
body's temperature, producing what we call colds, accompanied by
sluggish bowels. Sometimes this creates the feeling of suffocation,
with hot flushes and a craving for cold air. Other symptoms of
impaired elimination are catarrhal and asthmatic congestion, severe
nerve pains in the region of the solar plexus (particularly painful to
Virgo women during their menopause), dandruff, baldness, skin
eruptions and conjunctivitis. Foods in which potassium sulphate
occurs naturally will greatly assist the body's heroic cleansing
efforts. Those richest in the cell salt are:
green vegetables — especially brussels sprouts and
watercress;
deep sea kelp — powder and granules;
raw hazelnuts, brazil nuts and chestnuts;
dried figs and raisins;
avocado, carrots, corn and eggplant. 132 Karmic Lesson Being an Earth Sign, Virgo implies the need
for useful service to mankind, necessary for those born under its
influence to acquire critical karmic lessons. Suitably achieved
through the practice of healing or through the arts, it must always
be selfless service. As a Middle Sign, Virgo implies the need for
emotional control. They must learn that awareness cannot be
achieved when undue emphasis is directed towards the physical
body or its lusting for sensational involvements. Freedom, we must
remember, is only achieved to the extent that the mind is freed from
ignorance and the emotions do not cloud sensitivities. LIBRA – SEPTEMBER 23 TO
OCTOBER 22
Characteristic Expression
Balance
is
the
most
noteworthy endowment of people born under this sign, which is
symbolised by the scales. The natural inclination of Librans is
gentleness, for they are very affectionate individuals with an intense
desire to live in peace and harmony and to create such an
atmosphere wherever they go. They become utterly disenchanted,
above all with dishonest people in public office, finding it impossible
to excuse any form of hypocrisy, meanness or shallowness. Librans
see marvellous perfection in nature — not the perfection of
mathematical symmetry, but the beautiful symphony of the great
struggle between the material universe and its elements working
inexorably toward order. They especially abhor bloodshed and
violence of any type, for such transgression threatens balance and
offends beauty. Librans are blessed with a highly perceptive insight
and a keen sense of justice, a combination which predisposes them
to expressions of frankness often more forthright than flattering. It
must be realised that they intend no personal malice by their
directness but, rather, seek to correct anything they consider
undesirable or outside the appropriate order of things.
Negative Tendencies to be Surmounted It will be
surprising for many people who know Librans to learn that they are
naturally peaceful, gentle and affectionate beings. Often negative
Librans express themselves in emotional tempestuousness,
recklessness and sometimes downright aggressiveness. They also
succumb to sexual excesses when their health is unsettled. But it
must be emphasised that this is not the natural portrait of a Libran,
nor of any well-balanced person. Natural expressive balance is
precariously dependent upon the body’s chemical balance and when
this becomes upset by acidic irritations the brain, nerves and
muscles are directly affected. Such internal disharmonies induce
133 actions which are actually in conflict with the individual’s real
nature. They may become tense, excitable, aggressive or even
suicidal in their confusion. Rarely are they aware that internal
disharmony is a frequent cause of such unnatural attitudes.
Therefore they are not easily convinced that their diet has more
influence over their emotions than the environmental factors they
prefer to blame, such as the weather, the politicians, the spouse,
etc. Health Aspects
Hyperacidity, in these days of highly
processed, non-nutritive foods, is far from uncommon. Most people
live with it, believing it to be their natural condition. Consequently,
most people tend to be emotionally unstable, easily irritated, readily
aggressive. But when this condition prevails for Librans, the
departure from their normal and natural mode of expression
becomes extreme and critically interferes with their basic purpose in
life. One of the most alkalising of the mineral cell salts required by
the body is Nat Phos — sodium phosphate. A vital role of this
nutrient is to restore the body's chemical balance with its strong
alkalinity. Not only must Librans ensure that their diet includes
foods rich in this mineral salt, but also they should minimise
(preferably avoid) highly processed, acid-forming constituents of the
modern diet such as white flour and white sugar products, canned
foods, carbonated beverages, tea and coffee, etc. Foods rich in
natural sodium phosphate are, in order of concentration.egg yolks;
raw salad vegetables — especially celery, beetroot and
carrots;
brewers yeast;
dried fruits — especially figs, raisins and sultanas;
sunflower seed kernels — raw.
Fresh fruit is also an excellent alkalising food and a natural
source of high energy fruit sugar (fructose). Each day would be a
brighter one if it began with a fresh fruit salad. A daily vegetable
salad is also indispensable to Librans to maintain a proper chemical
balance. Without such a diet the body will manifest many of the
following uncomfortable symptoms of hyperacidity: foul breath,
pimples, skin irritations, frontal headaches (often with a feeling of
intense cranial pressure), scabby ears which might emit a creamy
discharge and feel constantly hot, ulcers, canker sores, rheumatism,
diarrhoea and occasional convulsions (especially in children).
Parents will also notice that children grind their teeth in sleep if their
upper gastrointestinal tract is too acidic. This is often an indication
of insufficient fresh fruit and vegetables in the diet. Bodily organs
which are especially sensitive for Librans are the kidneys, bladder 134 and adrenal glands — in fact, the entire pelvic region must be
carefully looked after to avoid prolapsed organs. Keep the
abdominal muscles in good tone by exercise. The lumbar region of
the spine is also highly sensitive — lumbago and rheumatism are not
uncommon for Librans. Karmic Lesson People born under the Sign of Libra are rarely
content to pass through life without a marriage partner. For them
the pairing of male with female is natural to personal balance and
wholeness, as the marital partner serves to supply a counterbalance
for the other's limitations. It is through such companionship, as well
as through comradeship with others met as they travel through life,
that Librans discover the meaning of brotherhood, of sharing and of
expanding their awareness of life's purpose for themselves and for
all mankind. Brotherhood also teaches emotional control to those
Librans who are motivated by the negative tendencies of jealousy,
resentment and similarly unbalanced attitudes. SCORPIO – OCTOBER 23 TO
NOVEMBER 22
Characteristic Expression As the last sign of the
emotional, or feeling plane, Scorpio relates to the most feeling, most
sensitive parts of the body, viz. the reproductive organs. Hence, so
much of the expression of those born under this Sun Sign has its
motivation related to sex and to secrecy. The men are more sexually
oriented than the women of Scorpio, and therefore are much more
emotional; the women are more able to contain their emotions and
to direct their energies into paths of healing and creativity. Both
men and women have powerful determination and the ability to hide
turbulent emotions beneath a facade of apparent calmness. Both are
skilful with their hands, a special quality which, when related to
their natural healing ability, explains why many are found in the field
of health. Both the men and the women make excellent magnetic
healers, chiropractors and osteopaths — those who prefer the more
conventional aspects of the healing arts gravitate towards surgery
and medicine. Their natural sensitivity gives these people reliable
intuitive guidance when they are in command of their emotions.
Their love of secrecy translates this power into successful
professional conduct. Negative Tendencies to be Surmounted Being so
impressionable and sensitive, Scorpios must guard against losing
command of their feelings and becoming negatively emotional.
Scorpio women are far more capable of controlling their emotions 135 than are the men of this sign in early life. Both can, however, achieve
successful self-mastery during their years of maturity, although this
often has to be forced upon them by necessary emotional lessons
involving the heart. These demanding trials are required for the sole
purpose of directing their steps further along the Path (towards
perfection). During their period of emotional adolescence some
Scorpios can become so disturbed that for a time they appear quite
bitter and cruel, unreliable and erratic. This is not their true nature,
as is evident when personal maturity evolves from self-discipline.
Men take longer to achieve this maturity than do women under the
Scorpio influence, for which reason marriage between two Scorpios
is rarely successful. A note of warning must be given here for
Scorpio men: if too much emphasis is directed towards the careless
abuse of sex, nervous energy can become seriously depleted. This
will be particularly noticeable in the lower limbs, for the sciatic
nerves are the most vulnerable. Resulting enervation can predispose
towards painful physical constrictions, such as stiffness of the legs
and thighs, curvature of the spine, paralysis, premature old age and
senility. Health Aspects
We have already considered some
pathological problems affecting Scorpio people as a consequence of
their negative living. These are mostly related to the reproductive
organs because they are the most sensitive organs in the Scorpio
anatomy. Scorpio people have to learn that this region of the body is
intended primarily for the begetting of children and for the
spontaneous physical expression of overwhelming love between a
man and woman. It should not be regarded as a regular playground
for over-stimulated desires. The Kundalini, or divine creative force
within man, cannot be expressed creatively (upward) and
procreatively (downward, or sexually) at the same time. When too
frequently involved in procreative expression the Kundalini draws
heavily upon the blood's vitality, resulting in a deficiency of the
mineral biochemic salt important to Scoprios, Cal Sulph — calcium
sulphate. Even if sexual expression is not actually practiced, but is
suppressed, almost as much bodily depletion will result. The natural
alternative is creative expression, the elevation of the Kundalini into
practical service for the betterment of life. So absorbed are the
enlightened Scorpios in their creativity that they must take care not
to overdo their enthusiasm and drain their nervous energy in this
direction by long hours of work with inadequate periods for
relaxation. Symptoms of depleted calcium sulphate can be
recognised in the body as burning sensations in the feet, anus,
stomach, throat, or mouth; sometimes as stomach ulcers, slowhealing wounds, skin ailments and pimples. Loose bowels, not
necessarily diarrhoea, can also be the result of insufficient dietary
136 Cal Sulph. Further evidence of deficiency can be recognised in
outward emotional agitation, even before it becomes a source of
discomfort within the body. Foods offering important sources of
natural calcium sulphate and which should be included in the regular
diet of Scorpios are:
natural cheeses — especially Swiss and Cheddar;
all green vegetables — especially watercress and parsley;
molasses — but only for people who do not eat sufficient
salads;
raw, unsalted nuts — especially Brazil nuts;
dried figs;
raw, fresh egg yolks;
sunflower seed kernels — raw. Karmic Lesson It might seem incongruous that the Sign of
Scorpio is on the Emotional Plane yet is one of the Water Triplicity,
which implies the general lesson of peace. This indicates that of all
the signs, Scorpio implies the most difficult lesson for those born
under its influence. This is the lesson of attaining peace by the
mastery of the passions and the positive direction of kundalinic
energy. Man is not only born under this sign when such a need has
been karmically established, but also when his latent ability for
healing has to be developed as a positive force in bringing bodily
harmony to mankind. SAGITTARIUS – NOVEMBER 23
TO DECEMBER 22
Characteristic Expression Particularly characteristic of all
healthy Sagittarians is their cheerful, gregarious manner. They are
exceptionally goodnatured people who are always fond of company
and of involvement in physical activity. Yet they rarely allow people
to get too close to them, preferring to maintain a safe distance to
ensure their personal freedom. This independence is vital to them, in
return they respect its need in other people's lives. Their delight in
physical activity extends to many different sports but especially
those involving marked athletic ability. Sagittarians invariably
possess very strong thighs and can usually move fast on their feet.
This, coupled with their gregariousness, indicates why they are
more interested in travel and constant movement than they are in
static security or deep mental contemplation. When young they
tend to shy away from too much responsibility but are prepared to
accept their share as they mature. Sagittarians have a deep 137 compassion for all living creatures. They also have a deep natural
love of philosophy which they should develop to better understand
the purpose of life. Their responsiveness to laws, both those of man
and of spirit, invariably results in their accepting both without
question or objection. A noteworthy metaphysical quality possessed
by most Sagittarians is their prophetic ability to foresee certain
events. These sometimes manifest in dreams, but do not always
involve them personally. However, disbelief and discouragement
when they are young invariably cause them to disregard this faculty.
If nurtured this ability could develop into a very powerful
endowment, thereby providing considerable benefit to many. Negative Tendencies to be Surmounted The desire
for constant change can certainly lead into many and varied avenues
of learning; but if allowed to persist unchecked it produces a
squandering of mental faculties. Concentration and patience will be
weakened unless self-control is adequately exercised. One of the
most successful methods of achieving this is by emphasising
accuracy in every action. Accuracy is an excellent exercise in care,
control and close mental application. Without the acknowledgement
and practice of this, the Sagittarian can easily become motivated by
idle desire and whim, experiencing many frustrations and, ultimately,
loneliness. Symptoms of deterioration will often appear as attitudes
sharply alternating between faith and doubt, exhilaration and
despondency. Eventually nervous instability will become so intense
as to create a highly neurotic person, unless they respond to selfdiscipline based on those ten valuable exercises in selfenlightenment
which
Pythagoras
called
the
Mathematical
Disciplines*.
Health Aspects The human body comprises virtually every
known element and it has combined them into a countless number
of chemical compounds. The chemicals which make up a building,
the soil and the ocean are all similar to those within the body of man,
although in different proportions. Even the basic material of glass —
sand — is not excluded for it is this mineral, silicon oxide, which is
one of the indispensable biochemic cell salts in the body. In fact,
silicon oxide is the cell salt which is most important to Sagittarians.
Silica, as it is commonly known, is also quartz and is composed of
extremely sharp crystals. In this regard, it symbolises the
Sagittarian, the archer, with the sharp arrow which pierces its
target. When silica is tempered to a high enough point for fusion it
becomes crystal clear, as do the thoughts of the Sagittarian when •See the author's comprehensive health book From Soil to Psyche pp 64-82. 138 his self-command and awareness have been tempered by the fusion
of self-control with adequate experience. Silica is found in the skin
and nails of the human body — it gives that natural glossy look to
the hair. It is also present in the membrane covering which protects
the bones and nerves. In general, this mineral is one of the
important strengtheners within the body. An insufficient supply is
indicated by difficulty in thinking clearly, by despondency, red
eyelids, red nostrils with sore tips, acne and pimples on the face,
failing hair, boils, muffled hearing and catarrhal conditions of the
upper respiratory tract. Natural foods found to be rich in silica are, in
order of available quantity:
all green vegetables — especially lettuce, parsley, asparagus
and cucumber;
fresh strawberries;
sunflower seed kernels — raw;
raw pumpkin seed kernels (pepitas);
dried figs and sun-dried apricots. Karmic Lesson With their natural love of philosophy and
their deep compassion for life, Sagittarians are well equipped to
develop an excellent level of emotional control and mental stability.
This will stand them in good stead for a highly successful life in
terms of their relationship with other people. Their natural desire to
understand the meaning of things enables them to finely attune to
human nature and to provide valuable help to those in need. This is
the earthly expression of divine love and the fulfilling of a karmic
need common to all Sagittarians. CAPRICORN – DECEMBER 23 TO
JANUARY 21
Characteristic Expression Caution is the keynote of
Capricornian expression. People born under this sign are generally
intensely practical — too practical to take risks, or attempt anything
about which they have any reservation. Although they have the
reputation for being determined, Capricorn people could not be truly
regarded as having a strong general determination but rather as
being deliberate in doing those things which fall within the ambit of
the conventionally acceptable. Being exceptionally law-abiding
citizens, they will not go beyond the commonly accepted limitations
of conventional society. Consistent with their orthodox attitude to
society, these people place great emphasis upon material security,
talent and position. Many Capricornians are found at the head of
large, established corporations, trusts and syndicates, where they
139 serve very capably and faithfully. Children born when the sun is in
Capricorn have very retentive memories but unless they take steps
to develop and train their memory, this valuable natural asset will
dissipate soon after their academic studies have concluded. Another
special aspect of these children is their need for peace — they have a
deep inner urge for periods of solitude, without which they could
become inexplicably melancholy. In fact, it is quite possible that
some of the much-publicised cot deaths are caused by undue noise
shattering the delicate emotional balance of infants born under the
Sign of Capricorn, especially if they also possess the Arrow of
Activity on their Birthcharts (see page 88). Negative Tendencies to be Surmounted With the
approach of the Aquarian age comes a changing pattern of values in
society. The orthodox is being questioned, the conventional is being
modified, everything is being investigated as to its suitability for the
new age society. This is typically Aquarian, but very unCapricornian. Consequently, many people born under the Sign of
Capricorn are currently feeling insecure because their deep faith in
materialism is being shaken. This produces an uneasiness which
worries them. Out of this confusion will come a necessary
reawakening, a reassessment of their values. They will recognise the
important differences between the man made and the natural values
in life, between the artificial and the real, the transient and the
eternal. Until this realisation brings about the establishment of a
new set of values life will seem empty and they will experience much
indefinable sadness. They can be easily helped when these causes
are recognised for then they will become aware of the need to adjust
their outlook and to plan for the future, rather than live in the past.
Health Aspects Relating Capricorn to the anatomy of man,
we find that Its emphasis is directed towards the knees and legs. It
is, therefore, in this region that special care must be exercised.
Caution must be intensified if two or more 4s appear on the
Birthchart (see pages 53 and 54). The most abundant mineral salt in
the human body is the most critical to the health of Capricornians.
Cal Phos — calcium phosphate — is the bone-building material
which is important to the health of everyone, but especially to those
born under this sign. Most Capricornians are susceptible to
weakened bones, to bone and tooth decay (caries) and to excessive
albumin in their urine. This free albumin is unable to find sufficient
calcium phosphate with which to combine; it consequently
overflows into the urine for elimination. The chronic calcium
phosphate deficiency symptom of thyroid enlargement which
causes the condition known as goitre is not due to lack of iodine but
to excessive free albumin. Other calcium phosphate deficiency
symptoms which might become evident from time to time are colds
140 and tonsilitis, difficulty in swallowing, periods of hoarseness,
irritations in the head and on the face, nervous panic and incapacity
for concentrated thought. The orthodox outlook of Capricornians is
nowhere more characteristically expressed than in their dietary
habits. They follow unquestioningly the modern diet of refined and
processed foods, abundant meat and white bread, tea and coffee
drinking, snacking on sweets and chocolates, etc. In short, theirs is a
diet of limited nutritional value, imposing upon their bodies
undesirable acid residues, particularly uric and oxalic acids*. Both
these acids leach from the body vital stores of calcium phosphate,
creating an inherent problem for people born to follow such habits.
Foods affording valuable supplies of natural calcium phosphate are,
in descending order of concentration:
brewers and torula yeast;
Swiss and Cheddar cheeses;
all raw, unsalted nuts and seeds;
soya beans, soya grits and soya milk;
fresh, unprocessed wheatgerm;
whey powder;
fresh, raw egg yolks:
parsley, broccoli, and most other green vegetables. Karmic Lesson As an Earth Sign, Capricorn implies involvement in service to mankind. But first must be attained spiritual
understanding to expand the Capricornian outlook. Some find this
through their church, some through service clubs, others through
charitable work. It is a difficult challenge for Capricornians to
recognise the limitations of a material frame of mind. But this they
must do if they are to triumph over their dogmatism. In addition they
must learn to develop a sensitivity and respect for other people’s
feelings, at least to the extent that they seek for themselves. AQUARIUS – JANUARY 22 TO
FEBRUARY 20
Characteristic Expression As harbingers of the new age,
Aquarians, not surprisingly, focus on the quality of life and work for
the betterment of all living creatures — humanity in particular. It is
imperative to the Aquarian that he be allowed to study life in all its
grandeur. Such a preoccupation embraces an extremely broad scope *For detailed information on the effects of these acids within the body, refer to the
author's book From Soil to Psyche. 141 — science, philosophy, religion (comparative, rather than
orthodox), mathematics (applied, rather than theoretical) and
anything related to veneration for life. This is typically new age.
Fundamental to everything Aquarian is his need to be trusted, his
need for truth and his abhorrence of hypocrisy. Every Aquarian has
an interest in metaphysical concepts which is only now being given
full scope in face of mankind’s increasingly widened horizons of
understanding. As a result the role of the Aquarian is gaining greater
importance in society. Blessed with a good memory and a naturally
strong fortitude, Aquarians have always been the seekers of esoteric
knowledge; but now they are coming into their own powerful era
when such knowledge is not only accepted, but actually sought
after. Negative Tendencies to be Surmounted Arising from
their intense dislike of deception and hypocrisy, Aquarians are apt
to over-react against those whom they regard as guilty of such
conduct. It is then that they must remind themselves that life is full
of lessons and that the hypocrite, by perpetrating such a sin, has
initiated his own karmic retribution which will manifest as his
appropriate lesson at precisely the right time. However, the
Aquarian should be ever ready to offer him compassionate guidance
and brotherly love. An emotional reaction on the part of the
Aquarian would commit errors for which he would have to pay a
karmic debt. The Aquarian suffers acutely from tensions, due to his
highly sensitive nervous system and delicate digestive system.
Frequent headaches are the usual consequence. Other symptoms of
emotional tension include impaired blood circulation, depression
and constant tiredness — all the result of enervation. Aquarians
must recognise that their acute sensitivities are intended to facilitate
the understanding of life (both physically and metaphysically).
Along with this they must learn to protect themselves from those
who would impose on them and waste their vital energy, or attempt
to regulate and exploit their powers. Such understanding demands
careful training in the Mathematical Disciplines of Pythagoras —
those exercises in enlightenment which equip man for his greatest
achievement, empire over the self, as Pythagoras described it. Health Aspects The expression of the Aquarian reveals itself
more in mental and spiritual than physical realms. They should,
therefore, not try to emulate feats of physical prowess performed by
others, but be content with their own special powers. Aquarians
have certain vulnerable parts of their bodies which require special
care. These are the ankles, calves and neck. It follows that they
should avoid skiing, football and other sports or activities in which
these parts of the body are placed in jeopardy. Aquarians generally
have slender necks and will often register tension in this region,
142 causing headaches or backpains requiring chiropractic care. The
biochemic cell salt most needed by Aquarians is Nat Mur — sodium
chloride. This is usually referred to as common salt and is the second
most plentiful salt in the body. But the sodium chloride demanded
by the body as a component of cellular nutrition is certainly not the
common salt originating in seawater. Sea salt and table salt are far
too coarse for the body's use because they irritate the highly
sensitive linings of the gastrointestinal tract. Its addition to food will
often lead to hypertension, swollen joints and other problems
involving the blood and the joints. Man must obtain his basic
nutrients from the soil of which his body originally derived, as the
Bible tells us and science confirms. Natural foods rich in sodium
chloride are headed by green vegetables, especially celery, beetroot
and carrots. Also included in the list are dried figs, raisins and
sultanas; for those who seek additional sources, egg yolk, brewers
yeast and molasses can be taken. Deficiency in natural sodium
chloride can cause impaired digestion due to lack of mucus, dry
mouth and throat, irritation of the eyes and skin, chilblains and
reduced vitality. Contrary to popular belief cramps do not arise from
inadequate sodium chloride but rather from inadequate circulation
and or excessive cellular toxicity. Ingesting salt tablets after
excessive perspiration defeats the body’s efforts to rid itself of this
unwanted saline toxicity through its pores. Karmic Lesson The role of the Aquarian as preparer for the
new age is already well known. This is achieved through the building
of a strong bond of kinship uniting all mankind in tolerant respect for
the individual; for human society is a huge conglomeration of people
of vastly differing spiritual ages, karmic histories, geographical
limitations, ethnic origins and religious conditionings. Total
guidance can, therefore, never be achieved by a rigid, dogmatic
plan. Human betterment will result only from individualised understanding which, in turn, permits the best development of the
individual. But the essential ingredient to all this is brotherhood:
the recognition that the ideal fraternity of the new age is based on
the harmonising of individual personalities for the uplifting of all. PISCES – FEBRUARY 21 TO
MARCH 20
Characteristic Expression Some of the sweetest, kindest
people put on earth are born under the sign of Pisces. These people
seem to possess a special talent for helping those in need,
considerably assisted by their hypersensitive nature. They are very 143 responsive to environmental influences and, therefore, should not
knowingly expose themselves to hostile conditions. The loyalty,
trustworthiness and generosity of a well-adjusted Piscean are
obvious to all who know them. It is because they are so willing that
they are easily imposed upon and should learn to guard against
this. Pisceans should not assume that everyone is as trustworthy as
they are. The natural loving sympathy of people born under the sign
of Pisces makes them ideal healers. Whether the demand be of a
physical, emotional or psychic nature, they will understand and
provide the help where it is most needed. Again, they do not regard
this quality as anything special, believing everyone to be so
endowed. This illustrates the beautiful, natural modesty of the
Piscean — an unusual quality in these years of acute ambitiousness.
Dedicated to helping mankind, the efficient and industrious Pisceans
tend to overlook the less worthy motives of many with fewer
scruples. They must learn to sharpen their powers of assessment
and to discriminate between those souls who really need their help
and those who merely want it because it is easier than helping
themselves. Negative Tendencies to be Surmounted The lack of
sound judgement which characterises younger Pisceans must often
be remedied by hurtful experiences. It seems unfortunate that their
acute sensitivity has to be so harshly treated, but so essential are
life's lessons that no other method will suffice. As they develop a
little more confidence, Pisceans become prone to overanxiety about
those in need. No matter how much they do to help, they are
invariably troubled by the thought that they are not doing enough.
This anxiety can become a real problem to them unless they adopt a
more philosophic understanding, supported by adequate training in
as many of the natural therapies as they can assimilate. Unless they
secure a sound training, in their enthusiasm to heal Pisceans could
unwittingly dissipate their energies and become despondent. This
could lead them away from harsh reality to seek solace in drugs,
alcohol or crime. Some suffer from long-term mental derangement
as a result of many and repeated frustrations.
Health Aspects The bodily extremities of the Piscean are of
pronounced importance — they have strong healing hands, but weak
feet. There is a powerful magnetic healing force natural to Pisceans
which is capably transmitted through their hands. Their feet often
cause them anguish from strains, sprains, fallen arches and the like,
indicating they must take special care of these vital appendages. The
biochemic cell salt indispensable to the health of Pisceans is Ferrum
Phos — ferric (iron) phosphate. As iron attracts oxygen, this vital
mineral salt revitalises the body by energising the blood.
Simultaneously it carries essential oxygen around the body for use
144 in its every function. If insufficient oxygen is available in the blood
the body attempts to distribute the ration as best it can. To do this
the blood motion (pressure) is increased. This creates higher-thannormal internal heat, often high enough to be called fever. Rather
than treat this fever with suppressant drugs, the content of ferric
phosphate should be increased by ensuring that the diet comprises
foods rich in this nutrient. If the correction is not undertaken the
more chronic problem of anemia can result. Further symptoms of
deficiency in ferric phosphate include depression, bleeding,
inflammatory pains and congestion. This is such a vital salt that its
deficiency affects the functioning of every part of the body. A wide
choice of natural foods rich in ferric phosphate, listed in order of
concentration, are:
brewers and torula yeasts;
pepitas (Mexican pumpkin seed kernels), sunflower seed
kernels;
soya beans, soya grits and soya milk;
wheatgerm and bran;
fresh, raw nuts — especially almonds, pistachios and pine
nut kernels;
egg yolk — fresh, preferably raw;
sprouted seeds, pulses and grains. Karmic Lesson This sign is the one which offers most peace.
Yet we are passing through what has been universally regarded as
the Piscean age without appearing to have achieved much peace in
the world. Other quite tremendous factors, based on human craving
for power and fame, seemed to intercede, placing greater demand
upon the forthcoming Aquarian age to improve the quality of life on
earth. Pisceans are destined to play a unique role in this endeavour
for they are eminently qualified to teach the world peace through
understanding and trust. By the same token they are intended to
bring peace to those sick people whose illnesses have hindered their
eternal search for the Inner Self. 145 A QUICK-REFERENCE CHART ARIES large head
and brain mentally active,
courageous,
volatile impatient,
critical,
hot tempered potassium
phosphate
KH2PO4 hyper-acidity TAURUS strong neck,
powerful voice,
large ears strong, active,
very stable,
reliable gluttonous,
obstinate,
overindulgent sodium
sulphate
Na2SO4 water retention,
selfless
liver upsets,
service,
toxicity
control of desires GEMINI strong hands,
arms and
shoulders fast thinking,
highly sensitive,
dual natured very reactive,
nervous,
insecure potassium
chloride
KCl respiration,
congestion,
menstrual
problems brotherhood CANCER weak stomach
and chest,
healing hands persistent,
prudent,
homeloving moody,
shy, fearful calcium
fluoride
CaF2 crocked skia,
tooth decoy,
gastritis inner peace
through selfcontrol LEO nervousness,
alertness affectionate,
energetic,
self-motivated hot tempered,
reckless,
sexual magnesium
phosphate
MgHPO4 weak heart,
nerve spasms,
cramps spirituality
of love VIRGO sluggish
bowels,
dry skin seek perfection, hypercritical,
potassium
reliable,
overanxious,
sulphate
generous
hyperchondriacal
K2SO4 colds, fevers,
constipation,
skin ailments service through
healing LIBRA gentleness,
tender abdomen balanced,
just,
frank reckless,
aggressive,
tense sodium
phosphate
Na2HPO4 hyperacidity,
ulcers,
rheumatism brotherhood
through sharing
marriage reproductive
organs,
skilful hands determined,
secretive,
composed sexual,
agitated,
erratic calcium
sulphate
CaSO4 skin ailments,
Hood toxicity,
ulcers creative
selfcontrol cheerful,
independent,
compassionate unstable,
frustrated,
lonely silicon
oxide
SiO2 skin eruptions,
brittle nails,
scalp disorders understanding
and helping
the needy SCORPIO SAGITTARIUS strong thighs,
fast movement CAPRICORN weak knees
and legs AQUARIUS weak ankles
and neck PISCES healing hands,
weak feet 146 orthodox,
determined,
practical calcium
materialistic,
insecure, fearful, phosphate
dogmatic
CaHPO4 trusting, honest, hypersensitive,
truth seekers,
reactive,
forbearing
nervous
loyal,
generous,
sympathetic frustrated,
anxious,
despondent headaches, emotional
control,
selfless love weak bones
spiritual
and teeth,
understanding
excess albumin through service sodium
chloride
NaCl tiredness,
indigestion,
headaches awareness
through
brotherhood iron
phosphate
FePO4 hypertension,
inflammations,
fevers peace through
understanding
and trust STAGE 12
The Power of Names One of the most sacred sounds to people's ears is their name.
Doubtless you have noticed that, no matter how noisy the
surroundings, when someone calls your name your attention is
instantly diverted to them.
Our names have become a very important sound to us, whether
it be our given names, our pet names, our nick-names, or whatever
appellations we prefer to use. Actually, our names must be regarded
as an adopted part of our personality and expression. A name is
important because its vibrations become fused with our own. The
term vibration implies not only the audible wave frequencies but,
even more broadly, the symbolic vibrations of the name as indicated
by its numerological pattern. These vibrations exert an influence on
our very personality and individuality, as schematically indicated by
the chart on page 5.
Many people overlook the influence exerted by their name on
the overall expression of their personality, but let us not dismiss this
subject too hastily. Names are not given to us by chance or by
accident. They attach themselves to us according to our need,
although we are rarely aware of this. Parents will choose a name for
their child guided by some preference. What created that
preference? Nothing occurs by chance — there is always a reason,
whether we are aware of it or not. Likewise, there is always a reason
for those who change their name — often a far deeper reason than
initially suspected. Numerologically, we can reveal that reason and,
in so doing, we discover a deeper side to our personality.
Reasons for selecting names can occupy an entire book of
fascinating reading. But we are more immediately in need of
understanding the influence of our name as it now relates to our
individuality. This will throw further light upon the discovery of the
Inner Self.
The force exerted by names on the moulding of personalities will
primarily depend upon the strength of the name and its relationship
to the Ruling Number of the people. If they have a less-thanpowerful birthdate the influence of their name will be far greater
147 than if the reverse applied. This is particularly exemplified in the life
of the sixteenth president of the United States of America, Abraham
Lincoln. His birthdate (February 12, 1809) was not powerful, but his
name gave the strength he needed to overcome personality
weaknesses and achieve a lasting place in history. By contrast, a
powerful birthdate, such as December 27, 1935, and the name John
will find very little influence exercised upon personality by the name.
Analysis will support this contention.
Irrespective of age, all people respond to some degree to the
vibrations of their names. This response is greatest during the
impressionable years of infancy and adolescence. Indeed, it can be
of great help to children if parents are numerologically guided in
their selection of the children’s names. Names which are chosen for
balanced power can be far more beneficial to the children than
names with conflicting vibrations. Personalities will be more
balanced if name and birthdate harmonise.
To assess the power of a name we must start by obtaining its
numerological values. This is achieved by translating the letters of
the name to their equivalent numbers, using the following table:
1 2 3 Júpiter 5 6 7 8 Mercúrio A B C D E F G H I
J K L M N O Plutão Sol R
S T U V W X Áries Z There is no immediate need to memorise this table, for the numerical
equivalent of each letter will become readily recognised with
practice. As A is the first letter of the alphabet, it is equivalent to the
first number of the numerical scale, the number 1. Each successive
letter after A relates to the equivalent number following 1. Thus, B is
equivalent to 2, C to 3, D to Júpiter and so on to the last letter of the
alphabet.
At this point many people ask: "But how does this system relate
to another language?" Experience proves that relationships do exist
between the alphabetical and numerical systems of every culture.
However, first let us become totally familiar with this method in our
native language. Then, if we have the time and patience, we can
expand our knowledge to a numerological understanding of another
language.
When analysing names we are concerned only with the used
names. It is of little more than academic interest to analyse a given
name or a family name if it is not used by the person. Even if a name
is changed by contraction, for professional or any other reasons, our
interest lies in analysing whatever name is used in daily life. For
148 instance, Allen might prefer to be called Al, William might prefer Bill,
Samuel might prefer Mark (as in Samuel Clemens' case) or Sam.
In other instances people have been known to dislike their first
name, preferring to be known by their middle name. Others might
dislike both their first and middle names, preferring to be known
only by the initials of both. This is popular in southern U.S.A. where,
for instance, a person called Jacob Benjamin might wish to be known
simply as J.B. — we would then analyse JB as his first name.
The analysis of rejected names will often throw an interesting
light on the personalities by indicating the reason for the change.
There might also be environmental reasons associating that name
with other persons, places or social attitudes which they dislike.
These, also, can often be numerologically explained. It is always
illuminating to compare the reason given by people for the change
with that revealed by numerological analysis.
Whatever the reason given by those persons, it is clear that the
name they use is the one we must analyse, for used names are living
names and only living names have vibrational influence on the Inner
Self.
Practice will reveal that a different degree of emphasis will exist
between persons’ used first name and their family name (surname).
As a rule, the first name is used more in personal affairs, so it has
greater impact on the personality. Family names are used more
frequently in business or professional circles, hence their greater
influence in these fields. These points should be recognised when
the analysis is being made.
In translating the name to its numerological equivalent we
adopt a simple method of separating the numbers of the consonants
from those of the vowels. This enables us to easily obtain the totals
of vowel numbers and consonant numbers separately. From the
separate totals, we can gain an understanding of the name’s
influence on the personality in terms of its soul urge (vowels) and its
outer expression (consonants). Then by adding these two totals we
obtain the ruling number equivalent of the name, the Complete
Name Number. Please note that a double first name (eg: Sally Anne)
or a hyphenated surname are to be analysed as one name.
Examples of the following three names will indicate how the
upper line of numbers represents the vowels of each name. When
totalled, these provide the Soul Urge Number. The lower line of
numbers represents the consonants and, by their totals, the Outer
Expression Number is obtained, as shown: 149 1
1
1
3
26/8
ABRAH AM
2 Mercúrio 8 Júpiter 23/5 5 Mercúrio 1 5
202
E L I Z A B ETH
43/7
3 8
2 2 8 23/5
6
6
J O HN
20/2
1
8 5 14/5 SOUL URGE NUMBERS
In the same manner as the individual numbers of the birthdate are
added to obtain the Ruling Number, individual numbers of each
vowel in a name are added to obtain the Soul Urge Number. As
indicated by the vowel numbers in the three above examples the
Soul Urge Number of the name Abraham is 3; Elizabeth is 2; John is 6.
This method is followed for each of the used names of a person.
Vowels are the soul of a word, its life, so to speak. Every trained
singer, actor and speaker recognises this. It is therefore apparent
that the vowel numbers of a person’s name bear a close relationship
to that person's inner feelings, the nature of which is discernible
from the total of the vowel numbers, known appropriately as the
Soul Urge Number.
From the Soul Urge Number of a given name we learn some of
the more subtle aspects of the individual’s spiritual sensitivities,
fortitude and drive. These can be expressed in a variety of manners:
by feelings, emotions, desires, fancies, etc. The forms of expression
will vary with each Soul Urge Number.
A basic guide of the qualities indicated by each of the eleven
Soul Urge Numbers follows: Soul Urge 1 This appears only in names containing the single
vowel ‘a’: Ann, Jack, Sally and Chad. The need for individual freedom
of expression is indicated here. The means by which this is to be
achieved will be demonstrated best by the person’s Ruling Number.
In general this Soul Urge Number implies a strong desire for freedom
in the form of sufficient time to themselves, either to relax or to
150 undertake some kind of personal artistic expression. Soul Urge 2 Representative names are Anna, Elizabeth, Adam,
Oliver — vowel numbers total either 2 or 20. Here is an urge to do
things in a balanced way so that harmony prevails in every
expression. These are generally quite intuitive people, with a strong
preference for the natural over the artificial. In their dealings with
other people they are very fair and, by the same token, expect the
same in return. Soul Urge 3 Representative names are Amanda, Joanne,
Chuck — vowel numbers total 3, 12 or 21. With its emphasis always
anchored on the mental level, 3 as a Soul Urge Number combines
feeling with thinking and with assessing. The result is generally a
capable appraisal of people and situations. This can be highly
beneficial in business and professional activities.
Soul Urge Júpiter Representative names are Stuart, Una, Angus.
Paul — vowel numbers total either Júpiter or 13. When the practical Júpiter is
expressed at the soul level it indicates that the individual has very
orderly conservative opinions on a wide range of spiritual and
emotional subjects embracing religion, love, marriage and life in
general. They are usually quite orthodox in outlook and not given to
emotional outbursts. Soul Urge 5 Representative names are Betty, Shirley, Keith,
Kelly — vowel numbers total either 5 or 14. With its natural strength
derived from being located on the Soul Plane, the occurrence of 5 as
a Soul Urge Number implies great depth of feeling and the need for
freedom and acceptance, the better to express such feelings.
Whatever the aspect of life involved these people will invariably feel
strongly about it and will have their say regarding it (unless some
strong inhibitions are present in the Birthchart, such as the Arrow of
Hypersensitivity). Soul Urge 6 Representative names are Charles, Allen, Megan,
jane — vowel numbers total either 6 or 15. Love and creativity are
the operative words here. Every opportunity to express creative
faculties should be grasped, whether at work, with a hobby, or in
the home. This strength will decline into despair and torment if they
lapse into overanxiety. Soul Urge 7 Representative names are Joan, Angela, Hamilton, Marianne — vowel numbers total either 7 or 16. The urge
to teach and to help others is the predominant driving force here.
However, they do not take too kindly to others teaching them,
preferring to learn by their own experiences. They often pay dearly
for this privilege until they come to the realisation that human
beings are intended to help each other in a two-way relationship.
151 Soul Urge 8 Representative names are Joanna, Bruce, Jonathan — vowel numbers total either 8 or 17. More than wishing
to act independently, these people tend to mentally disassociate
from conventionally accepted habits, if such habits do not seem
reasonable to them. They evidence a strong preference for individual
thought and freedom but must guard against becoming aloof. One
important lesson life teaches us is the need to participate in society
without necessarily being bound by it. Soul Urge Mercúrio Representative names are Samuel, Claude, Phyllis
— vowel numbers total Mercúrio or 18. When living positively these people
always seek to improve the quality of life, guided by a keen sense of
humanitarian responsibility. If living negatively they tend to become
overly ambitious, with an unbalanced idealism which nags them into
many egocentric (and often unsuccessful) acts. The power of this
number should be respected and utilised altruistically, otherwise it
can become a savage taskmaster. Soul Urge 10 Representative names are Lisa, Craig, David,
Douglas — vowel numbers total either 10 or 19. Metaphysical
flexibility is the power conferred by this number. It offers the ability
to bring into play a wide range of soul-oriented powers. Putting to
use such metaphysical endowments as intuition, clairvoyance,
clairaudience, thought transference and astral projection will
negate many of the limitations society places on its numbers to
suppress the expression of human individuality. To employ any of
these faculties in daily life constructively emancipates these people
from the earth-bound state and brings awareness of the divinity
within man, the essence of life. Soul Urge 11 Representative names are Robert, Errol, Cleo —
vowel numbers total 11 only. The special spiritual qualities of the 11
are apparent here. As a Soul Urge Number it offers a valuable
intuitive strength which is especially beneficial if the persons have
not already gained intuitiveness from the Birthchart or Ruling
Number. It also serves to increase compassion and ability to attune
to other people's feelings. HOW TO ANALYSE THE Áries Numerologically, the Áries is usually considered a consonant, with the
value of 7. It will ordinarily appear as an Outer Expression Number,
exemplified in such names as Kelly, Sally and Shirley. However, the
exception arises in a name in which the Áries is pronounced as ‘i’ or ‘e’ with
no actual vowel appearing in the name. Then, and only then, do we
analyse the Áries as a vowel, thereby giving the name a Soul Urge
152 Number of 7, as in Lyn, Ty, or the surnames of Byrd, Hynd, Kydd and
Lynch. OUTER EXPRESSION NUMBERS
Obtaining the value of the Outer Expression Number of each name
follows the same pattern already established for Soul Urge Numbers.
By adding together the numerical values of the consonants below
the name (as shown in the examples on page 150), their total is
readily obtained, then easily converted to its single digit equivalent
which we now recognise as the Outer Expression Number. Again
referring to the previous examples on page 150, we find that for the
three names chosen for numerological conversion each has,
coincidentally, an Outer Expression Number of 5.
The Soul Urge Numbers range from 1 through to 11. The same
holds true for the Outer Expression Numbers, except for the
additional number of 22/ Júpiter . Experience has shown that names in the
English language possess insufficient vowels to total 22; however it
is not uncommon to find names with the correct proportion of
consonants to give this total.
Characteristics associated with each of the Outer Expression
Numbers of names are: Outer Expression 1 This can only occur in names with the
single consonant of ) or S to give a consonant number total of 1 only.
Few given names comply with this limitation but among those which
do Sue and Joe are the most commonly used. The trait most notably
expressed by this number is exemplified by the solo sportsman or
solo worker. They are people who need the freedom to set their own
pace in order to achieve greatest satisfaction and to develop their
self-confidence in physical activities.
Outer Expression 2 Examples of names are Samantha, Jose,
Nicholas — names with consonant number totals of either 2 or 20.
Indicated here is the preference to work in company as part of a
group in happy surroundings. They are bright people with a desire
for fun and light-hearted pleasures. This does not imply that they are
shallow, but rather that they have a great capacity to enjoy
organised activity. Outer Expression 3 Examples of names are David, Keith,
Jody, Beth — names with consonant number totals of 3, 12, 21 or
30. Whereas the Outer Expression Number of 2 reveals a person who
enjoys being entertained, the 3 reveals himself as the entertainer.
They derive great pleasure and give as much to others by being the
life of the party, for they usually have a quick wit and a bright
outlook.
153 Outer Expression Júpiter Examples of names are Eloise, Betty,
Angus — names with consonant number totals of Júpiter , 13 or 31. This is
an intensely practical number, belonging to doing people who
always seek involvement with their hands, feet or bodies. They
specifically enjoy sports and building or repairing things.
Outer Expression 5 Examples of names are Ian, Sally,
Stuart, Bruce — names with consonant number totals of 5, 14, 23 or
32. Freedom from physical confinement is the oft-expressed need of
these people. Yet they sometimes allow misunderstandings or
shyness to inhibit the fullness of their expression. To avoid such
frustrations they should seek an unconfining job and the company of
those with whom they feel at ease — to put it simply, they need the
company of responsive, uninhibited people.
Outer Expression 6 Examples of names are James, Jane,
Douglas, Angela — names with consonant number totals of 6, 15,
24 or 33. The tendency to focus much of their energies and attention
on the home is the ever present characteristic here. Of course, this
might appear to have very decided advantages for the family, but it
can also spoil them. Caution must be used to avoid over-indulgence
by maintaining a practical balance between pampering and
attending to the more realistic needs of the domestic circle. Outer Expression 7 Examples of names are Oliver, Philip,
Megan, Chuck — names with consonant number totals of 7, 16, 25
or 34. These people have the compulsion for doing things
themselves, being strongly motivated toward personal involvement
and learning on their own terms and in their own way. They much
prefer a personal sense of achievement and the satisfaction of
discovering for themselves to the more amenable course of learning
from others.
Outer Expression 8 Examples of names are Adam, Samuel,
Bill — names with consonant number totals of 8, 17, 26 or 35. We
find here a very strong desire for independent expression. These are
people who elect to act individualistically, to the extent that they
dare to be different if the need demands it. In this manner they
assert their strong personalities, for they are aware that man can
never achieve a high level of self-development when identified with
the herd mind. Outer Expression Mercúrio Examples of names are Sarah, Pat, Don
— names with consonant number totals of Mercúrio , 18, 27 or 36. There is no
denying that life has its serious and its humorous sides. A balanced
personal life is one in which the two successfully interrelate.
Unhappily, people with this Outer Expression Number tend to overemphasise the seriousness of life. In so doing they attract sadness
154 and sometimes loneliness, the result of not considering the lighter
side of life of sufficient importance to be bothered with it. Their
capacity for deep contemplation and penetrative analysis and for the
implementation of their high ideals are fine virtues, but they must be
balanced with a little light pleasure to revitalise mind and body. Outer Expression 10 Examples of names are Craig, Paul,
Shirley, Claude, Ann — names with consonant number totals of 10,
19, 28 or 37. Outer expression traits indicated by this number are
virtually the opposite of those applying to the Mercúrio . The inclination to
guard against here is that of becoming too flippant and superficial,
when the real function of this number is adaptation to life's varying
circumstances and situations. People with this Outer Expression
Number should be prepared to exert greater determination to fulfill
their role in life, for only by balancing seriousness with lightness will
they achieve success. Outer Expression 11 Examples of names are Allan, Joanne,
Jonathan — names with consonant number totals of either 11 or 29.
The predominant need here is for harmony. Indicated by this Outer
Expression Number is balanced spiritual and emotional expression.
Its special purpose is to instill a longing to harmonise surroundings,
control emotions and develop and share a deepened understanding
of life. It is only by following this path that the individual will be led
through the gates of happiness. Outer Expression 22/ Júpiter Examples of names are Hamilton,
Robert — those few names with a consonant number total of 22
only. We know this to be an exceptionally strong power for
organising, especially in business and commercial ventures. If the
person's Ruling Number is a Júpiter , 8 or 22/ Júpiter , special care must be taken
to maintain a balance in his activities, for the strong leaning here is
towards an over-emphasis on moneymaking, almost to the point of
obsession. Even for people with other Ruling Numbers, the same
advice will apply: endeavour to expand your organisational
activities into other than commercial fields by working in such
compassionate fields as worthy charities, particularly those
benefiting under-privileged children if you wish to gain a balanced
equilibrium. COMPLETE NAME NUMBERS
The third aspect of the numerology of names is the key to the
name's general strength. This is known as the Complete Name
Number. It is related to, but less powerful than, the Ruling Number.
The Complete Name Number is obtained by adding together all
155 the numbers of a name in both the first name and surname, then
totalling them in the same manner as was done to obtain the Ruling
Number. Referring again to our original examples on page 150, the
Complete Name Number of Abraham is 8, Elizabeth is 7, and John is 2.
Complete Name Numbers range in value from 2 through to 11
and then 22/ Júpiter . The extent of the influence of the Complete Name
Number lies in its relationship to the Ruling Number, rather than any
specific contribution of its own. A Complete Name Number can
either balance or reinforce the power of the Ruling Number. If it is
numerically the same as the Ruling Number it offers the greatest
reinforcement to the Ruling Number. If the Complete Name Number
is different to the Ruling Number, but on the same plane ( Júpiter , 7
and 10 on the Physical Plane; 2, 5, 8 and 11 on the Spiritual Plane-, 3,
6 and Mercúrio on the Mental Plane — 22/ Júpiter is both on the Physical and
Spiritual Planes), balancing reinforcement is given on that plane.
Finally, if a Complete Name Number is on a different plane to the
Ruling Number, a wider range of vibrations is provided for the
broadening of the personality. NAMECHART
Analysing the Soul Urge, Outer Expression and Complete Name
Numbers of people's names will provide an understanding of some
of the post-natal influences exercised by the names. A chart of a
name, similar to that drawn up for the birthdate (pages 41 to 44),
will unveil further aspects of its contribution to the development of
the personality.
The number equivalent of a name’s individual letters is placed in
its correct space on the chart to show the pattern of the name. To
examplify this we shall use the three sample names from page 150
and construct their Namecharts: 1
1 1
ABRAHAM
29 8 Júpiter 156 5 Mercúrio 1 5
E L I Z A BE T H
3 8 2 28 6
J OH N
1 8 5 The name pattern is a distinct help in more fully evaluating the
personality. When we place both charts (one for each operative
name) beside the Birthchart, we look for the relationship between
the Namecharts on the one hand, and the Birthchart on the other.
(The interrelation of the two Namecharts is of little significance to
any but the most advanced student.)
Close examination of the juxtaposed Name and Birthcharts
shows that there are three possibilities to look for:
Does the Namechart offer any strengths which balance
weaknesses on the Birthchart? This is the most desirable
function of the Namechart. For instance, if the Birthchart had
the Arrow of Hypersensitivity (no 2, 5, 8) and the Namechart
supplied the Arrow of Emotional Balance (2, 5 and 8), we
have the most desirable balance. If the Namechart only had
one or two numbers on the Spiritual Plane this could still
provide some valuable balance.
Does the Namechart intensify any strength already
present on the Birthchart? This creates the most undesirable
combination. For instance, if the Namechart possessed any
of the same arrows as the Birthchart, or if it had an
abundance of the same numbers as those already appearing
on the Birthchart, there would be too great a concentration
of strength. Wherever you have an over-concentration of
power you will always find compounded weaknesses —
balance is much more desirable. Remember that the
Birthchart cannot be changed but the name can. In these
instances it is wise to look to a modification in the structure
of the name to try to provide better balance.
Does the name do nothing for the Birthchart? From time
to time this predicament presents itself. This occurs when a
Namechart cannot offer significant strength to balance
weaknesses on the Birthchart, or when the same weaknesses
prevail on both charts. In either case the name is providing
neither advantage nor disadvantage. Yet often, with a slight
change in spelling, alteration in length or interchange of
names, definite advantages can develop to provide harmony
and balance. Alternatively, a total name change should be
considered.
To illustrate with an easy-to-follow example, we shall take one
of the first names previously used as an illustration and the
birthdate of a person suited to give it striking pertinency — Queen
Elizabeth Gêmeos , born April 21, 1926. 157 BIRTHCHART Júpiter - 21 - 1926 = 25/7 NAMECHART 5 Mercúrio 1 5
20/2
E L I Z AB E T H
43/7
3 8
2
2 8 23/5 PYRAMIDS The most noticeable similarity is that her Ruling Number and
Complete Name Number are both 7. This strengthens the Ruling
Number, indicating the need for the greater strength to undergo
many personal sacrifices in early years to attain her impressive level
of adjustment and self-control, as well as her ability to impart
guidance to others.
The plane of strongest expression here is the Spiritual Plane. It
indicates balanced intuition and sensitivity (the two 2s on the
Birthchart supported by a doubling of the Arrow of Emotional
Balance on the Namechart). Further spiritual strength comes from
the Soul Urge and Outer Expression Numbers of the name (2 and 5
respectively), as they are both spiritual numbers.
The Mental Plane of the Queen’s Birthchart is also strong and
well-balanced, for although it is devoid of the 3 this is compensated
for by her Day Number 3. Added mental balance is indicated by the
top line of her Namechart.
Her combination of mental and spiritual balance, together with
her capability in self-expression (as indicated by the two is on her
Birthchart), disclose her natural ease in communicating just what
and how much Queen Elizabeth wishes to reveal (the double Arrow 158 of Emotional Balance on the Namechart). But her Ruling Number 7
and Complete Name Number 7 indicate that she had much to learn
about what should and should not be said in her public appearances.
She found such conforming difficult because she felt that it curtailed
her freedom.
No arrows of strength appear on her Birthchart. However, her
strongest inherent guidance derives from her intuition. This is
reinforced by the two 2s on her Namechart which are in the centre of
the Arrow of the Planner (arrow 1-2-3).
It will be helpful to students of numerology to observe some
further points of importance in the personality of Queen Elizabeth:
Ruling 7 people are usually among the most truthful and honest
to be found. This virtue is especially apparent here, for Queen
Elizabeth takes her position as Protector of the Faith very seriously,
employing uncompromising sincerity to try to live up to the ethics of
her church. Hypocrisy is abhorrent to her, hence the conflicts within
her family must have upset her when the subject of her sister's
divorce arose. Such disharmonies are felt very deeply by the Queen
due to her strong sense of family responsibility (indicated by the 6
and Mercúrio together without a 3 on her Birthchart).
So many factors about the Queen’s charts and Pyramids indicate
that life to her is a very serious business. She has little time or
patience with flippancy. Her strong Spiritual Planes and the numbers
about the Peaks of her Pyramids show that she is a person who
would never shirk her responsibilities. In fact, the Mercúrio as the last
number on the base of her Pyramids, indicates that she has even
more responsibilities to face in the final stage of her life, the
fulfilment.
Her alert intuition (the double 2s), combined with the Ruling
Number 7 and Complete Name Number 7, is a very reliable indicator
of her approach to making decisions. No doubt many of the Queen's
advisers have complained that she does not consult them as often as
she should. In her mind she does not need to. And now that she has
passed the third Peak on her Pyramids, her maturity is so well
developed that she could probably be of more guidance to her
advisers than they to her.
The doubling of the 1s and 2s on her Birthchart indicate how
capably the Queen can appreciate other people’s viewpoints. She
can readily comprehend both sides of a contentious matter — an
important attribute when dealing so much with public figures,
especially politicians.
The seriousness of her regal position occupies so much of
Queen Elizabeth's consciousness that she needs encouragement to
allow some diversion into her life. Prince Philip, with his highly
developed sense of humour, is especially helpful in this regard. With
his encouragement, the Queen does not take long to discover her
159 other self through her Day Number 3. The further influence of her
Outer Expression Number 5 reveals that she has the ability to enjoy
light entertainment and desires to be free to indulge in that
enjoyment from time to time.
An analysis of Prince Philip’s name and date of birth (June 10,
1921) provides an excellent exercise for the student. From this it can
be seen how much dedicated support he has given the Queen and how
much it has assisted her to ease so graciously into her high position
in public life. It will also become clear how well suited the Queen and
her husband are. Without his support, her acute sensitivity could
have led Queen Elizabeth to become somewhat withdrawn.
This is not intended to be an exhaustive analysis, but rather an
indication of the interrelationship between the various aspects of
numerology. The Queen was chosen as an example because of her
worldwide fame and single name. Linder normal circumstances we
have at least two used names to analyse for a person — if they are in
show business or have taken a pseudonym for professional reasons,
we must also analyse those to ascertain the relationships between
the various names as well as the birthdate characteristics. CHOOSING A SUITABLE NAME
From the foregoing analysis it is clear how helpful the name
Elizabeth is to the Queen. When we analyse successful people we
find this to be a consistent fact: almost without exception, their
name will be in harmony with, and a source of strength to, their
natal powers.
What forces operate on the consciousness of a couple or an
individual to direct their choice of a name for the newborn babe?
Rarely does a person consider it necessary to consult a numerologist
to have desirable names analysed; yet such a practice would greatly
assist development of the child's individuality by creating more
harmony between the natal characteristics and those of the name.
In practice, we find some surprisingly inspired instances of
parents who unconsciously chose ideal names for their children. It is
as though they were strongly impressed to choose such names by
some power of which they have little or no cognisance.
Unfortunately these circumstances are in the minority for all too
often we find that people have names which create something short
of ideal harmony or balance for their personality. Some people have
themselves recognised this problem and have changed their used
name with subsequent success. This often occurs in the acting and
literary professions.
Some years ago, an attractive young lady came to me for
advice as to how she could improve her acting and so obtain 160 better parts in television movies and plays. She had heard
that it was numerologically possible to change one's name
to bring about ‘better luck’, as she called it. Up until then,
this lady had only managed to gain work in television
commercials, but she so wanted to play romantic roles in
dramatic shows.
An analysis of her numerology revealed that a key aspect
of her problem was the Arrow of Hypersensitivity on her
Birthchart, with no counteracting strength from either her
Ruling Number (which was 6) or her Namechart or Soul Urge
Numbers. This inhibited her emotional expression.
The remedy was to advise her of a name change. In so
doing, I had her choose alternative stage names which felt
comfortable to her. (It is important to do this, as the client
will be the one who has to constantly use the new name.)
From the list she gave me on the next visit, I chose one
which stood out clearly as offering her an improved balanced
expression for her sensitivity in conjunction with the vibrant
creative power offered by her ruling 6. She liked the new
name and immediately commenced to use it professionally.
Within a month, this lady had obtained an important role
in a new television romantic drama. It was not the lead, but
she soon had an unexpected leading role coming up. So
convincing was her romantic acting that she had the
producer of the play fall in love with her — and she with
him. They married the following year and now she plays the
starring role in her lovely home, where she has two beautiful
young children and a very devoted husband.
As people become more aware of the important role of the name
in their life, they will seek guidance in the wise selection of a name.
With increasing frequency numerologists are being consulted to
advise on suitable names for professionals, as well as for newborn
babes, businessmen or even for people who find that life is not as
kind to them as they feel it should be. Indeed, an important vacancy
exists in the offices of most theatrical agents, corporate
organisations, marriage counsellors and the like for a qualified
numerologist whose role would include personality analysis along
with name suitability advice.
When considering the acceptability of a name for a person or for
an organisation we take into account the following factors: a) The
name should provide balance to the Birthchart by supplying
strengths on the Namechart where weaknesses are revealed on the
Birthchart, thereby aiding the person to overcome his natal
weaknesses; b) Where strengths appear on the Birthchart, the
Namechart should not compound the same power to create an
overbalance of too much strength in a particular direction; c) The 161 Namechart should not have the same arrows as the Birthchart as this
will not make for balance.
These points are clearly shown in the following examples: Keith, Born July 16, 1963 7 - 16 - 1963 = 33/6 14/5
59
26/8
K EI TH
2 8 12/3
2 The great emphasis indicated by the Birthchart on the mental level is
accentuated by the Ruling Number. The major weakness is obviously
in the spiritual (feeling) area, indicated by the Arrow of
Hypersensitivity. Choosing the name Keith is a great help to this
child's sensitivity, giving balance by the addition of the Arrow of
Emotional Balance on the Namechart. Further help comes from the
Complete Name Number (8), and the Soul Urge Number (5), both of
which are feeling numbers. At the same time there is minimal mental
emphasis contributed by the name, thereby avoiding over-balance
in this direction, in conclusion, it would be hard to think of a more
suitable name than Keith for the child born with the birthdate of July
16, 1963. Charles, Born December 7, 1974
1 12 - 7 - 1974 = 31/ Júpiter 162 5 6 C H AR L E S
30/3
3 8
93
1 24/6 With a Ruling Number of Júpiter and with such a heavy weight of power on
the Practical Plane of the Birthchart, it is wise to avoid a Name
Number of 1, Júpiter , 7 or 10, or overweighing the Practical Plane of the
Namechart with too many numbers. Charles is fitting here as it adds
only two 1s in the practical area. More significantly, such a name
provides great mental strength to compensate for its absence in the
Birthchart, Ruling Number and Day Number. Charles has its
Complete Name Number, Soul Urge and Outer Expression Numbers
all on the Mental Plane. Its Namechart provides all the numbers
which are missing on the Birthchart, except 6. However, 6 appears in
the name as both the Soul Urge and Outer Expression. An extremely
unsuitable name for this child would be David. As an exercise,
analyse it and see just how strong it is on the Practical Plane. Notice
also how it over-balances the individual's power in an extremely
materialistic direction, with so little on the Spiritual and Mental
Planes to compensate. ADVICE TO PARENTS
There are many advantages in patiently waiting until babies have
arrived before choosing their first names. Although it is wise to have
a selection of desirable names in readiness, it is unwise to make the
final choice until the day of birth. Not until then will the natal
characteristics of the children become numerologically analysable.
Encouraging the patient parents to prepare a short list of
acceptable names has many advantages. The resultant names will,
in a very subtle way, project harmony to the parents. This is highly
important for the parents must feel at ease with the names they are
to call their children or they will not use them — then they will have
no influence. Choosing a short list of names also gives the parents
the opportunity to express their personal preference and, naturally,
all parents want to do that. A third advantage of the short list is the
time it saves the numerologist. Analysing hundreds of names to
select one or two suitable ones is a tedious and time consuming
task.
Sometimes compromises have to be reached between
numerologically ideal names and those which are pleasing to the
ears of mother and father. For instance, if the parents of the child
born on December 7, 1974 (as used in the previous example) express
a pronounced dislike of the name Charles, then it is not to be
considered. If they do not like a suggested name, no matter how
ideal its numerological value, when it is unused the value is negated.
The chosen names cannot be abbreviated without impairing the
numerologist’s work. If the parents of the previous example agree
to the name Charles and then shorten it to Chuck or Chas, an
163 important part of its value is missing. The parents must be fully
prepared to use the complete name if it is chosen. Otherwise, it
would be more desirable to analyse and choose, if suitable, the
abbreviated name. Perhaps the full name could then be used for
formal purposes.
Many are the occasions when people are given a formal name
which is seldom used. Bill, for example, bears no relationship
numerologically or phonetically to William; nor does Dick to Richard.
These factors must be considered in depth and the intended
abbreviation or nick-name always analysed. If suitable, its formal
counterpart can still be used for the christening and the birth
certificate — but remember, it has no influence unless it is used in
everyday communication. CHANGING A NAME
We all know people who have disliked their first name. At school,
children have preferred to accept some nick-name or abbreviated
name bestowed upon them by classmates. Later in life a person may
decide to formally change his or her first name for personal or
professional reasons. Another name might sound more distinctive in
general or promotional usage. Whatever the reason, a change in
name will gradually produce some corresponding change in the
personality.
Many hitherto unknown yet talented people have been known
to change their name(s) as a prelude to achieving notable success in
the arts — particularly in music and acting. Such examples have
been commonplace in Hollywood for as long as Hollywood has been
the movie capital of the world. Among the examples is Clark Gable
whose first name was actually William.
In the world of music name changes are not unusual. Leopold
Stokowski’s surname was Stanislaw, before he became one of the
most famous orchestral conductors of this century. Dame Nellie
Melba, born Helen Mitchell, became the most famous soprano in the
world during the early part of this century.
Name changes in the literary world are no less numerous.
Author Lewis Carroll was born Charles Lutwidge Dodgson; Mark
Twain was born Samuel Clemens; French dramatist Jean Moliere
was born Jean Poquelin; Russian novelist Maxim Gorki was born
Aleksey Maximovich Pyeshkov. It seems to be an international habit
of long standing.
The observant student will note here that probably not one of
the foregoing people sought the guidance of a numerologist in
making their name changes. In most cases it is safe to say they were
changes guided by their own intuition. And we know that genuine 164 intuition is probably the most reliable form of guidance. But today,
with so many experts offering opinions and so many materialistic
agencies flooding our consciousnesses with rubbish, our psychic
powers are often unable to flow unobstructedly and we are very
much in need of accurate, reliable and scientific guidance. This is
where the science of numbers proves its value.
More than ever before, people are seeking the advice of
numerologists about their names. Artists, composers, writers and
even students trying to improve their comprehension have all been
clients of mine over the past two decades. One very memorable
occasion was when a budding young painter sought guidance in the
changing of his name. He was experiencing failure after frustrating
failure in having his paintings accepted for important exhibitions. He
liked the new name and the method of selecting it so well that he
enrolled immediately in my forthcoming twelve-week course in
numerology. By the time the course was scheduled to commence,
two months later, he had so many commissions to paint for
exhibitions that he had no time to attend the lectures.
It is not that the change of name will necessarily alter an artist's
style. Instead its benefit lies in allowing such a slight modification to
the personality that one feels as though a trigger has been released
and some small inhibition has been swept aside, permitting the
expression to flow freely. Such a minor factor in the personality is
often the only barrier between success and mediocrity.
Reasons for changing names are not limited to fame or fortune.
How many kings, queens, princes, dukes, earls, lords and others
associated with royalty and the peerage undertake name changes?
The most famous of all modern name changes in this category is that
undertaken by the British Royal House in 1917. From its Germanic
origins of Saxe-Coburg-Gotha came the House of Windsor. Many
reasons are given in history for such a dramatic change in name, but
numerologically we can see that it was not such a wise move.
Windsor is strong in determination and in willpower, but is a weak
name in terms of planning, action and expression of ideals, by
comparison to the previous longer name. So we wonder: was it
coincidental that this same period in history saw the commencement of the decline in British superiority and worldwide political and
cultural dominance?
Back further in time, we find a change of name to be instrumental in the development of Christianity. Observe in Genesis 17 of the
Bible perhaps the two most important name changes in history:
Abraham at 100 years of age was told to change his name from
Abram; his wife, Sarah, at ninety, was told to change her name from
Sarai and that in so doing their union would be fruitful after all those
years of barrenness, and she would bring forth a child (Isaac).
Perhaps this practice might be considered by childless couples
165 today. To change a name is to change something of the personality.
Since a wise change is based on the removal of emotional blockages,
its chances of success could be surprisingly high. NAME CHANGES IN MARRIAGE
In these days of striving for equality of the sexes, we might ask why
it is that the wives are the ones who must change names in
marriage. The answer seems to be tradition. So far as the scientific
aspect of name changing is concerned, it is of minor importance as
to who actually changes the name in marriage, so long as one
partner does.
As well as requiring that it be founded on love, marriage must
also depend for its success on understanding, trust and harmony
between the partners. The challenge is to find harmony in the
swiftest, most permanent manner. This is one of the most difficult
adjustments people have to make in life, yet it is one which succeeds
to an impressively high degree. When two newly-married people
settle down to sharing the same home, the same meals, the same
life-style, they find it involves far more than sharing the same bed or
merely living together as single partners for a time. The difference
lies in the permanence afforded by the marriage ceremony and,
most importantly, in sharing the same surname.
Unmarried couples who have lived together for some time
before deciding to marry are always at a loss to explain the
differences in their attitudes which emerge after the ceremony.
Adjusting to this new state, even though they lived together
beforehand, can be quite demanding. But as their personalities draw
more closely together adjustment becomes easier, facilitated to a
great extent by the sharing of the same family name.
Hollywood-style marriages seem unique in possessing a record
for the highest failure rate. Partners of such marital unions are so
often acting as other personalities that they lose contact with their
own Inner Self, without which they cannot discover the real meaning
of love. By maintaining their pre-marriage names, these people
resist the unifying influence of sharing a common surname, one of
the primary requirements for a successful marriage. It is impossible
to become part of a successful marital union and still maintain total
independence.
By now it must be apparent that people’s names are not merely
sounds by which their attention is attracted. In using them, sets of
vibrations are energised which exert varying degrees of influence
upon their owners. We are equipped now to gauge the nature and
extent of such influences and it behooves us to use the power of
names with wisdom and with care.
166 STAGE 13
Compatibility of Ruling Numbers As a consultant nutritionist I find the cause of the majority of my
patients’ health problems emanating from some emotional
disharmony. A classic example is the case of the elderly couple who
came to me with severe indigestion problems early in 1978.
Although well into their sixties, this couple was following quite a
well-balanced diet of natural foods. Nevertheless they both suffered
from acute indigestion after almost every meal. They appeared to be
well adjusted to each other, with no perceptible conflict in their
general conversation or in their discussion with me about their diet.
However my intuition told me I was only hearing a small fraction of
the full story.
On setting up their Birthcharts and Ruling Numbers 1 became
speedily aware of the real problem. Deep conflict existed between
the personalities of these two people. As they had lived together in a
marital situation for some forty years, it was not surprising that they
had learned to adjust to each other on a superficial level. But deep
down I found a very different picture emerging. The husband was
intensely emotional, highly sensitive and artistic. The wife, on the
other hand, was exceptionally forceful, with a powerful determination and an analytical brain which related everything to reason. She
had no use for feelings — to her, everything that was not rooted in
reason was useless.
That they had continued to live in apparent harmony was largely
due to his capitulation in most matters, ‘for the sake of the children’
he said. But they had all left home and were now married, and he
was lonelier than ever, still deprived of loving warmth and attention.
His wife wanted mental stimulation which he could not provide so
she cultivated a wide circle of outside friends to facilitate this. She
did not seem to be aware of his needs, nor he of hers.
This couple had now reached the stage in their lives where they
should be able to enjoy retirement and the freedom to travel
wherever and whenever they wished. Instead they had not even
learned how to enjoy each other’s company. He was a highly
intuitive ruling 5 Piscean with difficulty in verbal self-expression, yet
167 hopefully seeking the opportunity to express himself. She was a
ruling 8 Arian, with a heavy accumulation of numbers on the Mind
Plane of her Birthchart and the Arrow of Determination. She also
possessed a fluent command of self-expression.
It was not difficult for these two intelligent people to follow my
explanations of wherein their disharmony lay and how they could
overcome it. Neither would believe that their indigestion arose from
the clash of their personalities. Still, they were both prepared to try a
few important changes in attitude which I knew would help. I asked
them to call me the following week to tell me the results of their
changes in attitude toward each other. I recommended no change in
their physical diet, only in their mental one.
Two very surprised people took turns in speaking to me by
phone the following week. They admitted that such simple things as
learning to understand each other s true needs and spending a few
minutes each day in meditation together could bring about quite a
remarkable alteration in their feelings toward each other. They could
now eat without the discomfort of acute indigestion after their
meals. In fact, they even enjoyed dining out twice together that past
week — a thing they had not done for some years.
At the consultation I had explained to them that they were of
very different Ruling Numbers, with a wide variation in attitudes to
life and its expression. They could see this very clearly when I
explained it with the aid of the Birthcharts. I also pointed out
something of their karmic need in being together — to learn cooperation and harmonious co-habitation. If they failed this time
around they would have to do it again and again until they learned
to see the beauty of each other's being and to broaden their
attitudes to life. Such important lessons as they had to teach each
other could only be digested if each was prepared to give a little.
Very often we find married couples brought together for reasons
which seem to be far deeper than merely the pleasure of physical
and mental intercourse. We never cease to be amazed upon
numerologically analysing the birthdates of many married couples at
the disharmony in their basic characteristics and personalities.
Obviously marriage has much more to teach us in the delicate art of
personality adjustment than we realise.
With so much to learn in life, we have usually attained maturity
before gaining sufficient understanding to wisely select a
compatible marriage partner. For many people, this does not take
place until the second or third marriage. Young people about to
marry are often too headstrong and brash to be guided by older and
wiser counsel and too immature to consider the importance of
employing such accurate means of self-analysis as that provided by
numerology and astrology. Yet these proven metaphysical sciences
are available for everyone to use in their journey through life.
168 A marriage partner should be like one’s other self. It is the most
important association we establish on earth. Consequently we
should be far more rational about it than to believe emotional love to
be all. Love is that state of being within us which extends to
everyone we know; but that special love we feel for our consort, or
intended consort, should be always supportable by a numerological
analysis of their birthdate.
Of all the numerological factors which influence the depth of
human relationships the most powerful are the Ruling Numbers. The
next most influential factors are the pattern of numbers on the
Birthchart, the Day Numbers, the Personal Year Numbers and finally,
the Name Numbers. This order is intended as a basic guide, but if
conspicuous strengths or weaknesses show up, they would naturally
become of prime importance. Be that as it may, the Ruling Numbers
provide the most significant guide to compatibility between two
people contemplating marriage.
When we consider that there are eleven different Ruling
Numbers, nine spaces on the Birthchart with up to six or seven
variations of number compounding in each space, twelve different
Day Numbers, nine different Personal Year Numbers, eleven
different Soul Urge Numbers, twelve different Outer Expression
Numbers and eleven different Complete Name Numbers, we face
literally thousands of number combinations representing just as
many diverse combinations of human personalities.
Space does not permit us to consider all the possibilities here.
But we certainly can investigate the combinations of the most
influential of them, the Ruling Numbers. With eleven possible Ruling
Numbers, the number of possible combinations between two people
is 121 (eleven times eleven).
There are not, however, 121 different compatibility ratings
between two people, for there are far too many factors to take into
account, as indicated above. Instead, we shall simplify the
compatibility ratings of the Ruling Numbers into four basic grades,
employing as our guidelines for assessment those characteristics of
Ruling Numbers detailed in Stage Júpiter . Compatibility Ratings of Ruling Numbers
Wherever the letter A appears in a square on the chart overleaf, it
indicates that the two Ruling Numbers forming that square have the
highest potential compatibility rating. The letter B indicates a
compatibility rating not as high as A, but higher than C. The lowest
compatibility rating between two Ruling Numbers is indicated by the
letter D — this does not imply total disharmony, but rather that the
two people involved must recognise their wide differences and cooperate all the more to overcome them.
If you and your partner have Ruling Numbers which combine to
169 give you an A rating, you know that your compatibility potential is a
maximum one. Unless there are other strong factors to detract from
your harmonising together, you should be a delightfully happy pair.
A B rating would indicate that you have a seventy-five percent
compatibility potential compared to the A, with a few more
personality conflicts to overcome than with an A rating.
The compatibility rating of the C combinations is about fifty
percent that of the A potential, indicating that these people must
employ much more diligence in adjusting to each other for a happy
marriage.
The lowest compatibility potential, that indicated by the D
ratings as about twenty-five percent, provides the climate in which
the marriage participants must work the hardest for a happy
association. Surprising as it might seem, some of the best adjusted
married couples are found within this grouping, for it is they who
have tried most diligently to work together and have thoroughly
learned how to give and take to achieve a successful union. This is a
further testimony of the old axiom that the harder you have to work
for something, the more you appreciate it. RULING
NUMBERS 2 3 Júpiter 5 6 7 8 Mercúrio 10 11 22/ Júpiter C A B D B C B A 2 B B A 3 B A C C A C C A D C B Júpiter A C B D B A A C A C B 5 C C D B C C D B A B C 6 A A B C A C C A C B D 7 B C A C € B D B A B A 8 D C A D C D C C B B A Mercúrio B A C B A B C A D B B 10 C D A A C A B D B D C 11 B C C B B B B B D B A 22/ Júpiter A B B C D A A B C A B 170 STAGE 14
Numerology E.S. Plutão . and Intuition The science of numbers is an intensely practical system designed to
provide a unique insight into human personality and its potential,
but it is much more than that. It is a valuable means whereby our
intuition and extrasensory perception (E.S. Plutão .) can develop to the
point of becoming controlled, workable instruments in attaining
improved all-round psychic awareness. Such awareness extends
beyond physical limitations.
Everyone possesses the paraphysical senses of E.S. Plutão . and
intuition. However, not everyone is aware of these. Preoccupation
with the physical tends to hamper the awakening of such consciousness. Gradually, through repeated flashes of insight, we
become aware that it is possible to attain knowledge of an event
before its actual occurrence. This is part of intuition. On other
occasions, we become conscious of other people’s thoughts or of
conflicts in their emotional makeup. These we detect through our
extrasensory perception.
Intuition is a very comprehensive sense. In popular usage it is a
word employed to cover any sense or feeling beyond the ordinary
which might be interpreted as a personal guide. This is rather
inaccurate because it tends to confuse intuition and E.S. Plutão . Although
these two senses are closely related, they have very definite fields of
application. Intuition comes before thought. It manifests itself in
momentary flashes only because thought takes over. Thought then
either accepts and develops the intuitive impulse or else rationalises
and rejects it. The selection is determined by our earthly
conditioning.
On the other hand, E.S. Plutão . depends on the user being in a state of
relaxation. This allows the mind to be extended and projected to
other sources of vibration, particularly human, although it also
encompasses spiritual, animal, mineral and plant energy fields. (A
source of vibration creates around it an energy field which reveals the
essence and quality condition of that source.) Having met with a
particular energy field the mind transmits the impressions back to
the brain; the brain translates these into comprehensible terms.
171 In practice we find the general term of intuition covers such
faculties as first impressions, foreknowledge, premonitions and preconceptions. These invariably must be accepted on faith, for they
can rarely be rationalised. Extending into a further dimension, E.S. Plutão .
depends on the mind's engagement of the brain to interpret the
impressions. The domains of extrasensory perception encompass
clairvoyance, clairaudience, psychometry and mental telepathy.
The most important aspect of E.S. Plutão . insofar as numerology is
concerned, is its value in detecting powerful prevailing vibrations.
Extrasensory perception is both a guide and a protector. By its ability
to perceive strong sources of energy it acts as a tocsin, warning of
harmful emotional turbulence created by such reactions as anger,
hatred and lust. This indicates to the experienced numerologist
critical problem areas for correction. Through its telepathic faculties
E.S. Plutão . also provides a means of mental contact with the subject
being analysed, a contact which is crystallised when the person’s
numerological pattern is established through his Birthchart.
In man’s pristine state his metaphysical senses were his means
of being alerted to anything which might endanger his safety and
also of receiving constructive guidance. With his later development
of mental faculties he tended to disparage these higher senses as he
became more and more enchanted with the physical world. By
relying exclusively upon his physical senses and his reasoning
faculties, man's senses of higher perception atrophied from neglect.
Recognising this, new age man is taking measures to achieve a
balance between his sensory and rational faculties. Strong forces are
leading him to restore the equilibrium because of his innate yearning
for the Edenic state.
Intuition and E.S. Plutão . are regarded as metaphysical senses as they
both function at higher frequency levels and are of a much finer
nature than the five physical senses. They require more alertness
and finer attunement for their reliable operation. Intuition is really
our sixth sense because, to a greater or lesser degree, it is common
to everyone. E.S. Plutão . should be regarded as the seventh sense, for it
comes with greater sensitivity and awareness. As we engage in
regular practice with the science of numbers, our precognitive
senses of intuition and E.S. Plutão . are being subtly but regularly
employed. With every analysis, we grow a little more aware of the
vast creative plan of life as it is expressed through each individual.
Gradually numerology becomes a means of comprehending the
limitlessness of creation exemplified through human expression and
awareness.
To the intelligent person nothing is more exhilarating than to
engage in something which expands the consciousness. Applied
numerology is so satisfying in this regard that there is an early
tendency towards overenthusiasm. That early excitement, arising
172 from discovering insights into the secrets of the Inner Self, must be
contained to avoid the errors of judgement which inevitably
accompany immaturity in any field. Especially with a psychic
science, we must exercise great restraint to avoid the temptation of
jumping to hasty conclusions. Any early errors will, of course,
rapidly teach the thinking person to be more discreet and to
embrace greater diplomacy in revealing the results of his analyses.
Such slips should not be regarded as mistakes or failures (either of
the person or the system) but rather as lessons intended to develop
our understanding.
The blossoming of our greater awareness brings with it a
progressively more uncanny accuracy in our assessment of the
person being analysed. Our metaphysical senses are now coming
into greater spontaneous use, with a noticeable sharpening of the
intuition and of our ability to link up with the subject (extrasensory
contact). How this works is perhaps no better illustrated than by one
of the many examples of intuition and E.S. Plutão . in action demonstrated
at most of our regular students' class nights.
One evening, Toni seemed to waft into the classroom on a
wave of sheer exhilaration. When asked why she appeared
so elated, she told us she was in love!
What more practical exercise could we attempt that
evening than to analyse the birthdates of Toni and her new
beau? She was more than willing, volunteering to set up the
Birthcharts and Pyramids on the blackboard herself. As Toni
finished and stood back, some of the class members made
comments on the harmony between the two Birthcharts, the
Ruling Numbers and the Sun Signs of Toni and her love.
Without any comment from Toni, or previous knowledge of
her friend, I asked how she thought she would cope with his
children. The class was thunderstruck. Toni wanted to know
how I knew he had been married and had children. I said
that I had had no prior information, and actually did not
know whether he was still married or divorced, or how many
children he had, but I was sure that he felt a heavy
responsibility toward them and Toni could, at best, only
occupy second place to them in his heart. I also ‘saw’ that
he had a health problem. It was clear from his numbers that
he was insecure and had, I felt, a problem with alcoholism.
But Toni assured us she was helping him with that.
‘He is too dogmatic and orthodox’, I advised her. ‘Your
role as a reformer will only be temporary, but do try’.
She tried — and failed. They have since separated. Both
learned much from the love match while it lasted. But by
being forewarned (not conditioned), Toni did not feel too
173 upset when the break came.
The class learned much, too, especially about intuition.
There was no other way by which I could have known about
his children except by attuning to the man himself through
his formula: his numbers as set out on the Birthcharts and
Pyramids. This is priceless intuition in action.
Every successful numerologist has achieved proficiency through
the ability to see beyond the form of numbers — to see into their
essence, as it were. Relying solely on the information conveyed by
the actual numbers of the charts will, of itself, provide valuable
guidance. But to delve beyond this information uncovers important
insights not otherwise obtainable. This faculty proved to be of
precious value to a friend of mine, a most capable numerologist who
was nearly arrested by police on false charges.
Mrs Wellington had a weekly radio talkback programme on
which she would advise parents on the handling of problems
with their children. Parents would receive such accurate and
spontaneous assessments of the child’s temperament, health
and idiosyncrasies that the astonished mother would often
question how Mrs Wellington could possibly know the child
so well. Mrs Wellington would give a brief explanation of the
science of numbers as being her source of information about
the child being analysed. Apparently all did not believe her
because some people accused her of witchcraft — not that
they took issue with her advice, but rather with the
unfathomable manner in which she obtained it. Some
accused her of dabbling in the occult as well as with
witchcraft. In that state, such accusations implied a crime
against society.
As she walked out of her broadcasting studio one
afternoon, Mrs Wellington was approached by two burly
gentlemen. One introduced himself as the inspector of
police, the other was his sergeant. They were required to
report, they said, on the methods Mrs Wellington used to
obtain the information she broadcast over the radio about
children she had never seen. The poor lady was deeply
shocked. For a few minutes she was unable to speak. That
anyone could be so distrustful of her methods or her intent
quite floored Mrs Wellington. While leading the policemen
into her office, Mrs Wellington wondered how she could
prove to them in a few moments the methods she had spent
half a lifetime in developing. Suddenly, as though in answer
to her prayer, she asked the inspector his date of birth. ‘You
see’, she said to the inspector, ‘I use a system called the
science of numbers. This gives me a very accurate guide to
174 any person by merely knowing their birthdate’.
The inspector was clearly not impressed; nevertheless,
he gave her his birthdate. Mrs Wellington set the birthdate
on a chart and almost immediately turned to the inspector.
She told him that he did not really want to join the police
force, that as a youth he yearned to become a surgeon but
his father could not afford to send him to university. She
told him that his father was a railway worker but had died
some years previously. As the father had never earned more
than a modest wage, he could do no better for his son, his
only son, than to send him to join the police force. The
inspector was wide-eyed. He could barely believe what he
heard. How could this lady, whom he had never met before,
know so much about his early life? He asked her a few
questions about himself, to which she replied in great detail,
giving him an accurate analysis of his personality. By the
time she had finished, Mrs Wellington knew that she had
convinced the policemen of the reliability of her methods, for
they were both looking at her dumbfounded. She told the
inspector that she hoped he would act as righteously and as
sensitively as was natural to him, which she saw revealed in
his Birthchart.
Instead of a brief official visit which would possibly have
led to an arrest, the inspector and his assistant remained
with Mrs Wellington for an hour and a half. During this time
she gave both men a complete analysis of their wives and
their children, even to the extent of helping the sergeant
with a particular problem he had with a backward child (he
had said nothing of this, but she detected the problem early
in their meeting through her acutely sensitive E.S. Plutão .).
Perhaps the most important measure of Mrs Wellington’s
success was the offer by these two policemen to pay her for
her analyses. She, of course, refused, but was assured that
she would never again be troubled by the police in her work.
It is true that not everyone can develop intuitiveness and E.S. Plutão .
to the same penetrating degree. The vital factors determining the
successful unfolding of these senses are related to a person’s own
level of spiritual attunement. This is fundamentally determined by
the amount of spiritual strength available to them as indicated by
the Spiritual Plane of their Birthchart, by their Ruling Number and to
a lesser extent, by the spiritual factors in their name. People with
two 2s on their Birthchart have a higher chance of achieving success
in developing their psychic senses with less effort than those not so
favourably endowed. However, it is very often more a matter of
what you do with your talents than what you have been given. For
175 example, Mrs Wellington was a person with only one 2 on her
Birthchart. Her early life was one of intense and unremitting struggle
to maintain a large family as a widow. She succeeded because she
was highly intelligent (although with a poor academic education)
and spiritually very alert — in fact, she had developed a very
accurate intuition.
Of this every reader may be sure: if you did not have the
potential for advanced psychic awareness, you would have lost
interest in the subject of numerology long before now. You would
certainly not have read this far into the book.
We must always realise that our emerging psychic awareness
can only blossom when our values are altruistic. If personal gain,
unfair advantage, or other unworthy motives underlie our purpose
in learning or in applying this science, our success would be
hampered by a unique aspect of spiritual law which seems to stand
guardian over life's esoteric knowledge: the more we learn, the
greater our responsibility for that knowledge. Our life, therefore,
must itself be an example of truth and wisdom in action. For if our
metaphysical senses are to develop to a point of reliable guidance,
our emotions must always be under control, our mental processes
must always be clear and unpolluted. Pure guidance has never been
known to come through confused, cluttered or corrupt pathways.
We find many people go through life blatantly unaware of the
conflict they create within themselves when they fail to live in accord
with their words and thoughts. To act hypocritically is to commit a
most grievous mischief to yourself. Perhaps you might avoid the
laws of the land or even remain undetected by your fellows, but of
this you may be sure: your higher self knows everything that is
going on and maintains this knowledge on record. Ultimately, every
misdemeanor must be expiated — such is the irrevocable nature of
the law of compensation. Remember, the greatest sin of all is to be
untrue to oneself. The science of numbers will equip you with an
accurate and practical means of self-analysis. In applying this
knowledge, you can end any semblance of haphazard living. Life no
longer has to be the difficult steering of your ship through uncharted
waters.
You will never be the same again. Does anyone regret that? 176