PLANETS
in LOCALITY : Exploring Local Space Astrology Steve Cozzi CONTENTS Chapter 1
The Horizon System
Chapter 2
The Local Space Chart in the Home and Community
Chapter 3
Relocation and Long Distance Travel
Chapter Júpiter The Geomantic Circle
Chapter 5
The Local Space Chart and Physical Health
Chapter 6
Relocation Techniques
Chapter 7
Grid Systems
Chapter 8
Horoscope Examples
Appendix A/Michael and Margaret Erlewine
1. The Celestial Sphere
2. The Astrology of Local Space
3. Local Space
Appendix B/Jose Arguelles
The Holonomic Model of Knowledge
Appendix C/Steve Cozzi
Banishing Rituals
Appendix D/Bruce Cathie
Geographical Harmonics
Appendix E/Steve Cozzi
Matrix Software, and Local Space Charts
Appendix E/Peter Tompkins
Secrets of the Pyramids
Appendix G/Steve Cozzi
Calculating Mileage Distance on Planetary Lines 1
29
63
91
127
135
171
217 241
246
255
263
271
275
283
285
293 FIGURES l/Sokar, Egyptian God of Orientation
2/The Horizon and the Houses
3/Sunrise Horizon Planting Calendar Júpiter /Astronomical Alignments
5/English Ley Lines
6/Megalithic Alignments
7/Physical Features/Planetary Connections
8/A Local Space Chart Mercúrio /Floor Plan with Planetary Lines
10/Floor Plan with Local Space Horizon
11A—E/Magnetic Declination in the United States
12/Planetary Lines and Home Fixtures
13A—B/Planetary Lines on City Maps
14A—C/Planetary Lines and Matrix Software
IS/The Geomantic (Local Space) Circle
16/The Ecliptic, the Signs, and the Seasons
17/The Sky and Local Space Houses
18/The Celestial Sphere
19A—C/Three Coordinate Systems
20/]ohndro's Location Lines
21/Astro*Carto*Graphy's'
22/Astro Locality Map
23/Denver and the Local Space Horizon
24/Chicago and the Local Space Horizon
25/Ptolemy's Old World Grid
26A—C/Geodetic Maps
27/The Planetary Grid System
28/Unified Vector Geometry Spheres
29/Unified Vector Geometry Triangle
30/The United States and UVG Geometry
31/UVG and Europe
32/Grid Energy Lines in the British Isles
33/The Expanded Cartography of Admiral Piri Reis
34/The Twelve Devil's Graveyards
35/Base Map Adapted from Lemurian Fellowship
36A—B/New Zealand and the World Grid System
37/The Sirius Mystery facing p. 1 Júpiter Mercúrio 10
12-13
12-13
25
32
34
35
36-40
42
49-50
65-67
92-93
136
138
139
140-141
145
150-151
153
165
167
173
174-176
186
188-189
191
194-195
196
197
198
200
201
204-205
206 38/The Oracle Octaves
39A/The Ziggurat of Babylon
39B/Harleston's Sphere
40/Harleston's Sun Pyramid Reconstruction
41/Nazca Lines of Peru
42A—B/Marketing Areas of China
43A—B/Carlos Castaneda (2 Charts)
44A—B/Albert Einstein (2 Charts)
45A—B/Mark Twain (2 Charts)
46A—B/Benito Mussolini (2 Charts)
47A—B/Napoleon I (2 Charts) 207
210
210
212
213
214-215
218-219
223-224
226-227
231-232
234-235 Appendix A
A—C/Locating Cities on the Celestial Sphere
D/Starmap 242, 243, 245
256-257 Appendix B
A/The Holonomic Model of Knowledge
B/The Psi Bank
C/Geomantic Flow Chart
D/Model of Evolved Psi Rings 264
266-267
268
269 Appendix D
A/Greenwich, Vatican City and the Great Pyramid
B/Grid Structure and the Geographic Poles
C/Grid Polar Square and the Geographic Pole
D/Three Grid Polar Squares 278
279
280
281 Appendix F
A/The Sphere and the Tetrahedron
B/Harleston's Pyramid of the Sun
C/Stecchini's Ziggurat of Babylon
D/The Ziggurat and the Latitudes 286
287
288
289 TABLES
1 /Degrees of Azimuth
Cross Comparison Chart
2/Case Examples of Planetary Lines
Throughout the Home
3/Planetary Intersections with
Objects and Fixtures in and around the Home Júpiter /Planetary Lines in the Home
5/Directions in the Community
6/Planetary Lines in the Community
7/Degrees Azimuth at Solstices
8/Travel and Relocation on Planetary Lines Mercúrio /Two-Planet Combinations
10/Interpretations of Planets on the Angles
11/The Twelve Local Space Houses,
with Emphasis on Home & Travel
12/The Planetary Positions
13/Cross-Cultural Multi-Level Geomantic
(Local Space) Circle
14/Anatomical and Physiological
Correspondences with Planets and Signs
15/The Twelve-House System
with Spinal Sections
16/Correspondences of Three Systems
17/Geodetic Equivalents for Major World Cities
18/United States Geodetic Coordinates
19/Correspondence of Latitudes
and Zodiacal Signs
20/The Planetary Grid System
21/Chart of the Oracle Octaves 41
45
46
47
48
52-54
57
70-71
72-73
76-85
87-88
105-119
120-121
129
131
131-132
177
179
184
192-193
208-209 Local Space Astrology
Although it is not as well-known. Local Space Astrology is
the natural counterpart of predictive astrology, the astrology of
time. In this comprehensive book Steve Cozzi not only describes
in easy-to-understand terms the nature of the Local Space system of horoscope interpretation, but he also offers detailed
delineations, something not found previously in print. Author
Cozzi brings to this important branch of astrology some genuinely
pioneering ideas and concepts which link modern astrology
with the astrology of the ancients, an astrology in which space
and direction were emphasized.
But there is more here than just Local Space. As the book
progresses, the author tackles other aspects of spatial astrology,
including what has come to be known as astro-mapping or
astro-cartography. Beyond this are intelligent discussions of
various astrological and non-astrological theories regarding
possible grid patterns which overlay the earth—and from which
useful information about one's locality may be obtained.
Perhaps it is inevitable that a work on Local Space Astrology should end up being a work which also examines the magical properties of space. Cozzi, who is well versed in a number of
esoteric traditions from around the world, offers the reader
insights into Feng Shui, Geomancy and other bodies of knowledge that recognize and attempt to explain the mysterious forces
which surround and influence our lives. This is an important
book for practical and experimental astrologers as well as dowsers,
geomancers and occultists.
—Bruce Scofield
Electional Astrology ABOUT THE AUTHOR
Steve Cozzi began his study of astrology in 1968. He began
teaching astrology in 1970. He has lectured at the AFA '84 and '86 conventions, and at the UAC 1986 convention. Steve is a member of all
the major astrological groups in the United States and abroad. As the
co-chairperson for programs of the Colorado Fellowship of Astrologers,
he has brought in many of the best astrologers to speak to that
organization.
He has been active in the area of Locality Astrology since 1979.
His research into the practical methods of Local Space astrology and
his invention of the first geomantic compass in the West qualify him as
one of a handful of practicing geomancers.
Steve has been a sincere student of Yoga for many years, and has
a wide-ranging interest in the field of metaphysics. Along with his
writing and teaching activities, he also works in the areas of business
management and the travel industry. He lives in Lakewood, Colorado
with his wife, Janet, and their two children, Anthony and Nicholas. TO WRITE TO THE AUTHOR
We cannot guarantee that every letter written to the author can be
answered, but all will be forwarded to him. Both the author and the
publisher appreciate hearing from readers, learning of your enjoyment and benefit from this book. Llewellyn also publishes a bimonthly news magazine of New Age esoteric studies, and some
readers' questions and comments may be answered through the New
Times' columns if permission to do so is included in your original letter. The author participates in seminars and workshops, and dates and
places may be announced in The Llewellyn New Times. For further
information on Local Space, to write to the author or to secure a few
sample copies of the New Times write to:
Steve Cozzi
c/o THE LLEWELLYN NEW TIMES Plutão .O. Box 64383-Dept. 098, St. Paul, MN 55164-0383, U.S.A.
Please enclose a self-addressed, stamped envelope for reply, or $1.00
to cover expenses. THE LLEWELLYN MODERN ASTROLOGY LIBRARY
Books for the Leading Edge of practical and applied astrology as we
move toward the culmination of the 20th century.
This is not speculative astrology, nor astrology so esoteric as to
have little practical application in meeting the needs of people in
these critical times. Yet, these books go far beyond the meaning of
"practicality" as seen prior to the 1980's. Our needs are spiritual as
well as mundane, planetary as well as particular, evolutionary as well
as progressive. Astrology grows with the times, and our times make
heavy demands upon Intelligence and Wisdom.
The authors are all professional astrologers drawing from their
own practice and knowledge of historical persons and events, demonstrating proof of their conclusions with the horoscopes of real
people in real situations.
Modern Astrology relates the individual person in the Universe
in which he/she lives, not as a passive victim of alien forces, but as an
active participant in an environment expanded to the breadth and
depth of the Cosmos. We are not alone, and our responsibilities are
infinite.
The horoscope is both a measure and a guide to personal
movement—seeing every act undertaken, every decision made, every
event, as time dynamic, with effects that move through the many
dimensions of space and levels of consciousness in fulfillment of Will
and Purpose. Every act becomes an act of Will, for we extend our
awareness to consequences reaching to the ends of time and space.
This is astrology supremely important to this unique period in
human history, when Pluto transits through Scorpio, and Neptune
through Capricorn. The books in this series are intended to provide
insight into the critical needs and the critical decisions that must
be made.
These books, too, are "active agents," bringing to the reader
knowledge which will liberate the higher forces inside each person to
the end that we may fulfill that for which we were intended.
—Carl Llewellyn Weschcke Other Books by Steve Cozzi
Generations and Outer Planet Cycles, AFA, Tempe AZ, 1986 Forthcoming Books and Concepts
A New Look at Mundane Astrology—The Art of Predicting World Events
The Local Space Charts of Cities and Countries
The Astrological Quatrains of Nostredamus DEDICATION Dedicated to my beloved spiritual grandfather (Parum-Guru),
who has shown me that time and space are variables. ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS Special thanks to Michael Erlewine, whose research, encouragement and assistance helped make this book become a reality. A
deep appreciation to Sue Osterhaudt for her editing of part of the
manuscript, to Joan McEvers and Tom Streissguth for their complete
editing and excellent suggestions, to my wife Janet for her art work,
and to Carl Weschcke and Julie Lockhart. CREDITS
Figure 1 (facing page 1) —Copyright ®1976 by Robert Kyle Grenville Temple. Reprinted by permission of Harold Ober Associates.
Figure 3 (page Mercúrio ), Figure Júpiter (page 10)—from Living the Sky by Ray
W. Williamson. Copyright ®1984 by Ray W. Williamson. Line illustrations copyright ®1984 by Snowden Hodges. Reprinted by permission of Houghton Mifflin Company.
Figures 5 and 6 (pages 12-13)—From New View Over Atlantis by
John Michell. Copyright ®1983 Harper & Row.
Figure HE (page 40)—From the International Association of
Geomagnetism and Aeronomy (IAGA) Bulletin No. 52. By D.R.
Barraclough and D. J. Kerridge.
Figures 14 A—C (pages 65-67)—Matrix Software®1982by Michael
and Margaret Erlewine.
Figures 16, 17, 18, 19 (pages 136, 138-141)—From Astrophysical
Directions, ®1978 by Michael and Margaret Erlewine.
Figurell (pages 150-151)—Astro*Carto*Graphy®copyright®!981
by Jim Lewis.
Figure 22 (page 153)—From Astro Computing Services. Reprinted by permission of Neil Michaelson.
Figure 27 (page 186)—Copyright ®1983 by Becker and Hagens.
Reprinted by permission.
Figures 28, 29,31,32,33,34,35 (pages 188,189,191,196,197,198,
200,201)—From Pursuit, Second Quarter 1984, by Becker and Hagens.
Reprinted by permission.
Figures 36 A and B (pages 204-205)—From Bridge to Infinity by
Bruce Cathie. Reprinted by permission.
Figures 37 and 38 (pages 206-207), Table 21 (pages 208-209) —
From The Sinus Mystery. Copyright ®1976 by Robert Kyle Grenville
Temple. Reprinted by permission of Harold Ober Associates.
Figures 39 A and B, Figure 40 (pages 210 and 212)—From Mysteries
of the Mexican Pyramids. Copyright ®1976 by Peter Tompkins. Drawings
by Hugh Harleston Jr. Reprinted by permission of Hugh Harleston Jr.
and Harper & Row.
Figures A, B, C, D, Appendix A (pages 242,243,245 and 256-257) —
From Astrophysical Directions. Copyright ®1978 by Michael and Margaret Erlewine. Figures A, B, C and D, Appendix B (pages 264, 266-269)—From
Earth Ascending, originally published by Shambhala Publications.
Figures A, B, C and D, Appendix C (pages 278-281)—From Bridge to
Infinity by Bruce Cathie. Reprinted by permission.
Appendix E—Matrix Software information reprinted by permission of Michael and Margaret Erlewine.
Figures A, B and C, Appendix F (pages 286-289)—Drawings by
Hugh Harleston Jr., text by Peter Tompkins, from Mysteries of the Mexican Pyramids. Copyright ®1976 by Harper & Row. Reprinted by
permission. INTRODUCTION j.t has been some 15 years since I developed Local Space astrology as I have come to understand it. Now, thanks to Steve Cozzi, we
have a book on this fascinating subject.
We live in a world that is a tangle of signs and signals, a veritable
web of reference and meaning that seems to point or lead us this way
and that. It is up to us to sort it all out. The space around us is filled with
indicators of all kinds. As we learn to read these signs and directions,
they always seem to lead or refer us within. They point the way to
inner knowledge, to our getting to know ourselves.
Our inner world too is filled with pointers and references, the
majority of which appear in the form of "meanings." What do things
mean or portend? Where do they lead or point to? All this directionality, and
by that I mean all references and all meaning, cannot help but point or
lead us to the selfsame end: the experience of ourselves.
This is a book of directionality—a study of signs and directions in
space (the external world). The real message of Local Space (or any of
the directional techniques described in this book) is that all directionality, whether measured in the outer world of compass directions,
etc. or as measured within ourselves in the form of meaning and other
forms of reference, leads to the same conclusion: action or experience.
They can but direct us to an experience. In the last analysis, directions
always refer us to an action... to the very brink of an experience. All
thought... all reference... all direction ends in action or points to
action.
Yet, it is up to us to take the plunge. I might add that the experience
or action referred to is always our own, the simple experience of ourselves, the "Be Here Now" that we are told about. The primary purpose of astrology is not to predict. Astrology is, above all, a way to
know ourselves—a way of knowledge.
It is ancient wisdom that we must know ourselves. Yet, little has
been mentioned of the importance of being known—that there be
someone to be known. It is hoped that techniques such as Local Space
will lead us to the very edge of action and experience itself, for they
xv xvi / Planets in Locality
point right at it. Having arrived at the edge by means of all the pointers, signals and directions that there are, we should have no further
hesitation, but, recognizing an opportunity when we see it and a duty,
plunge in and be known. Michael Erlewine
September 1987
Big Rapids, Michigan The universal geometric forms are created because the geographical biosphere merges with the geocentric-great circles in the atmosphere—all is
geodetically aligned and geomantically interpreted. The sacred geometry, a
crystal network of form and number defining time and space. Júpiter "^ Fig. 1
Egyptian papyrus depicting Sokar, the god of orientation. The gadget on top of the
omphalos is a standard Egyptian measuring ruler (and also the symbol for the sky).
The two pigeons facing each other are the standard glyph for the laying out of parallels
and meridians. CHAPTER 1 THE HORIZON SYSTEM D
U efore any practical techniques are discussed, it is important
to cover some basic historical and technical information. With an
understanding of where this unique system came from and how it was
developed, we will be better able to grasp its subtl e importance as well
as its practical qualities.
Although the Horizon System may be new to you, it is actually an
ancient system widely used throughout the world. Why it became
dormant in modern times is difficult to explain. Perhaps astrologers
became obsessed with the Ecliptic System commonly used in Western cultures. Unfortunately, converting the Ecliptic to the Horizon
System before the advent of computers presented most astrologers
with a real challenge in mathematical calculations.
What exactly is the Local Space/Horizon System and how does it
work? Well, first of all, it is not a strange system that was just dreamed
up. All the evidence points to it being at the very heart and soul of astrology. In fact, the calculations necessary for a natal chart can't be
done without taking into consideration the coordinates used in the
Horizon System.*
The explanation of the three major coordinate systems in astrology is very important, because
in the process we need to see the functional beauty of how all three systems work as one. The
information contained in Chapter 6 is not just for the technically oriented student ofastrology.lt
contains a deeper conceptual message that works on the inner levels of our awareness to somehow spark a visual and functional insight on the rotational and orbitalmo vements corresponding to Earth and the solar system.
1 2 / Planets in Locality
In my own life and in the lives of others. Local Space Astrology
has proven itself again and again. It has helped many people live more
productive, satisfying and happy lives. The following is a list of how
Local Space and the whole of locality astrology can help those using
its methods:
It can put you in touch with your personal planetary patterns, acting as an aid to discovering your own personal myth. It depicts a journey through all your strengths and weaknesses. This journey is plotted
in the heavens, but it can literally take you across the planet in search
of those special places that can add meaning and vitality to your
life.
It can help uncover how these planetary energies manifest in
your daily life. It shows how to perceive and interact in a new "art of
living." The improvements that follow will certainly make your home
life more comfortable and enjoyable. It can systematically describe
the many influences in your community or natural surroundings that
may affect you for good or ill.
Basically it offers you the freedom of choice in determining not
only how you want to live but where you should relocate or travel to.
Locality astrology can tell you what influences are at work anywhere
you may be on Earth. YouH find out how each direction you travel, or
the location you live in, affects your psychological and physical
health.
It can answer questions like: Where is the best place to add on to
the home? Where is the proper place for the pets to stay or the musical
instruments to be stored; which is the right wall for the bookshelves
or china closet? In what part of town will I find a suitable partner?
What is my strongest and weakest element, i.e. psychological tendency? Where in my house is the best place to meditate? Why do I
almost instantly like people from some parts of the country and have
an aversion to others from different locations? Where is the best location for my career in the United States, New Zealand, or elsewhere?
The solid knowledge that Local Space Astrology offers will allow
you greater freedom of choice, based on real knowledge of the factors
involved, with the results to be anticipated. The Local Space technique is a system whereby the intangible becomes tangible, where
abstract qualities become concrete, and where intuitive feelings are
confirmed in an orderly and realistic fashion.
This Local Space/Horizon System is really just one of the four
"great circles" used in navigation, astronomy and astrology. The The Horizon System / 3
horizon, ecliptic, equator and prime vertical are the great circles and coordinate systems whereby mankind can measure Earth's position/relationship with the solar system and beyond. Each of these great circles
represents a different view, yet each one is mathematically related to
the other three.
What is the Local Space/Horizon System? Picture yourself in the
middle of a large transparent dome located in a wide open field. You
could be facing in any direction: north, south, east or west. At night all
the stars and planets are there for you to observe. As you turn completely around in a circle, you will have covered 360 degrees on the
horizon. These 360 degrees are called azimuth. This visible horizon
around you is a local piece of the Earth's surface and a localized view
of space: a "local space." The horizon that is seen in this local space
perspective is not the same view as the standard zodiac which is the
ecliptic, i.e. the path of the Sun (more on this later). In any place you
may be on the planet, you'll have these 360 degrees of azimuth surrounding you. It is a circle on the Earth's surface acting as a compass to
guide us in any one of the 16 directions.
Throughout the day the planets and stars will continually change
position due to the Earth's rotation. Different stellar bodies will be
seen at different heights above the horizon. These heights are expressed as altitude. When above the horizon, height is expressed as
+0° to +90° altitude; when below the horizon it is expressed as-0o to
-90° altitude.
Local Space is very much a person-centered astrology, for the
observer and the observed. We are the center, with the zenith directly
above us and the nadir directly below. So in review, we have 360
degrees of azimuth around us, +0° to +90° of altitude to the zenith,
and -0° to -90° of altitude to the nadir below.
You may be wondering what the other three systems of measurement are. They are based on the ecliptic, prime vertical, and the
equator. The ecliptic is the most commonly used. It is the Earth's path
around the Sun, and commonly called the zodiac (the Earth rotates on
an axis with a 23.5° tilt).
The prime vertical is a circle running directly east and west
overhead and below. It is drawn through the zenith and nadir. The
Equatorial System is mostly geographical in nature, dividing the Earth
into latitudes and longitudes. All four systems are based on circles of
360 degrees. (More on these systems in Chapter 6.)
If you have a computer-generated standard chart for your pres- N
90
°0 Op NW NE
N£
NE NW
WN ENb W by N t by N W
W by -5
Wi w
iW 12
SW
SW SW SSW Wei 55E io SE <V Fig. 2—The Horizon and the Houses
A Local Space or Azimuth chart reverses house positions and places planets on
the horizon.
ent location or birth location it most likely has the Vertex (VT) position listed. The Vertex is due west and the opposite point, the AntiVertex, is due east. The Tenth House cusp is always due south and the
Fourth House cusp is due north, in the Northern Hemisphere. As you
can see in Figure 2, this reverses the customary position of the houses.
You can determine if any of your planets are within a few degrees of
the cardinal directions. (See Chapters 2, 3 and Júpiter .)
The altitude of the planets can't be given because this is not a true
Local Space chart, but a standard chart, and therefore the planets are
on the ecliptic. What you need is the planets on the horizon measured
in azimuth. In some computer programs, you can ask for a Local Space
or azimuth chart; usually it is displayed on an open wheel or "Aries"
chart. (See Appendix E for computer programs and steps to take.) Júpiter The Horizon System / 5
Another thing to remember is that a standard or Local Space
chart must be for your present location; i.e., the date and time {true
local time) stays the same but the Midheaven/lOth, and Vertex, are
(including Ascendant) determined by the latitude and longitude of
your present location.
If you place yourself back inside the dome you see that the
planets are at a certain altitude. By drawing a line straight down from
each planet to the horizon you would find that it is in a certain compass direction. Each planet has its own direction. If you walked in that
direction within or outside of the dome you would be walking on that
planetary line. Venus could be south, Saturn southwest, while Jupiter
might be pointing north, etc.
This planetary line will be different in every place to which you
travel or relocate, because it is calculated for a specific latitude and
longitude. Your birth time and date cannot be changed. Time remains
frozen but space/place can change. This is the primary truth underlying the whole field of locality astrology.
In other words, the aspects between the planets will always be
constant but the cusps or angles—Ascendant, Midheaven (Medium
Coeli or MC), Vertex, etc.—will vary from one location to the next. So
even though the planetary aspects among themselves remain the
same, the aspects to the angles are different in every location.
Your Sun trine Jupiter or Venus conjunct Mars would not change.
Their house positions would change, and they will make new aspects
to the angles or compass directions on the chart. So you can see that
every new location presents us with a new set of influences. Thus the
obstacles and opportunities, fiascos and fortunes, and the whole complex assortment of favorable and unfavorable influences can be known
before you go to a certain place, or for that matter have dealings with
people who live there! Preplanning takes on a whole new meaning
with locality astrology.
Although there are a number of favorable locations to move to,
it's not likely that most people will do so. National, cultural and
economic boundaries may cause you to stay within a familiar region.
However, you can still choose the best possible location within limited
geographical areas.
The grass always seems greener just over the fence; the truth is
that in many ways it is greener. We all need change—variety is the
spice of life. Relocating may not be the answer for everyone, but
traveling is an option that can be undertaken by many. It seems to be 6 / Planets in Locality
human nature to get into ruts; we are often enslaved by the boring,
monotonous, humdrum routines of daily living. Travel knocks you
out of your ruts temporarily, and sometimes permanently, and can be
incredible fun. It can be frustrating and tiresome, but it is always stimulating, because you are subjecting yourself to different and unaccustomed planetary influences.
These influences are more than just people and places on a
superficial level. Each of us has different reactions to warmth and cold
and to the four elements. If cold planets dominate in your chart you
may be attracted to warm climates. If heat-producing planets are
strong, the pull is to cool areas. The Planets
Sun
warm
Moon
cool
Mercury
neutral
Venus
warm
Mars
hot
Jupiter
warm
Saturn
cold
Uranus
cold
Neptune
warm
Pluto
hot or cold
Transpluto
warm
As for the elements: Earth/practicality, Water/feeling, Fire/energy,
Air/communication. You are drawn toward your weakest element, so
that its physical presence can trigger new understanding in that area
of your life.
What if your lifestyle limits your travel, and your chances of
relocating are not very high? Local Space Astrology still offers a great
deal of information. There is the home and community where you
spend most of your life. That transparent dome referred to earlier
could very well be your home—a home with the planetary lines running
through it and beyond it into the community and/or neighborhood.
The bottom line is that you are (as sociology suggests) partly a
product of your environment. So if you change the environment, you
will effect the product, thus causing changes in health, thinking and
inner life. The Horizon System / 7
So whether the journey is short or long, the Local Space Horizon
acts as a magic circle, a circle offering many paths. Each path is a choice
that pulls you onward to greater discovery, challenge and fulfillment.
History of the Horizon System
The exact origins of this fantastic system are hidden in the early
centuries of recorded history, perhaps as far back as 6000 bc. The convenience of this system is an important reason for its early development, since naked-eye observations formed the earliest basis for
locating the directions of the planets. If we can trust astrological history, it wasn't until 300 bc that the Greeks introduced their version of
the Ecliptic System, which later became the standard astrological
operating procedure. In China the Ecliptic System wasn't widely used
until the 1800's. The Chinese (along with Middle-Eastern civilizations)
seemed to favor the equatorial and horizon coordinates.
The Horizon System used in geomantic practices seems to have
its deepest roots in four areas: Italy, western Africa, what is now called
Iraq/Iran, and China. In West Africa and Nigeria there are some surviving methods, yet they are not always clearly definable as horizonbased systems, and there are many unknowns and confusing points
about systems used in the Middle East and elsewhere.
Some confusion with this subject has arisen because the words
geomancy, astrology and divination are mistakenly lumped together.
Both major systems of geomancy in the East and West used astrology;
however most schools of astrology do not take geomantic principles
into consideration. Although geomancy can be used for divination, it
was used exclusively for that purpose only in the West.
Geomancy in a strict sense implies the usage of the Horizon System. "Geo" means that which pertains to the Earth, and because the
Horizon System is based on seeing the planets in relation to the cardinal directions on the Earth's surface, it must be considered to be the
prime astrological system used in geomancy.
Geomancy in northern Europe is really a 15th-century divination system.1 This form of geomancy has a strong astrological basis,
using the common system of twelve signs and the seven ancient
planets. The seven planets are each given a helpful and a harmful
quality (thus giving fourteen factors); when the Nodes are added to
the dual natures of the seven planets we have a sixteen-factor system.
Questions are formulated and dots are chosen randomly. The order of
these dots places the planets in various houses. Interpreting their 8 / Planets in Locality
positions answers any number of possible questions.
The most comprehensive locational system to come down to us
is the Chinese system of geomancy called "Feng Shui" (pronounced
fung shway). It means literally "wind and water," and is such a vast system that to attempt to explain and describe it in a few pages would be a
definite injustice. It should be known, however, that the system
involves ecology, biology, zoology, geology, geography, cartography,
topography, navigation, electromagnetism, architectural design,
landscaping, interior decorating, ceremonial magic and, of course,
astrology.
It's quite a comprehensive system, and although certain important practical parts of this sytem will be explained in Chapters 2 and Júpiter ,
it is beyond the scope of this book to cover the many areas that Feng
Shui can encompass. However, in specific areas I sincerely feel that
this book will advance this ancient art and science of geomancy past
its present boundaries.
There has been much speculation about the exact origins of
geomancy. From the evidence available, and considering the nature
of the subject, it is best to assume that it had many points of origin,
unless you talk in terms of occult history and say that almost all the
sciences came from the "lost" island of Atlantis.
The geomantic systems in Europe were practiced by a variety of
schools, cults and individual authors. Henry Cornelius Agrippa wrote
a famous book on geomancy in 1655, as the fourth in a series of
volumes on occult philosophy. Other geomancers, including Christopher Cotton, Aleister Crowley, Robert Fludd, and Raphael (Robert
Cross Smith), helped salvage and restore Western geomantic systems. Some authorities claim that the European systems of geomancy
had their origins in Babylon and that the knowledge traveled to
Europe through Egypt, later being influenced by Greek theories.
There are, in fact, a number of geomantic-type systems practiced
in Africa today. One stems from the voodoo gods of Petra and Rada
Loa on Africa's west coast; the Ifa divination is used in Nigeria, and the
"khatt ar-raml" is based in northern Africa. These and others still
employ the same sixteen-factor system originally used in Europe.
The use of the Horizon/Azimuth System as a geomantic science
was also practiced in the Americas. Although most of the oral tradition behind it is still kept secret, or is lost, anthropologists and
archaeologists are discovering an increasing amount of information.
Significant discoveries have been instrumental in developing the spe- tMAIN CORN PLANTlNu
LOHMIN KWITCIA
TAWAT KYATE EARLY CORN PLANTING
SQUASH R ANTING,
CLEARING,
FIELD CLEARJNGj
1
1 TAWAT
NEYERKTCOMO I
NASNAMAJO
PAVONTCOWO
KYATA -r /r'TW
VWlNTeR
3RD WEEK. IN MAY 1ST WEEK IN MAY
•a solstice
^
45°
65°
3ROWfiEK
IN
DEC 21 sr
SUAAMER SOLSDCE
APRtU
3RD
WEEK 103"
APPRO*. MAG JUNE 215T
75*
IN pee.
43°
BFARINQ t/m a*
HORIZON CALENDAR, DECEMBER TO JUNE, WALP! PUEBLO Fig. 3—Sunrise Horizon Planting Calendar
from the Hopi pueblo of Walpi cial field of archaeoastronomy in the last two decades. Recordings in
rock buildings and kivas date back to at least 1100 a.d. It is a fascinating
fact that over 700 years ago horizontal methods were used by the
ancient ones—the Anasazi. Because of the dry climate and rocky
terrain in the Four Comers area of the southwestern United States,
many important observational techniques remain preserved in rock.
The ancient ones and their ancestors watched the horizon very care9 Fig. Júpiter —Astronomical Alignments
at Casa Rinconanda, Chaco Canyon N.H. Plutão . fully to be able to prepare themselves for the seasonal variations of
rain and sun, the necessary ingredients for growing crops. Ray
Williamson and others have shown that near-exact solstice and
equinox measurements were in use; and that the risings, settings and
culminations of planets were observed (see Figures 3 and Júpiter ). In addition, the cardinal directions were pinpointed and used with a high degree of accuracy.2
10 The Horizon System / Gêmeos This practice is not just confined to the American southwest.
Evidence shows that the Horizon System was used in varying degrees
everywhere across America, including South and Central America. In
Central America, the Aztecs, Toltecs and Mayans developed the most
intricate system, not only in the Americas, but in the entire world.
Their system consists of a complex series of cycles within a 260-day
solar calendar. 20-day periods, each with its own sign, repeated 13
times in any 260-day period. The result was that in 52 years, or 18,980
days, no two days were repeated in any of the 260-day cycles.3 This
illustrates the fact that astronomy and astrology were in a highly
developed stage in the Americas, and that the horizon/azimuth observations were used as foundational and core techniques.
From the hidden pyramids in the Andes, to the lines of the Nazca
plains, across Central America to the ancient Mayan and Toltec structures, farthernorth to the great kivas and medicine wheels, the Horizon
System was the astronomical and astrological standard.
The observation and use of the Horizon System is in fact a
worldwide phenomenon. In England the Horizon System reached
amazing levels of sophistication. In John Michell's work The New View
Over Atlantis, many remarkable discoveries are explained. Júpiter The whole system in England is centered around what are called
the "ley" lines. A ley is an actual path that is marked across the surface
of the Earth by shallow trenches, lines of rocks, or mounds of various
sizes, all of which are aligned in straight paths. Quite often these ley
lines are not visible on the surface but are exactly aligned by a variety
of stone monoliths and/or water wells. The sites which are used in
alignments are in fact a network of interconnected ancient ceremonial
sites, which in our present day are usually occupied by a church or
some other important building (see Figures 5 and 6).
Researchers have found that most of the lines and sites are on the
azimuth of the Sun, Moon or certain stars.5 A number of investigators
found that different sites had different characteristics based on the
azimuth of the celestial bodies they measured.6 These lines run for
hundreds of miles in most cases, and a straight line on a map can be
drawn from site to site without error. The long-forgotten builders of
the ley lines connected the hills, valleys, streams and overall landscape
with the planetary movements, thus creating a pure geomantic tapestry, mirroring the above and the below. Mitchell describes it as "a
fusion of the terrestrial current with the influences emanating from
the heavenly bodies."7 Moat W - tiinTv*
s - t FI it>^»ck Júpiter ?
. _ r M'i r V v SUi 1 hnOTOii l,»i / • iif\ffit{-'or
,1 u tf>i70j^r *. Urano J' \
4u,.^^:ht!Tr
*V 1
-*jpV\ estonuap'
/f* ,V/"^V \^ini
'•■. V: ' Plutão . ' ;W"- ^ Jrr.ufh'ih
- ;■. X VX, TTyirhn.jton
; •
" - Júpiter *} tKft&nd \
■ 3v * x •J u - ., ^ -.-■ a,r \ M
\ .. tW
.. ^.Havti»u
' ^X> tk-... Plutão .I( lay Li«x. ^r^7- KneJurch//^ Fig. 5
Leys, two of them running parallel, on the Bedfordsh ip-Hertfordsh ire border, formed by alignments
of churches on ancient sites, earthworks and stretches of tracks which often lead up to churches. The
reader may find more alignments than those marked here. Fig. 6
A line of four standing stones, one of them in the stone circle at Castle Fraser, Aberdeenshire.
This pattern ofmegalithic alignments from stone circles is repeated throughout the country and provides the primary evidence of the ley system. 24 / Planets in Locality
The sacred geometry and geomantic engineering that was used
to construct countless sites across the planet is becoming less a mystery all the time. Amid speculation on their purposes, some things are
known. Certainly they were used for many types of ceremonies, and
because of the electromagnetic currents they generated, it is conceivable that they served as a worldwide communication and transportation system.
The discovery of past scientific and ritualistic techniques is
important and exciting, but we can't realistically wait for all the pieces
to slowly come together. Now is the time when the recent discoveries
in this area can blend with the past to produce a hybrid system with
substantial practical value.
Local Space Astrology: The New Geomantic Science
The concept of space/place in astrology during this century has
until recently taken a back seat to other astrological specialties. Until
the 1970's very little had been done in this general area. A minority
has always known about locality chart methods, but fewer still have
used them, or knew how to use them. The average astrologer and
client alike were not quite ready to accept the relevancy of changes in
space/place on the birth chart. It was common knowledge that you
changed your Ascendant and Medium Coeli when you moved from
your birthplace. It was also common knowledge that the planets were
thus shifted into different Houses and formed new aspects to the
Ascendant and Medium Coeli, and this was about the extent to which
movements in space were used.
There were a few notable exceptions. L. Edward Johndro was the
astrologer who in theory and practice kept the concepts of coordinate
systems alive. It is still hard to believe that his two major works were
written and published around 1930.8 Johndro had a sort of "living systems" approach to coordinate systems. In other words, he attempted
to expose the inner workings (systems) of the astrological clock,
instead of continually focusing only on the hour, minute and second
hands, as had been done for centuries. His theories deal with a multisystem planetary approach. He viewed astrology as a dynamic interplanetary gestalt where various forms of gravity and electromagnetism
constantly played upon each other, producing effects on organic life,
thus triggering events. (In Chapter 6, Johndro's theories will be explained in more detail.) The Horizon System / 15
Charles Jayne is another astrologer in this area whose many
articles have demonstrated his research and technical skills. Mercúrio There
are others who have contributed directly or indirectly to coordinate
systems, such as James Neely, David B. Black, Mark Pottenger, Zipporah Dobyns, Steve Blake, Axel Harvey, Gary Duncan, Jim Lewis,
Theodor Landscheidt, Ken Gillman, Bruce Scofield, Angel Thompson,
John McCormick, Seiggruen, Lt. Com. David Williams and M. Kahila.
All of these astrologers as well as many others have played various
roles in the overall development of time/space coordinate systems.
However, it wasn't until Michael Erlewine (founder of Matrix
Software and the Heart Center) and his wife, Margaret, began their
research that the practical significance of the Horizon/Azimuth System was realized. Once the tedious mathematics were worked out in
converting the ecliptic/zodiac planetary positions to their azimuth
and altitude, then a new and extraordinary revelation took place.*
At an early stage in their research the Erlewines realized that
"The visible horizon being much like a magic circle [meant that] here
is a map, in space, of an event from a topocentric perspective, or local
center; and thus, an astrology of Local Space."10 A chart or graph in
Local Space is really the clearest representation of the planets in space
in any locality from the point of the observer. In the Horizon/Azimuth
System it is often the case that "what you see" is exactly "what you
get."
Michael Erlewine has stated that: "Coordinate systems are great
Languages or Orderings of our total reality, and each one raises to our
attention its characteristic Gestalt or whole dimension of life."11 The
beauty of Local Space is that it automatically links you with the
immediate natural surroundings: the general landscape and its inhabitants, the animals. Whether in your home, filled with its various
objects, or out in nature, it "gives a sort of flat Earth perspective, as it
were, the visible horizon being much like a Magical Circle."12
The Local Space chart is truly a magical circle, as Michael says,
and more so than most would care to realize. I believe Erlewine says it *It should be remembered that one of the major obstacles in the development of Local Space
charts was the fact that you couldn't just open an ephemeris and find the azimuth of the planets.
There were no such books, and there still aren't. Instead the information is stored in navigation
manuals and more recently in a few computer programs. Before the time of programmable
calculators, who would be willing to sit down for a couple of hours and perform complex
calculations to satisfy his curiosity? Another factor is that Local Space charts are based on exact
times of birth, and until the last fifty years exact birth times were hard to obtain. 16 / Planets in Locality
best: "I must confess, a somewhat magical view of our world begins to
emerge: one in which every city and friend becomes a radiating center
of influence. Here for the first time the long history of Magic, witchcraft
and sorcery takes on a practical reality, where local deities and preferred directions become the rule, and we are thrust forever beyond
the threshold of the just slightly remarkable. The psychedelic character in Local Space charts is unmistakable and it appears as a kind of
grand talisman and vast ritual ground through this perspective. The
closest popular image of a similar nature in the modem consciousness
is the remarkable world of Don Juan as generated by the author Carlos
Castaneda. Here is not subtle plane, but a personal landscape painted
in bold and clear strokes. A world where the modem man is learning
to move across the face of the Earth in an endless adjustment and tuning of his radix—of himself. Individuals driven in particular directions on a checkerboard world, unable to resist traveling to a goal that
is no particular place on Earth as much as it is a direction within them:
the direction of a force, or of a planet: There! where Power hovers!,' to
use Don Juan's expression."13
The Erlewines were the pioneers in the field; they were the first
to develop and implement a practical system using the horizon/
azimuth, which they more accurately called "Local Space." History
has shown us that the Horizon/Azimuth System has been used for
many centuries and in a variety of ways, yet it was almost completely
abandoned for hundreds of years in the Western world. The average
person in past civilizations never had the advantage of having a personal, accurate Local Space chart. The Horizon Systems of the past
were of a broad and general nature and were constructed for the use
of everyone. Even though those systems revealed many mysteries
about people and places, they were not geared to the birth moment,
and therefore to the specific destiny of the individual. The Horizon/
Azimuth Systems of the past were employed for the use of the many,
the collective, and for the ceremonial, agricultural, procreational needs
of the tribe, city or state. The Erlewines for the first time put the magic
circle of directed force contained in the Local Space charts into the
hands of the average person.
They noticed early on that planets close to the major directions
(i.e., north, south, east, west) played a significant role or had a determining influence on a person in that specific locality. They also discovered that people traveled and relocated along certain planetary
lines. These two points were major breakthroughs, because nobody The Horizon System / 17
had realized that horizon planetary positions were important in relocation, nor had anyone figured out that a planet's azimuth was actually a
line that could be plotted on a map across the Earth's surface, connecting people and places. After many charts had been analyzed by the
Erlewines, a unique and valuable system began to take shape.
Their findings were quite an inspiration to me; the possibilities of
what this system could do for people multiplied over and over in my
mind. I knew that locality astrology had the answers to many questions, questions that were not or could not be answered by conventional astrological methods. The Erlewines have made a major and
historic contribution to the astrological community and to the general
public, and the writing of this book is a direct result of their research.
The fundamental principles contained in their research are expanded
upon in the following chapters, and many of the Erlewines' insights
directly and indirectly have caused new and meaningful techniques
to unfold. (See Appendix A for the complete article.)
Please keep in mind as you study Local Space that it is still a
young system (in its new and present form), and even though it has
grown in scope and direction, it remains wide open in its possibilities.
The sky's the limit!
An Introduction to Feng Shui—Chinese Geomancy
The philosophical and practical qualities of Feng Shui blend so
perfectly with the basis of Local Space Astrology that it seems appropriate to elaborate further on this subject. In doing so the correlations
between Local Space and geomancy should become clearer.
This is a most complete system; in fact there are many volumes
on the subject written in Chinese. Feng Shui is presently used openly
by many practitioners (mostly in Hong Kong); it has been rendered
into English, so it can be of great value to us.
To learn Feng Shui it would be best to locate an experienced practitioner in the Far East and learn directly from that person. Since
extended travel is not possible for most people, written works will
have to do.
The most informative books on the subject are: Feng Shui by
Sarah Rossbach,14 The Living Earth Manual of Feng Shui by Stephen
Skinner,15 and An Anthropological Analysis of Chinese Geomancy by
Stephen Feauchtwang.16 The latter is by far the most comprehensive.
However, all do a good job of describing the basics of Chinese
geomancy. 18 / Planets in Locality
Feng Shui has been called an "astro-biological mode of thought,"17
and an "astro-ecology,"18 by investigators. Skinner correctly states
that "Feng Shui was thus the mother of the systemic use of magnetism,
navigation and geography, just as astrology was of astronomy, alchemy
of chemistry."19 Another well-taken point of his is that"... Feng Shui
bridges space and time using the compass to interpret both."20
Methods can vary widely among geomancers. This variety stems
from the fact that there are so many different areas for them to focus
on at any one time. Occasionally this very complexity has been used
as a protective smoke screen. Sometimes they found it necessary to
exploit the ignorance of others, or to save their hides when they were
found in error.
The geomancers use what has been called a "geomantic compass" (see Figure 15). Each ring on the compass contains a new set of
information. Depending on the situation any number of these rings
can be used separately or together. (See Chapter Júpiter for the uses of the
Western version of the geomantic compass.)
The rings as sources of information are used with one goal in
mind: to interpret gross and subtle energy patterns. This all-pervading
energy is called Ch 'i. There is constructive and destructive Ch'i, cosmic and earthly Ch'i, and male and female Ch'i. Flow of Ch'i can mean
the flow of spirits, money, friends, health, etc. It is at once the most
powerful and wonderful force in nature and in the universe.
It has been mentioned that the electromagnetic forces in concert
with planetary energies make up what the Chinese call Ch'i. This
primeval and vital force manifests in a variety of ways, and it is the task
of geomancy to detect, channel and generally make use of this everpresent energy.
The accumulated knowledge about Ch'i comes from the two
primary schools of Feng Shui. One is the "form school," whose major
proponent was Shuh-Meu. He was an Imperial Feng Shui master
from 840 to 888 a.d. The form school didn't use the planets or compass
very much; instead, it centered itself around the natural architecture—
the contours, structure and shapes found throughout nature. The
form school practitioner had the eye of an artist, the feelings of an
environmentalist, the quickness of a photographer, along with some
of the skills of a geologist. The difficulty with the form school is that
each person sees different things in nature, and therefore interprets
them in a personal fashion. What is true for one may not be true for the
many. It was harder to reach a general consensus, but once it was The Horizon System / 19
agreed upon, the natural or man-made object became a useful part of a
Feng Shui map.
The other notable school was the "compass school." It was developed in and around 960 a.d. by various teachers in the Sung
Dynasty. It uses the compass, I Ching trigrams, stars and planets. The
process seems to be straightforward and simplistic. However, it
requires practice and intuitive skills to make sense out of a Chinese
geomantic compass. (We explore the uses in Chapter Júpiter .) The fact
remains that not all natural structures easily lend themselves to practical guidelines.
The Feng Shui geomantic compass is a complex hand-held plate
consisting of about 30 concentric rings. All the rings are correlated
with the four major and twelve minor directions. Planets, stars, signs,
months, days, numbers, elements, seasons, times of day, I Ching
trigrams and many other factors are all used. Each bit of information
can be used in connection with all or any of the others.
There are basically three types of Ch'i: terrestrial, cosmic, and a
combination of both, in humans. This Ch'i naturally has a Yin/female
part and the accompanying Yang/male part. The female and male
components are both external and internal. The Feng Shui experts tell
us that the vital Ch'i is more noticeably present during the period
from midnight to noon (Third through Tenth Houses), and that the
torpid Ch'i is more prevalent from noon to midnight (Ninth through
Fourth Houses). There is an ebb and flow of Ch'i just as there is in the
tidal rhythms. It is common knowledge that the tides are strongly
influenced by the Moon and to a lesser degree by the Sun. Feng Shui
also says that the Ch'i changes its direction and quality every two
hours. Astrologers will recognize this as the average time it takes for
30 degrees of a sign to rotate over a given point, such as the Midheaven
and/or Ascendant. In the yoga schools it is taught that the prana (the
Hindu word for Ch'i) changes every two hours, and that this can be
detected in the shifting of breathing from one nostril (nasal passage)
over to the other about every two hours.
The Moon's effects on Ch'i are quite strong. It has been proven
that the Earth's geomagnetic field has an hourly flux in accordance
with the positions of the Sun and Moon. The readings that prove this
were taken at Greenwich, England from 1916 to ^SZ.21
In another study quoted by NASA, it was shown that the geomagnetic field is the most calm just before the new and full Moons.
Just after the new and/or full Moon there is an immediate distur- 20 / Planets in Locality
bance of the geomagnetic field.22
Other researchers in this area have found that a lunar-induced
modulation of the field occurs only when the Moon is within Júpiter degrees of the ecliptic plane and between the full Moon and the last
quarter, i.e., between the 15th and 23rd days of the lunar cycle. It was
also theorized that if the full Moon is near the ecliptic, powerful
geomagnetic storms will occur especially around noon, with a quiet
period before sunset. The maximum effect would be to have a total
solar or lunar eclipse occurring close to either solstice or equinoctal
points and to have it at noon or midnight local time.23
Tibetan astrologers say that the peak of male Ch'i occurs on the
10th day, i.e., five days before the full Moon, and the peak of female
Ch'i is on the 25th day, or five days before the new Moon.24 The peaks
of male and female Ch'i do not fall in either of the disruptive periods
mentioned above.
There are many studies that could be quoted to illustrate how the
cosmic and terrestrial Ch'i interact; the oldest of these works is by J.H.
Nelson. He developed a theory in the mid-1950's while working for
RCA. It showed how the planetary angles affect the solar winds; and
with this knowledge he was able to predict with great accuracy when
solar winds would disrupt television and radio communications,
along with significant effects on the weather.25 In a study by Theodore
Landscheidt, accurate predictions of the time and intensity of solar
flares which strongly relate to the 11 - and 22-year sunspot cycles have
been formulated.26
Don't lose sight of how living things are directly influenced,
because the sensitivity of various life forms can be startling. For example, a very basic organism like the volvox (a single-celled organism),
which has been around for millions of years, responds to magnetic
fields, and even detects specific lines of force, i.e., directions.27 Many
types of whales have enough metallic particles in their heads to detect
magnetic directions. When these magnetic lines are temporarily
altered the whales still follow these paths, even when it means beaching themselves! Not only whales but birds, monkeys, cockroaches
and pigs exhibit certain atypical behaviors just prior to major earthquakes. It is thought that they somehow pick up on certain geomagnetic waves under the Earth. These waves are called "S" and " Plutão "
waves by Russian scientists.28
Humans also respond to all sorts of subtle stimuli. For example, the
lack of energy experienced just before a New Moon, and the overabun- The Horizon System / 21
dance of it at the Full Moon can, in part, be attributed to the lack of negative ions in the air. These ions with extra electrons are in short supply
at the New Moon, but there are generous amounts of electrons at the
Full Moon. At this time rain and lightning strikes are more common,
which is one way that the biosphere is recharged with more electrons.
There are many advantages and opportunities that come from
time-tested techniques and knowledge that was once hidden. We are
only now beginning to explore Local Space Astrology, Feng Shui, and
the whole fascinating field of locality astrology.
Important Pointers from Feng Shui
The following is a list of important tips. It is practical, detailed,
and directly applicable to Local Space charts.
2. The primary concept in Feng Shui is to gather the needed
amount of Ch'i (vital energy) without allowing it to stagnate. Moderation, balance and harmony on a practical level form the basis of this
system. Good Ch'i, like magnetic lines from the poles, always flows in
a curved and rhythmic pattern. Bad Ch'i tends to flow in straight lines
and either manifests suddenly or slowly. The damage of bad Ch'i is
often unnoticed or undetectable at first.
2. Generally anything man-made or natural that is convex is
considered male. Anything concave is female. Any feature or shape,
symbolic or actual, that corresponds to Fire and Air elements is male;
the Waterand Earth elements are female. Therefore valleys and caves
are female. Ridges, large rocks and trees are male. Feng Shui indicates
that the ideal proportion is a ratio of three male to two female. When
these two forces meet with such a ratio it produces the perfect or
balanced Ch'i; a valley (female) sheltered on three sides by mountains (male) with the south side open is the classical example.
3. The Ch'i fluctuates more in urban areas, and can change from
positive to negative over very short distances. Júpiter . The shapes of houses are important. It is necessary to have
equal proportions in the outline of the house. A house can be odd
looking and yet still have balanced dimensions. Certain shapes are
not conducive to the inflow of good Ch'i. Houses with one or more
rooms added on improperly will not allow the Ch'i to circulate fully
throughout the house. Good house shapes are circle/dome, square,
rectangle, and octagon. 22 / Planets in Locality
5. A house should have a large entrance (in proportion to the
rest of the house) and be free from obstructions, such as large trees,
small buildings, and walkways that detour excessively.
6. The plot of land should not be shaped so that its symmetry
inhibits the natural landscape. (The actual shape of the plot is less
important than house size and shape).
7. A southern exposure about halfway down a hill or mountain
is best. The main entrance facing east is the next best, followed by
west; north entrances are usually not considered good.
8. If water flows by the home it is more favorable if it bends
inward toward the property. If it flows outward it is not as helpful. If
the river or stream is very fast or very slow then the Ch'i either flows
by too quickly or it becomes stagnant. Mercúrio . Remember the flow of Ch'i is not only the flow of energy, but
also of friends, information, money and other forms of wealth.
10. You don't want to have your house or business located at the
intersection of streets in a "T," or in the apex of a "V." These street
intersections can be most harmful. The Mars/Saturn force of the
automobiles will cut right into a home or business.
11. If the land is extremely flat the Ch'i will tend to be stagnant. If
the land is too steep and/or broken, then the Ch'i will flow by too swiftly or it will become scattered.
12. Locating near the confluence of streams or rivers or close to
the ocean or a lake will provide an excellent source of good Ch'i. If the
air currents are moderate and the water is relatively unpolluted, it is
even more favorable.
23. People are encouraged to plant bushes and trees to the north
and west to neutralize bad weather Ch'i as well as adverse thoughtforms. Small ponds with or without fish can increase the Ch'i in an
area where it is poor. Fountains serve the same purpose. When centrally located they have the added ability of channeling the Ch'i to
many areas in the house or yard. Some people sink a long pole (10 to
20 feet) into the ground and put a red light on the top of it, which is
said to attract and draw Ch'i up from the Earth, not symbolically
but physically.
14. Inside the house fish tanks, plants, musical devices, burning
good incense, bells, pictures, mirrors and chimes are ways to disperse The Horizon System / 23
bad Ch'i and also to help circulate good Ch'i. So if there is a problem
area in the house you have a variety of options to choose from. (For
more stringent measures see Appendix C, "Banishing Rituals.")
15. One of the most common tactics used is to set up mirrors. A
mirror can reflect the bad Ch'i back to its source, e. Vênus ., back to a
neighbor's house. Although mirrors can't stop industrial or auto
pollution, they are effective in decreasing people pollution. Simply
place the mirror in such a way that it faces the source of inharmony.
Mirrors (and in some cases pictures) can also be used inside the home
to reflect bad Ch'i outward so it can be circulated by chimes, fish tanks
or the natural air currents from windows.
16. The locations of businesses should be at regular comers, but
not apex or dead-end points. The establishment should have large
double doors or revolving doors so that people and money can flow in
easily.
17. Interiors are very important, especially in colder cities where
many hours are spent indoors. A house is alive just like the people
within it. The windows are the eyes, doors become the mouths, vents
are ears, heating systems the heart, and ducts, plumbing and wiring
are the arteries, veins and nerves. Because there are any number of
possibilities that will arise, it must fall upon your own best judgement
as to what is or is not balanced.
18. The front door should open to a large room, and afford a maximum view of the interior. Doors should not face each other, nor
should they bang into each other when opened. Don't have a bed or
office deskclose to the door. Yourside and/or back will be too close to
the door, and this could lead to problems, such as not being able to see
those entering the room.
19. Heavy beams in various places can be a problem, especially in
bedrooms where a beam over the bed can be oppressive and cutting.
Moving the bed and putting chimes on the beam is recommended.
(Doors and beams are given considerable attention in Feng Shui, and
it seems appropriate since doors and beams are linked to Saturn.)
The Ch'i in rural areas does not fluctuate as dramatically over
short distances as does the Ch'i in a city, which can change every 50
feet or so. In the country specific locations are measured in hundreds
of yards and sometimes even miles. 24 / Planets in Locality
The female Ch'i is in rivers, lakes and ponds, etc. Neptune is connected with large bodies of water, salt water, and all very slowly moving water. The Moon is linked with streams, rivers, and lakes and all
quickly moving water. Pluto is associated with water underground,
hot mineral (healing) springs, and all water at night.
The male Ch'i is concentrated in mountains, hills, and trees of all
sizes. If you live in a place which is relatively flat, then all water sources, trees and rocks play an important role. According to my findings,
oaks are linked with Saturn, elms with Pluto, pines and cottonwoods
with Jupiter, lodgepole and bull pines are related to Mercury, magnolias to Neptune, most fruit trees to Venus, willows to the Moon.
Maples, birch and ash seem to be a mixture of Pluto and Venus. The
Sun is indirectly related to all the trees because of photosynthesis.
The shapes of mountains reveal their planetary connections (see
Figure 7, page 25). Mountains with very high and sharply pointed
peaks and/or a series of sawtooth peaks are linked with Pluto.
Volcanoes are also Pluto types, but their point is the convex cone
within the crater. The average high, pointed peak is a Mars type. High
mountains or hills that are somewhat rounded at the top are Jupiter
types. Softly rounded or bell-shaped hills and mountains are of the
Venus type. When a mountain or hill is mostly flat at the top it is a
Saturn type. When the flat plain is broken and fairly uneven then it is a
Uranus type; all mesas are therefore Uranus types. Mountains or hills
that have a series of small domes at the top or long, rounded, hilly
ridges are linked to Mercury.
It becomes obvious that the solar system is a master key in describing how the planetary energies link up with the biosphere—the
terrestrial and celestial reflecting each other. Fig. 7
Physical features reveal planetary connections through their shapes. 25 Notes
1. Skinner, Stephen, The Oracle of Geomancy. New York City: Warner
Destiny, 1977.
2. Williamson, Ray, Living the Sky. Boston: Houghton Mifflin Co.,
1984.
3. Scofield, Bruce, "The Astrology of Ancient Mexico" in American
Federation of Astrologers, Vol. 46, No. 12, Tempe, AZ. Júpiter . Michell, John, The New View Over Atlantis. San Francisco: Harper
& Row, 1983.
5. Michell, p. 46.
6. Michell, p. 47.
7. Michell, p. 66.
8A. Johndro, Edward, The Stars. New York: Samuel Weiser, reprinted 1970.
8B. Johndro, Edward, The Earth in the Heavens. New York: Samuel
Weiser, reprinted 1970. Mercúrio . Jayne, Charles, An Introduction to Locality Astrology. Astrological
Bureau, 1978.
10. Erlewine, Michael, The Astrology of Local Space. Heart Center, 1977,
p. 2.
11. Erlewine, p. 3.
12. Erlewine, p. 3.
13. Erlewine, p. Júpiter .
14. Rossbach, Sarah, Feng Shui. New York: E. Plutão . Dutton.
15. Skinner, Stephen, The Living Earth Manual of Feng Shui. Boston:
Routledge & Kegan Paul, 1982.
16. Feuchtwang, Stephen, An Anthropological Analysis of Chinese
Geomancy. Vithanga, Southern Materials Center, Republic of
China, 1974.
17. Wheatley, Paul, The Pivot of the Four Quarters. Chicago: Aldine,
1971.
18. Bennett, Steven J., Chinese Science, Vol. 3, pp. 1-26. University of
Pennsylvania, 1978.
19. Skinner, p. 73.
20. Skinner, p. 85.
21. Leaton, Malin & Finch, "The Solar and Luni-solar Variation of the
Geomagnetic Field at Greenwich and Abinger," Observatory
Bulletin of Great Britain 53: 273, 1962.
26 22. Lieber, A.L, The Lunar Effects. Garden City, NY: Anchor Press,
1978.
23. O'Dhaniel, Noah, Earth Mysteries, Considerations, Vol. 1, No. 2. Mt.
Kisco, NY, 1984.
24. Reynolds, John M., "Tibetan Astrology and the Kalachakra,"
Geocosmic News, Vol. Mercúrio , Nos. 3 and Júpiter .
25. Nelson, J. H., "Shortwave Radio Propagation Correlation with
Planetary Positions," RCA Review, December 26, 1951.
26. Landscheidt, Theodore, A paper and lecture at the National
Oceanic and Atmospheric Research Conference, Boulder, CO,
August, 1983.
27. Palmer, J. D., "Organismic Spatial Orientation in Very Weak
Magnetic Fields," Nature No. 198,1963.
28. "Whales and Dolphins Navigate Via Magnetic Grids," Brain-Mind
Bulletin, Vol. 10, No. 3, December, 1984. 27 CHAPTER 2 THE LOCAL SPACE CHART IN THE HOME
AND COMMUNITY M ost people spend over 85% of their lives in and around
their home and workplace. Eight hours a night is spent sleeping,
another eight working; travel time, reading, watching television, etc.
absorb the balance of our lives. Isn't this environment worthy of more
attention? Now you have the Local Space chart as the perfect tool to
tune in the wide variety of conditions in your immediate environment.
In the Local Space chart the planets surround you on the horizon
circle. Below you is the nadir, and over your head is the zenith. You are
the center of all that is around you—the observer and that which is
observed. You are truly a intermediary between Mother Earth and
Father Sky, standing in a dual role of Earth steward and cosmic
citizen.
The planets on the horizon are always around you. You occupy
the hub of the wheel, and they radiate in various directions at different
elevations. When you change locations, the planets point in different
directions. If you stay in one place, the planets stay fixed until you
move again. Actually your Local Space chart is good for about fifty
miles in any direction from where you live. Once you go beyond that
planetary positions will have changed enough to warrant a new
chart.*
*—People bom above the mid-latitudes (above 30 N 00 or below 30 S 00), and who remain living in those latitudes, tend to have their Local Space planets in many directions around the chart.
As they travel closer to the equator the planets will begin to bunch up or group along the east/
west directions. Therefore, below 30 N or above 30 S the Prime Vertical Circle chart is used—see
Chapters 3 and 6.
29 30 / Planets in Locality
Before I describe the uses of the Local Space chart in the home
and community, you need to understand something about the underlying basis of this system. There is no better way to do this than to
examine again some of the basic principles of Feng Shui.
As you have learned, this ancient Chinese system of geomancy
places the greatest emphasis on understanding the flow of Ch'i, the
vital life energy. Ch'i pervades all existence, flowing in everything and
everyone. There is a cosmic Ch'i coming from the planets and beyond,
and an Earth Ch'i which is partly electromagnetic. Both these types
merge and flow over the Earth in continuous and rhythmic patterns.
Ch'i is carried by water and is also channeled by the winds. The Ch'i is
in, as well as on the Earth at all times. There are four basic kinds of Ch'i:
male and female, torpid and vital. The most auspicious location to find
the vital Ch'i is where the male and female forces meet.
The biosphere of Earth is alive and pulsating with energy; it is up
to each of us to make use of it in the best possible ways. Man, the
organic computer composed of electrochemical and electromagnetic
substances, responds unceasingly to the flow of Ch'i in all its forms.
The vital energy within all living things has to be understood, and the
Local Space chart along with the wisdom of Feng Shui can help you
understand how to live a more productive and enjoyable life. Landmarks, planets, stars, compass directions, all come together in this
new geomantic science of Local Space Astrology.
One of the qualities that contributes to accuracy of a Local Space
chart is its basis of a near-exact birth time. Most ancient astrological
charts were not constructed to the exact hour and minute of birth. The
Feng Shui system is a good example of a method used for the masses.
The nearest this system came to an exact birth time was the birth hour;
but in most cases only A.M. or Plutão .M. of the day of birth was used. Only
royalty and those in other positions of power were given the consideration of an exact recorded birth time (in Chapter 1 some guidelines for Feng Shui were given).
For one reason or another we all have learned to turn off to some
degree certain perceptions about our immediate environment. If you
ask people to describe the ways in which their jobs influence them,
you get conventional answers in the majority of cases. The same is
true of the home. There are all kinds of things that affect you on subliminal levels, yet because it is hard to locate and define exactly what
they are, you either dismiss or generally attempt to forget these subtle
influences. This is how the ancient geomantic knowledge, along with The Local Space Chart in the Home and Community / 31
the discoveries in Local Space, can help immensely. The obvious
answers are not discounted but are taken into consideration, along
with viewing situations in a new way—a way in which many other factors that you've learned to ignore can answer questions and play an
important role. For example: Why do the pipes always leak in the west
bathroom and not elsewhere? Why do the dogs always knock over the
garbage cans on the north side of the house? Why do certain appliances work in one place but not in another?
There are countless questions like these which may have practical answers, but what about the unnoticed or unexplained factors
involved? There are any number of occurrences in your home and
workplace that are difficult to explain unless you can view your
environment in a new way.
Astrology is a cosmic science that helps one discover the real
causes behind the apparent ones. Local Space charts can do the same
and often in more practical ways. After all, what could be more downto-earth than relating the planets to rocks, trees, rivers, hills, and
buildings (with the objects and fixtures within them)? Granted there
are always going to be people who find conditions as well as causes
that simply don't exist, but this can happen no matter how clear or
foolproof the system.
Everything around you has a symbolic and literal meaning, and
through the use of the Local Space chart you can begin to discover the
vast interplay of the spiritual and material worlds.
The first step is to get a Local Space chart for your present location. This can be done in a number of ways. The correct procedure to
follow with software programs, and information on where to order
your Local Space chart, is given in Appendix E.
The important thing to remember is that the planets are no longer in the 360 degrees of the Zodiac/Ecliptic System. In a Local Space
chart they are viewed in 360 degrees of azimuth, measured on the circumference of the horizon. There are no signs in this system, and the
houses are reversed (see Figures 2 and 8).
Azimuth is simply a way of finding out the directions of the
planets. The beginning point of 0 degrees azimuth is usually due
north. Some people prefer to start at east. It really doesn't matter
where it starts as long as you know that 90 degrees in either direction
puts you at another cardinal direction, i.e. north, south, east or west. If
due north is 0 degrees azimuth, then 90 degrees clockwise will be due
east, 90 degrees counterclockwise will be due west, and 180 degrees is LOCAL SPACE B 33 344
336
62
66 71 89
76
w
57 231 180 M ^ Fig. 8
a Local Space chart, planetary positions are indicated
degrees of azimuth. 32 The Local Space Chart in the Home and Community / 33
due south. (The international standard is due north=0 degrees of
azimuth; then west is 90°, south 180° and east 270°.)
Planetary Lines in the Home
In order to go any further youll need to have a non-graphic, or
round, twelve-house Local Space chart, as described above.
Remember that on a Local Space chart the houses are reversed
from the birth chart. In this chart the Seventh House is to your left, not
right, and the Fourth House is at the top, not bottom (more on this
later).
Once you have your Local Space chart for your present locality,
the next step is to get a floor plan of your home and/or office. Since
this is not usually available, I suggest you make one. Draw it on an
average SVa" by 11" piece of paper and add as much detail as you think
necessary (the more the better). I suggest that you put in all rooms,
furniture, windows. The more you include, the easier it will be to see
where the planetary lines are going (see Figures Mercúrio and 10).
The next step is to find out where due north is in your home. People living in urban areas built prior to 1960 should not have a problem,
because most of the streets were built during this time on a north/
south—east/west axis. If you live in a rural area or in the newer suburbs, then it is likely that the standard alignments were not used. The
simplest way to find out is to use a local map. If you want accuracy, you
can find due north with a compass. Figures 11A-E show the magnetic
deviation from true north for your area.2 Magnetic declination is the
difference between true north, i.e., astronomical north, and the location of magnetic north. It is measured in azimuth degrees. For most
places in the United States, the difference will be somewhere between
23 degrees east of north to 23 degrees west of north. (Magnetic north
is 102 W 03 and 77 N 00 as of November, 1984. It moves about 1 degree of latitude northwest every 10 years). Look at Figure HE to find
the most recent magnetic deviation (from the North Pole) for your
area. Once you have the degrees, you can find true north by facing in a
northerly direction and matching the degrees of deviation on the map
to those observed on the compass. If you live in a place where the
deviation is 15 degrees east of north, then as you face north move the
compass slowly until the needle is on 15 degrees east of true north,
i.e., toward the magnetic pole. Whichever way the top of the compass
is now facing indicates due north. IN
mag DEC CP
5 Mercúrio a Fig. Mercúrio Floor plan with planetary lines and compass points indicated. This matter accomplished, the next step is to find the approximate center of your home or job location, keeping in mind the structure's orientation to the compass points (see Figures Mercúrio and 10). If you
move around continuously at work, then you should use the center of
the entire work area, which may be a part or whole floor in a high-rise,
34 Fig. 10
Floor plan with planets indicated on Local Space horizon. or in a ground-level office/shop. If you have your own office or work
station, then you can find the center of it with very few problems. It
isn't critical that you find the center to the inch, but it is necessary that
you locate the center within a couple of feet. In some cases the center
can be found by standing where you assume it to be and measuring by
eye from that point to see if all directions are equal in distance. If there
are a number of different rooms and objects in the line of sight, it is
more difficult, and you may need to use a tape measure.
35 Fig. 11A
Magnetic declination in the United States for 1945. Fig. 11B
Magnetic declination in the United States for 1955. A Urano ztao,1 "iltf
s u Wej'wjftf
7
A c 6"" L
Z\
Fig. 11C
Magnetic declination in the United States for 1965. Fig. 11D
Magnetic declination in the United States for 1975. • '( \ -r
\ ^
\ ^<3^ <?
, 0^\ Júpiter -X
<f X
<<x\ 40* N 40" N 30* N 30* N i «#»>
DECLINATION IN DEGREES /\
CHANGE IN MINUTES OF ARC PER VEAR
"N A / -I
^
110* w A>
Cj" \ ^
s c
100* w 90* W Fig. HE
Magnetic declination in the United States for 1985. 80* W Table 1
Degrees of Azimuth Cross Comparison Chart
0—0
0—180
5—185
10—190
15—195
20—200
25—205
30—210
35—215
40—220
45—225
50—230
55—235 60—240
65—245
70—250
75—255
80—260
90—270
95—275
100—280
105—285
110—290
115—295
120—300 125—305
130—310
135—315
140—320
145—325
150—330
155—335
160—340
165—345
170—350
175—355
180—360 This table can be used as an aid when various azimuth degrees are given, e. Vênus . 175
degrees of azimuth is the same as 355 degrees, but in the opposite direction. It has been
mentioned that if a planet points in one direction, it also points to the opposite direction. Therefore, you can use this table for more exactitude. Now comes the fun part. If your Local Space chart is on a transparency, then all you have to do is place it over the center of the floor
plan and/or drawing of your home/office. You may want to get a
transparency of the floor plan and put it over the Local Space chart.
Another option is to draw in the planetary lines on the house map. To
make sure you draw the correct angles you need a small plastic sextant which has the azimuth degrees (see Table 1).
You are now ready to "walk the chart." What I mean by this is to
follow each planetary line from the center of your home and/or office
and see what they intersect. These lines of force go in two directions. If
a planetary line runs a few degrees south of west, then it also runs a
few degrees north of east. If the line is due north, then it is also due
south, etc. (see Table 1). At this point in my understanding of Local
Space planetary lines, I'm assuming that both directions are equal in
strength. It is entirely possible that the actual direction in which the
planet lies has a stronger influence.
There are ten planetary lines plus the Nodes; some of these lines
will be close together, others far apart (see Figures Mercúrio and 10). Each
planet reacts differently because of its own particular qualities. These
41 L i Quadratura l Quadratura Quadratura m Quadratura Quadratura r
u zi n E Fig. 12
Planetary lines corresponding to fixtures and objects within
and outside of the home. qualities do not differ from the basic meanings familiar to most astrologers. The qualities of two or more planets will begin to blend at about
five degrees of orb, using only the conjunction and opposition aspects.
(These aspects cause a fusion of energies because the planets occupy
the same or opposite direction, respectively, in space along the horizon,
which is different from aspects that form planetary connections by
angles, i.e., 60°, 90°, 120°, etc.). The closer they are to one another, the
more blended their energies will become.
42 The Local Space Chart in the Home and Community / 43
The objects and fixtures throughout your home or office also
have a planetary signature. Each of them can be linked to a certain
planet (see Figure 12 and Table 3). What we have then is planetary
lines offeree radiating outward, into and through objects and fixtures
in the home. (To get a better idea of what others have experienced,
turn to Table 2, page 45, for some of the survey results.)
Planetary energies have distinct traits, and are also linked to one
of the four elements. This can cause either attraction or repulsion.
When planetary lines hit certain objects that are antagonistic to them,
we have a potential problem. Let's say the Pluto line intersects an
object connected with the Moon; what effects should we expect? In
this case effects have been shown to be inharmonious. The major
reason for this is that a planetary line making contact with an object
acts just like a conjunction. The conjunction is the most powerful of all
aspects, and even though the Moon and Pluto are both Water planets,
this is one example where the blend is mostly inharmonious. Look at
Table Júpiter on page 47 and you will see which planets cause problems
with different groupings of objects/fixtures.
Take your time in walking your chart, and when you are finished,
go back to the center of the house where you started and think about
what you have learned.
The Saturn line seems to cause most of the problems. It's best not
to locate delicate objects in its path. Mars, Pluto and Neptune can also
cause problems. The particular combinations in Table 3 represent
only those that have been discovered. There are, in fact, many possible combinations, some difficult, some not.
Beneficial influences generally don't attract much attention because things remain somewhat normal. This is especially true when a
planetary line runs through an object that it is naturally associated
with, for example, Jupiter with valuables, Saturn with doors and stairs,
etc. (see Table Júpiter and Figure 12).
Since we are talking about planetary actions and reactions we
must not forget the aspects in the regular birth chart and how they are
used with the Local Space chart (aspects in the Local Space chart are
covered in Chapter 3). A basic truth in astrology, no matter what technique you are using, is that no extra input can override the birth chart
assessments. If Saturn is well aspected, and/or the individual has
made a concerted effort to work positively with Satumian energy,
then many of the adverse effects will not transpire. 44 / Planets in Locality
Everyone is different, and some planets are more easily understood than others. Because of this you may be able to devise a healthy
strategy in dealing with them. Other planets tend to be more imbalanced, and are therefore challenging and often destructive. If you
already practice astrology, you know that it takes a certain amount of
honesty and objectivity to admit that certain planets are more difficult
than others. If you are not familiar enough with your birth chart, consult a professional astrologer. If you're unsure of how to find one, a
metaphysical bookstore can put you in contact with a local organization or with qualified professionals. (Llewellyn Publications also
offers astrological services—write for their free catalog.)
Table Júpiter is a list of the planetary lines in and around your home,
and what you might expect from them. Each planetary line points to a
particular area. The planetary influences are most helpful when they
intersect the obj ects and fixtures that they are harmoniously associated
with, as listed in Table 3.
Dividing your living area into astrological houses can also be
used to better understand your living situations; however, they comprise a larger area and therefore are not as definitive as the planetary
lines. These houses can be used with greater reliability if they lack
planets. This is more common nearer the equator, where only the
First, Seventh, Twelfth and Sixth Houses contain planets in Local
Space horizon charts.
One other important factor about the planetary lines in the home
relates to their altitude. You will recall that planets on the horizon
have an altitude above or below that horizon. When the altitude is
above or below 60 degrees it may point to an influence above or below
ground. Planets below the horizon may point to events in the basement or under the house. Those above 60 degrees of altitude relate to
occurrences in the upper rooms, attic or on the roof.
When you encounter an inharmonious situation the simplest
remedy is to move the object to a better location. But what if it is a permanent fixture which can't be moved without a hefty financial investment? In these cases we can use some of the time-tested methods
suggested by Feng Shui. See "Important Pointers from Feng Shui" at
the end of the previous chapter. Table 2 Case Examples of Planetary Lines Throughout the Home
SATURN line through Moon objects: Poor gardens, has to work hard on plants,
frozen pipes, bad water pressure, doesn't water plants enough, poor sewer
line, small garden.
SATURN line through Sun objects: Damper on fireplace broken, skylight leaks,
hard to keep wood stove warm, cramped children's room.
MARS line through Mercury objects: Phone replaced a number of times, verbal
fights, many old books, radio needs to be fixed, negligence about books,
irritated by the radio, radio cracked, radio tuner out.
PLUTO linethrough Venus obejcts: Beat-up furniture, beautiful objects damaged,
child abuse in guest room, very promiscuous person in the guest room.
SATURN and NEPTUNE lines through Mars objects: Old tools, car battery problems, rusty tools, vents closed off, not enough tools.
SATURN line through Jupiter objects: Uneven patio cement, doesn't use porch,
rarely uses T.V., bad picture tube, large tree pushing against porch and
cracking it, porch cracked, very selective in watching T.V.; with Neptune
line included, either watches T.V. for a very short or very long time.
SATURN line through Saturn objects: Of no consequence.
PLUTO line through Uranus objects: Bad wiring has led to blown circuits, fuses
blow out fairly often, poor T.V. reception.
SATURN line through Neptune objects: Broken windows; with Uranus line, too
tense to meditate, and also distractions and uncomfortable in meditation.
Bad reactions from drugs, medicine went bad (no data for MARS line).
MOON line through Pluto objects: Had to replace bathroom floor, bad water
faucet, had to rebuild bathroom which was complicated and took a long
time, clogged drains, hides things under water bed, a wall had to be
removed because builders got garbage into drain, roof over bathroom
leaks.
Injuries and Accidents: Mars and Uranus conjunct on west direction, broken
ankle. On Uranus line, cut toe. On Mars and Saturn lines, cut left knee,
broken nose. On Mars and Uranus lines, fire in attic. 45 Table 3
Planetary Intersections zvith Objects and Fixtures in and around the Home
t).* MOON objects: A. Main on and off water control. B. Majority of
potted plants. C. Garden plot. D. Washer. E. Swimming pool.
F. Allergic substances. G. Small boats. t). SUN objects: A. Skylight. B. Child's room. C. Wood stove, fireplace. D. Warmest part of the house. d MERCURY objects: A. Telephone (s). B. Books. C. Radio. D. Dogs,
cats and other small animals.
VENUS objects: A. Things of beauty. B. Most used furniture (not
including bed). C. Guest room. D. Musical instruments.
E. Wood pile. F. Women's clothes. G. Middle levels. n- Netuno MARS objects: A. Furnace. B. Car. C. Tools. D. Machines. E. Driest part of house. F. Firearms. n JUPITER objects: A. Valuables. B. Porch, patio, balcony. C. T.V.
D. Master bedroom. E. Men's clothes. F. Upper levels, e. Vênus .
attic. n/a SATURN objects: A. Little-used or unused areas. B. All stairs,
beams and doors. C. large wood or concrete structures including large trees. D. Lower levels, e. Vênus . basement. E. Coldest
part of house.
URANUS objects: A. Fuse box. B. Antiques. C. Electronic/electrical equipment, e. Vênus . computer, ham radio, etc. E. Wind
damage. F. Ventilation. d—tj. NEPTUNE objects: A. Drugs and/or poisonous substances. B. Major windows. C. Where you reflect or meditate. D. Horses,
cows, and other large animals. E. Water damage. F. Bacterial
and infectious substances. G. large boats. 5— Mercúrio PLUTO objects: A. Main sewer outlet. B. Main bathroom. C. Hidden things. D. Septic tank. E. Hot tub. F. Garbage cans.
G. Bedroom. ft TRANSPLUTO objects: A. Kitchen. B. Food storage. C. Dining
room. *indicates adverse influence
46 Table Júpiter Planetary Lines in the Home
SUN: This corridor adds a sense of importance to things, so they are noticed.
Objects are personalized and this is a personal spot. Round objects and
those that are gold or orange are enhanced.
MOON: A positive place for living things, plants, animals, etc. May cause fluctuations and sensitivity. It is a natural and passive spot which helps anything with irregular curves or waves, as well as concave objects. Opal,
silvery and pale blue colors are best.
MERCURY: This area has the ability to reveal meanings. It speaks to people—
signs are read, phones get answered, letters get sent. A work area and
message spot. Thin, clear objects do best along this line.
VENUS: On this line the beauty and desirability of items are brought out. This
area also increases togetherness; it's a congenial spot. Things that are softly
curved and colored or tinted with pastels of sky blue, green and yellow are
best. Copper and brass objects do well.
MARS: Energizes and increases all activities. This can be a traffic corridor. It's
an assertive spot. Anything that protrudes or has sharp angles (made of
iron) does well. Red, carmine are good colors.
JUPITER; This area adds a protective influence. It promotes enjoyment, and
things appear luxurious. For most people and most activities it is the best
spot. Large, full objects and those colored purple, violet and deep blue
do best.
SATURN: A stabilizing and supporting place, it may age things and definitely
slows down activities. Often it is the empty spot. Things made of wood,
compressed forms, black and darker colors do best.
URANUS: Objects are perceived as being more unique and antique. This is
not a stable area, but certainly adds excitement. Odd-shaped things that
are multi-colored are advantageous. The different spot.
NEPTUNE: Mystifies, obscures, may give false appearances. The mysterious
spot. Gray, lavendar, and sea green colors are good.
PLUTO: Tests and hides things. Objects seem newer and renewed. This is the
recharging spot. Scarlet, luminous pigments do well here.
TRANSPLUTO: Makes things more practical, valuable, edible and sensual.
The earthy spot. Cloth and fabrics are accented. 47 48 / Planets in Locality
Planetary Lines in the Community
The planetary lines that radiate out in all directions in your home
keep right on going outside the house in their respective directions.
You have a center in your home, and in turn your home acts as a center
for the whole community.
Obtain a large and detailed city or county map and pinpoint
where you live. Then place the center of the Local Space chart
transparency over that point on the map. You can also draw in the
planetary lines on the map using a sextant. Once this is done, it won't
take long to discover why certain areas evoke certain emotions and
trigger different experiences (see Figures 13A and 13B).
The list in Table 5 (below) can help you locate important areas
throughout your community.
Table 5
1. Direction of work is
2. The most frequent direction other than work is
3. Direction of education and/or learning is Júpiter . Library
.
5. Exercise
.
6. Supermarket
7. Restaurants
8. Relaxation, meditation Mercúrio . Family members
10. Bank
11. Lover
12. Gas station
13. Injuries
The line that you travel most frequently is important because you
are continuously under its influence. If this line happens to be that of a
planet that is strong for you, then you will benefit, because its energies
will be drawn into your life. If a musician practices at a place where his
or her Venus line runs, s/he will tend to be more productive. However,
if a construction foreman has his Venus line running through the job
site, he may find that his workers tend to procrastinate, which causes
delays. It all depends on the nature of the activity and how the
attributes of the planetary lines work for or against you. Fig. 13A
Planetary lines radiate throughout a metropolitan area. The line that you travel on most often is not necessarily the most
powerful influence. If any planet is within three degrees of the cardinal directions or five degrees above or below the horizon (altitude),
it will be strongly felt. When either is less than two degrees, they can
become a dominant influence (more on this later).
A woman I know must travel on her Neptune line 90% of the
time. She lives in the southwestern part of town and her Local Space
49 Fig. 13B
Planetary lines on a city map. Neptune is northeast. If she wants to get anywhere in town she must
travel northeast. This same person also has Jupiter within a degree of
due west (Local Space Seventh House), so even though she gets disoriented and confused from the Neptune line, it never causes any
serious problems because of her dominant Jupiter. A civil engineer
working on a high-rise had his Mars/Saturn line pointing toward his
quarrelsome boss. When he changed departments, the same boss was
on his Jupiter line and the situation calmed down considerably.
50 The Local Space Chart in the Home and Community / 51
The line that rans from your home to where you work often describes the type of work you do, or it may reflect your attitude about
your work. It is an important line not only because it has to do with
how you support yourself, but also because you travel on it frequently. If there is no line within a mile of the work location, it could mean
that you have more freedom. It may also indicate that your job has no
great meaning in your life at this time.
The other lines and locations are important depending upon
various life situations. The line closest to the bank has an added
importance when you apply for a loan; the library when you are doing
research; the lover when you seek companionship, etc.
Reminder: Be sure and look in both directions, using Table 1.
Follow closely the lines on the chart, comparing them (in azimuth) to
your city or county map. The relative strength or weakness of the
planets in your birth and Local Space chart will strongly affect the
planetary lines (see Figures 13A and B).
If you know that a planet causes problems for you when you
travel on or near its line, does it make sense to travel in a zig-zag pattern to your destination to avoid adverse affects? The answer may be
yes, because traveling different routes to a certain place can lessen the
influence of a planetary line. However this solution is only a temporary one, because you are still going from point A to point B, and
point B will always be in the same direction from A, unless you move.
So you can lessen the effects, but not altogether stop them, as long as
the direction remains the same. The other option besides moving is to
no longer go to place B, which could be easy unless it happens to be
where you work. Remember planetary directions stay the same no
matter where you are in your home or community. If Mars is due east
and Jupiter is due north, then every time you travel in an easterly direction, you are on your Mars line, just as you are on your Jupiter line
when you travel in a northerly direction.
It has been my experience that if you change your residence
within your community, your whole orientation can change along
with it. If, for example, you were living on the west side of town and
you moved to the south side, your Local Space chart would stay the
same. However, you would be traveling on different lines. Your starting point would now be in the southern area. Going to various places
would require traveling predominantly north. In the beginning you
would probably frequent many of the same places that you did while
living at the previous location, but after a while there would be a Table 6
Planetary Lines in the Community
SUN: Along this line you are apt to be self-contained, positive and consistent.
A great sense of self-identity can develop. You are certainly more in touch
with your inner power, so you can lead and/or express your individual
creativity easily. It is not wrong to feel proud and important along this line,
since you do in fact have a slight edge over others because of your
increased willfulness.
Driving Tips: Very few auto problems encountered. Don't hog the left passing lane. If travel is to the east or south, situations are improved; to the
west or north, influences are mildly weakened.
MOON: This particular pathway usually makes one aware of internal and
external rhythms. Memories rapidly pass through your mind and you may
be able to grasp subtle messages displayed in nature. It is common to be
passive, moody, receptive. Experiences seem to evoke marked emotional
responses.
Driving Tips: Chance of running out of gas. Fuel pump problems and flat tires
are possible. Difficulties may arise from not driving defensively, or driving
over-defensively. Movement to the north or west is best; the south or east
is not as good.
MERCURY: Following this route will definitely enhance mental and communicative potential. It may be advantageous to car pool, for the added
purpose of having someone to talk to. Keep a note pad handy to write
down ideas at the red lights. You may prefer listening to talk radio and/or
book cassettes.
Driving Tips: Use the turn signals and be aware of forks in the road. South and
east are the best directions; north and west are somewhat weaker.
VENUS: On this path you become more attuned to that which brings pleasure.
Art, music and all things of beauty seem to stand out. Since your need to
socialize is accented, doing things with others can be rewarding. It is
generally a peaceful and often relaxing line, however problems can arise
when you allow indulgence and procrastination to take hold.
Driving Tips: Generally only minor problems, but avoid sightseeing when
you are at the wheel. East and south directions are favorable; north and
west are only slightly different.
MARS: Along this line you feel assertive; at times even combative. Direct
involvement is stressed. If you need to get some place in a hurry, you can
do it on this line, but you may be takings chance. Remember, your car can
be a weapon.
Driving Tips: Traffic tickets and accidents may be common, and car problems
seem to be prevalent here. Buckle up! South is best; north the worst, and
east and west variable.
52 The Local Space Chart in the Home and Community / 53
JUPITER: This is most certainly a route in which you get a lot out of life.
Activities are enjoyable because you feel relaxed and safe. Under these
conditions it is very conducive to expand your horizons. This can be done
in a variety of ways, and two of the most enj oyable are through recreational
and educational activities.
Driving Tips: Since you rarely feel tense on this line driving is usually uneventful, although breaking technicalities of the law is a possibility. All
directions have about the same influence.
SATURN: Quite naturally it will take you longer to get where you are going
on this route. Situations demand that you think and act pragmatically.
There is a tendency to think about matters in a serious vein, often causing
worry and frustration.
Driving Tips: Physical as well as psychological obstacles are in your way. Be
prepared for delays and detours. Car problems may be numerous. Watch
out for detours on the road. The south can help matters; the other directions may have little effect one way or the other.
URANUS: Events occur suddenly around you and to you along this path. The
element of the unexpected is ever present, sometimes adding excitement,
and at other times causing irritation and upset. On the other hand you
could get some of your best original ideas on this route.
Driving Tips: This is an out-of-the-ordinary sector. Accidents are likely. All
electrical areas of the car are apt to cause problems. Often it's the battery,
spark plugs, or ignition. Any little odd driving habits may be magnified. Be
alert when it is windy. South and east are best. North and west may be
more problematic.
NEPTUNE: On this line your imagination and fantasy life are activated, which
can lead to inspiring small journeys and also to some confusing jaunts.
Although you can get away from it all on this line, unclear appearances and
false expectations are still present. Intake of drugs or alcohol can be
deadly.
Driving Tips: Make sure you get understandable directions to new locations.
When possible avoid driving in the rain or snow. To be on the safe side,
keep things off the seats and lock your car, because thievery may be likely
in this area. The radiator, fuel pump, and condensation on the points
could be some of the more common car problems. For most people the
northerly directions will be the most difficult. Influences of the other
directions vary greatly from one individual to the next.
PLUTO: On this line you tend to waver a great deal. You feel that you are an
integral part of the masses, or on other occasions you can feel distinctly
removed from everyone. Although you discover things about yourself
here that you never knew, it is still a somewhat compulsive and demanding pathway. For some people there is a certain amount of mystery and
intrigue along this direction. 54 / Planets in Locality
Driving Tips: This is certainly the place where a heavy foot and rude habits
need to be controlled. Mechanical problems, when they do happen, can be
major. Driving at night may prove hazardous. Directions have a wide
variance from person to person.
TRANSPLUTO: This route predisposes you to think about your everyday
concerns. Practical and financial matters take precedence. You may often
frequent fast-food drive-ins.
Driving Tips: Overly conservative driving habits can cause problems on this
route. You may have a fine car, but questions of comfort often arise. It
seems that north is the best direction, with east being the least favorable.
Nodes: The nodes simply allow you to make contacts, form alliances with
others. They are strongly influenced by close planetary aspects to them. change. Let's say Neptune and Saturn were in an easterly direction at
the old address, which meant that you had to travel on those lines
most of the time. Traveling on Saturn and Neptune lines is not a pleasant experience for most (but not all) people. In the same Local Space
chart, Jupiter and Venus are in the northerly direction. Since the home
is now in the southern part of town, you would probably travel more
extensively on the Jupiter and Venus lines, i.e. from south to north.
The Jupiter and Venus lines would then become more influential. The
Saturn/Neptune influence would change to a Jupiter/Venus one
because of your new location. In most cases this would indicate an
improvement in employment, income and social conditions. Even if
you went to the same bank, restaurants, and friends' homes, your
attitude would be different, because you would be traveling on new
planetary lines.
There are three other ways in which the planets on the horizon
have an influence.
Solstice and Equinox Azimuth Degrees
When the astronomy of ancient civilizations is examined, it is
seen that there are four recurring observations used by nearly every
culture that watched the sky. The astronomer/astrologer priests kept
a record of these important dates—the spring and fall equinoxes and
the summer and winter solstices. It didn't seem to matter how complex or simple their astro-mathematical model was, because these
dates always played a very significant role in the culturally based
cosmology. The Local Space Chart in the Home and Community / 55
In the Tropical/Seasonal Zodiac it is known that each of these
points coincides with 0 degrees of the cardinal signs (Aries, Cancer,
Libra, Capricorn). The seasons on Earth are measured by these four
important points. Because of the 23.5° tilt of Earth's axis, and the orbit
of the Earth around the Sun, the Sun's position with respect to the
equator (declination) has four critical points throughout the year. At
the times of the spring and fall equinoxes (Aries and Libra), the Sun is
at the equator. Its declination is moving northward at the spring
equinox and southward at the fall equinox. The Sun's position at the
equator makes the distance from the poles about equal, hence the
word equinox.
The Sun's equivalent position at these times coincides with
azimuth observations, which are almost the same for all latitudes
north and south. The Sun will rise very near due east on the mornings
of the spring and fall equinoxes. The relative uniformity of these
events indicates that the cardinal directions of east and west are crucial in astrological and geomantic practices.
The renewed heat of the Sun at the spring equinox indicates a
time of new beginnings, a time when each person begins to reach out
and communicate. New cleaning, planting and construction were the
most common outlets for this Arian fire-of-action. This fire is fed by
the Air element, which was also strong at this time. Air and the direction east and the Local Space Seventh House dominate in the springtime. Partnerships are renewed and new bonds are forged through
sharing.
When the Sun enters Libra at the fall equinox, the harvest is well
underway; not only a harvest in the fields but also a harvest of human
ideas. Nature is about to rest and there is a turning inward. Each
individual must face the transformation of autumn alone. The emotional
Water element and the Local Space First House are activated at this
time. (The difference in east and west is explained in Chapter 3.)
Solstice means "to stand still," and that is exactly what the Sun
appears to do at the solstices. Because the Sun's declination is either to
the extreme north or extreme south at these times, we do not have an
equivalent situation. Each latitude north and south will be different
(see Table 7).
In order to determine the azimuth of the Sun at these times it is
necessary to calculate the chart for the exact sunrise closest to 00
degrees of Capricorn or Cancer, i.e. the winter and summer solstices,
respectively. 56 / Planets in Locality
If you observe the summer solstice sunrise at latitude 25 N 00 and
someone else is observing it at 45 N 00 there would be a difference of
about 8.5 degrees of azimuth. These particular degrees of azimuth at
the solstice have a powerful influence on other planets that are within
three degrees of conjunction or opposition (see Table 7).
The Sun's stationary position was a sacred time for the ancients, a
time filled with power and mystery. The two solstices work differently, since they occur at different times of the year (they are, of course,
reversed in the Southern Hemisphere).
The summer solstice and the beginning of the sign Cancer are
looked upon as a time of growth and abundance. The fields are filled
with growing crops and game is plentiful. This abundance is also
signified by the fullness of emotional expression, warm feelings and
direct actions. This time corresponds to the long days of the solar fire,
and the direction south. This direction is the Local Space Tenth
House, the house of one's profession and position. It is a time to fulfill
one's destiny. Planets within three degrees of the summer solstice
azimuth will be more productive in terms of allowing things to move
toward their fullest potential. These planets will also act as guardians
of inner visions. They will play some part in your quest for selfrealization. The emotions evoked can either help or hinder affairs
suggested by this solstice point.
The winter solstice is a time of sacrifice and austerity. In this quiet
and calm time of less sunlight, you can organize your thoughts, and
find answers. There is more darkness than light (in the Northern
Hemisphere) for only three days out of the year, and those days are
December 22nd, 23rd and 24th. On the 25th, light conquers darkness
and the Sun (Son of) God is reborn. At this time, a silent birth also
takes place, and a new year begins. This is also the Local Space Fourth
House. You stay in your home so that you can better realize your
internal world. The earthy stability of Capricorn can overcome the
mysterious and oppressive forces of the north. Planets located within
three degrees of the winter solstice azimuth point will tend to be foundation builders, bringing powerful learning experiences of maturity
and stability. Correct timing is both a friend and foe at this solstice.
The following table will help you find the solstice degrees in your
Local Space chart. Use the latitude of your present location or any
other latitude you wish to check; use south latitude for the Southern
Hemisphere. The fall and spring equinox points are very close to due
east/west, so a table for them is unnecessary. Table 7
Summer Solstice:
25 N 00 — Azimuth is 20 degrees 42 min. NORTH of (above) East.
30 N 00 — Azimuth is 22 degrees 00 min.
35 N 00 — Azimuth is 22 degrees 21 min.
40 N 00 — Azimuth is 22 degrees 52 min.
45 N 00 — Azimuth is 25 degrees 00 min.
Winter Solstice:
25 N 00 — Azimuth is 25 degrees 38 min. SOUTH of (below) East.
30 N 00 — Azimuth is 26 degrees 50 min.
35 N 00 — Azimuth is 28 degrees 30 min.
40 N 00 — Azimuth is 30 degrees 24 min.
45 N 00 — Azimuth is 33 degrees 11 min. Magnetic Declination
It has been shown that the cardinal directions of east and west are
given added importance because of the Sun's position (sunrise) at the
spring and fall equinoxes, and an even greater importance at the
solstices.
What about the north-south axis? What contributes to its energy
and importance? One answer is found by studying the influence of
the magnetic pole, which is a deviation from true north.1 This deviation is called magnetic declination and it almost always differs from
true north/south. In the United States, it ranges from 23 degrees east
of north to 23 degrees west of north.2 (See Figures 11A-E.)
The north-south magnetic pull is one way in which the Ch'i flow
can be detected. Feng Shui geomancy has four major rings or plates
that concern themselves with Ch'i.* The Earth ring which has the correct cardinal directions is used to determine the general direction or
path of the Ch'i. The two Heaven Rings measure the worth of the Ch'i,
how vital/rich or torpid/poor it may be. The Man Ring shows how the
flow affects man during a twelve-fold cycle: from conception to
burial.
•—In the traditional Feng Shui geomantic circle there is a minimum 16 rings, but it can have as
many as 38 rings. Each ring has its specific purpose just like the cross-cultural information contained in the Local Space geomantic circle.
57 58 / Planets in Locality
The Heaven Rings are measured in accordance with magnetic
declination. Therefore any planet within three degrees of the magnetic
north-south line will take on a greater significance, because it will pick
up the magnetic charge.
Look at your Local Space chart and see if any of the planets are in
the Third, Fourth, Ninth or Tenth Houses (which could put them near
the degree of magnetic north of your locality), using a 3-degree orb.
The basic nature of the planet will describe the grade or worth of the
Ch'i flowing into your life. If this planet has been helpful in the past,
then so will the Ch'i. If it is a planet that tends to cause problems, then
the worth of the Ch'i is diminished. So you can have good or bad
Jupiter Ch'i, good or bad Saturn, Pluto or Venus Ch'i, etc.
Altitude of the Local Space Horizon Planets
Another important position in the Local Space chart is the planet
that is closest to the horizon. Secondary is the planet with the highest
altitude or elevation. Although all the planets are measured in azimuth
on the plane of the horizon, each one is at a different altitude in the
sky. (Remember the cardinal directions are on the assumed flat plane
of the horizon around you, and altitude is measured above and below
this flat plane.) Directly above is the zenith, directly below is the nadir;
the altitude is 0 to 90 degrees above or below the horizon and a +
(plus) or - (minus) is used to indicate it.
The planet that is the lowest or closest to the horizon is thought to
be most significant. Any planet + or - 8 degrees will have a very strong
effect on that locality. Often (but not always) the very same planet(s)
will conjunct the Vertex/west or Anti-Vertex/east. In equatorial regions
all planets are close to the horizon, so the effects are insignificant.
However, when you shift the planets to the Campanus/Prime Vertical
system they no longer remain bunched, but are dispersed along the
Great Circle which connects the zenith and nadir directly above and
below. (See Chapter 3 for more details on how to use the prime vertical in equatorial regions, i.e. between 30 degrees north and south
latitude.)
Planets with an altitude above or below sixty degrees are also
important, but they seem to be a distant second in importance to those
close to the horizon. (There is a similar correspondence in natal astrology, where a planet close to the Tenth and Fourth House cusps is
considered descriptive of your inner nature and objectives. However,
natal Tenth and Fourth Houses are not the same as the zenith and The Local Space Chart in the Home and Community / 59
nadir. The zenith is directly above and the nadir is directly below,
whereas the Tenth and Fourth cusps are due south and due north,
respectively.)
In any locality the extreme altitudes of a planet, i.e. 60 degrees
above or below, is significant. A planet above the horizon (+) helps
describe your goals and outward activities. The planet that is the
lowest (-) will be descriptive of your inner or unconscious process
and development.
Whatever its altitude, a planet will tend to be located toward one
of the cardinal directions. For example, if a planet has a low altitude
and is generally in an easterly direction, then the descriptions in
Chapters 3 and Júpiter can be used. If a planet happens to be in between two
cardinal directions, e. Vênus . southwest, then there will be a blend of the
influences of both south and west. Referring to Figures 10 and 13, and
Table 12, will also prove helpful.
In summary the most important positions in the Local Space
chart for any locality are:
2. The influence of planets closest to any of the four cardinal
directions is felt at 5 degrees of orb, but it is generally not a major
influence until it is less than 2 degrees of orb. Include conjunctions to
the standard Ascendant/Descendant. (This is covered in Chapters 3
and Júpiter .)
2. The influence of planets with the lowest altitude (closest to the
horizon) begins at 7 degrees and becomes increasingly stronger as
the orb decreases.
3. Planets in close conjunction or opposition in the Local Space
chart, under 3 degrees of orb, especially those that closely aspect the
Local Space positions at the birthplace. Júpiter . The planetary line you travel on most frequently in your community. Usually less than 1 mile orb or two degrees of orb.
5. Other close aspects (less than 2 degrees in the Local Space
chart).
6. Planets near the solstice (3 degrees orb).
7. Planets near magnetic north or south (3 degrees orb).
8. The planets that have the extreme altitudes, e. Vênus . 60 degrees
above or below the horizon. The planet that is highest followed by the 60 / Planets in Locality
planet that is the lowest will have a mild influence. Experiment with
Figures 10 and 13, and Table 8. Mercúrio . Don't forget to compare your planetary positions with the
geodetic Ascendant and Midheaven (this is explained in Chapter
7). Notes
1. Newitt, Larry, "The Magnetic Pole on the Move Again." The Denver Post, Denver, CO, December, 1984.
2. "Values of Magnetic Declination," prepared by the National
Geophysical Data Center, Boulder, CO, December 12,1982. 61 CHAPTER 3 RELOCATION AND
LONG DISTANCE TRAVEL r * hen people travel across the planet or settle down in a
new locality, they immediately begin to take notice of different physical and psychological changes. For some individuals, definite unconscious and spiritual changes occur as well.
When people talk about a new environment, they tend to explain
the new events in terms of their own emotional responses. The major
reasons for relocation, such as marriage, divorce, college and military
service, are often de-emphasized because relocated individuals are
busy dealing with the emotional impact of the new environment. Descriptions of the new location in general terms are common. Statements like "It feels good to me," "The place has good vibes," "I like the
climate" or "The people seem friendly" are often used. These general,
non-descriptive statements are attempts to explain all the new stimuli
This is not to say that these are incorrect expressions. But we tend
to rely too often on our first impressions and gut reactions without
really knowing for certain how the new place will affect the totality of
who we are. Sometimes these first reactions are correct, but there
comes a point when initial expectations must give way to a more complete understanding of the situation.
63 64 / Planets in Locality
It is true that no matter how far you travel from the birthplace you
still carry an original imprint of that location (with the aspects between planets remaining the same). The important point is that you
can modify your birth chart to some extent by changing where you
live! Therefore the actual planetary influences at work, when properly understood, can give you a unique opportunity to develop plans
and maximize your potential more directly, often in a short period
of time.
When you change where you live, the physical surroundings will
change. More importantly, however, your subjective interpretations
also change. You begin to perceive the new place in accordance with
the new planetary emphasis for that location. The longer you stay in a
particular location, the more dominant this planetary influence will
become.
If you never move from your birth location, it is necessary to
make the best of the situation through a greater understanding of the
Local Space planetary lines. In many Third World countries and countries where relocation is restricted, people don't have the advantage of
changing the angles of the chart.
In the final analysis, any location is what you make of it. By overcoming difficult problems and drawing out the potential around you,
it is possible to maximize your growth and happiness. We all know of
some people who are miserable despite their beautiful and prosperous surroundings, while other individuals can be productive and
happy in some of the most depressing and chaotic locations.
Each individual's Local Space lines start at the center of the home,
then pass through the home and radiate out into the community. They
don't stop there, but keep right on going across the surface of the
Earth. (On a physical level they start in the human body at the tip of
the sternum. More on this in Chapter 5.)
Because these lines are traveling on the round surface of the
Earth, they form a curving wave motion. A planetary line when projected due west will begin to bend southward until it has covered
about six thousand miles. Then it will begin to swing northward again.
The planetary lines only appear to travel in straight lines in your home
or community. In fact, they are slowlycurving northward or southward.
This bending effect becomes noticeable after about 50 miles. Because
of this phenomenon, plotting with a graphic display program was
developed (see Figures 14A, B and C). At the end of this book, there
are instructions on how to use these programs as well as information 125 120 115 110 105 100 95i , i. > ^ i ^ i.50i, I ■ I > I l,J * t I I < I I I i 1 ..I I I ■ I i I
i' rsi
r
' Urano fcmiJ ifl ... > HK > TX -\ LA /
.-411
1FL USA
LOCAL SPACE
IC'U
Fig. 14 A
Local Space Houses are plotted from a central location. Fig. 14B
Planetary lines and Local Space houses radiate outward
from any given location. 126 1 1 .i. i.115
. i . i.i.
>. i.i . ; .i lid
■ i . i. i . i. i 105
. i . i . i. i. i.lOO
i. i. i. i . i .?5i . i . i. i .i.90i. i.
1
Vi,
ri"\ : Wfl
\ v V /■
V \ v
HJ \ M
r m 1 'i
■ Urano -.. A-"'
' '■{
\
! '•; « \V
: I
■ -JI
" Urano K-,V "E
/
„'
NV
. 7 Aih V
. MH's
x .vii-. Netuno K.ffl Plutão 1I 40 i, ■80i ■ i ■ i ■ i ■ 11175■ ii ■ i. i.79i. i. (10
. 0I(
He, •.
.1.
-1 IL ' HI■'■•t1 :
) / m w. A
M> Áries ; ki t /
bf-p^CPW
W Pi
V
TH. - '" X HC ■m / /■
T:: yT TTTs
\ ¥ A''
Gfl V /
i .As 'flu
\Lft./
JUft.
f
PL\
) s r
( I .26 I USA
'( \
" J LOCAL SPACE ;
'■ !
1
1 T* i1 ; * i ■ i"r' i ' i * 'i' i ■ \i ^r,r9/8,.
rr> 'i i »» i 1 i i 1 i M i i i '■ i»i' Mercúrio ..i ■ i ■ i1 V
i' i "
110
105
100
115
Fig. 14C
Planetary lines intersect when projected from two locations. 68 / Planets in Locality
on where to order a copy of your Local Space chart and/or graphic
map, including the Astro*Carto*Graphy® map.
In my initial survey of friends and clients, one of the questions I
asked was about important relocations in their lives. In almost 100%
of the cases, the movement from one location to another followed the
direction of a certain planetary line(s), i.e., the direction of travel and
certain planetary line(s) matched. Keep in mind that the planetary
line goes in two directions—the azimuth of where it originates and
towards the opposite azimuth or direction.
It was discovered that the line(s) traveled on seemed to describe
an overriding need present at the time of travel and/or relocation. If, for
example, your major reason for moving is to attend college, then it is
likely that the best line for you to travel would be that of Mercury or
Jupiter. This is true unless you are actually attending college in order
to find a mate or play football—then romantic Venus and active Mars,
respectively, would be more descriptive. What if your life is one in
which your energies have been scattered due to excesses and overindulgence? Your need would then be to gain greater control over your
life, and to become more responsible and organized. Traveling on
your Saturn line to a new and temporary or long-term location would
be a possible way to achieve this.
If you can isolate your true life needs before relocating, then by
comparing them with the appropriate planetary lines, it may be possible to know in advance in what direction you are going! On the other
hand, if you are already in a new location, the knowledge of what
planetary line you traveled on can prove very helpful in clarifying
what situations caused the move, along with added objectivity in
assessing present goals.
Keep in mind that when you travel on a planetary line, it means
that city A is connected to city B by this line. No matter how you get
from city A to city B you are still in effect traveling on that particular
line, because the cities are both connected by this direction in azimuth
(see Figures 14A, B and C).
What if you feel that your needs are expansion, growth, success,
etc., and you wish to travel on your Jupiter line, but don't know
where? If your present location is Boston and the Jupiter line is on the
east/west axis, then you would know that you must travel east or west.
Suppose you decided to travel west. Looking at the Local Space
graphic display, you observe this line going through Indianapolis, St.
Louis, Santa Fe and on to Los Angeles. How would you know your Relocation and Long Distance Travel / 69
destination? The standard method would be to check a series of
relocation charts for various points west. (Although the standard
relocational methods are valid, the number of choices can confuse
matters.) Thanks to the Astro*Carto*Graphy® and Local Space maps
you will be able to see what aspects there are to your angles, i.e. the
I.C., M.C., rise/set, Ascendant/Descendant, or Vertex. Neither method
is 100% accurate, due to birth time errors. When both are used together
you can improve your chances of pinpointing a beneficial geographical location. (For more details on these and other methods, see Chapter 6.)
The descriptions in Table 8 can be helpful in clarifying needs and
to show what you can expect generally when traveling to relocate or
on vacation on various planetary lines. (Traveling on these lines in the
home and community was covered in Chapter 2.) Keep in mind that
the prominent planets in the Local Space chart for a particular locality,
i.e. planets conjuncting the Imum Coeli, Medium Coeli, Vertex, Ascendent, etc., basically determine the influences for any location.
Choose the planetary line that is closest to your destination. If it is
more than 200 miles (and/or more than 8 degrees of azimuth) from
this selected location, it should not be used. Table 8
Travel and Relocation on Planetary Lines
MOON; Moving along this line will certainly involve your basic emotional
drives in a variety of ways. Home, land, parental and domestic security
needs generally seem to be pronounced. The Moon very often takes on the
qualities of the sign and aspects it has in the birth chart. Close aspects from
planets in the Local Space chart are very important. Therefore with the
Moon you will most likely feel a mixed influence. Awareness of your
intuitive feelings and receiving guidance from the natural environment
can occur on this line. Past emotional conditioning is the key to understanding
how this line will manifest. Your general need is to feel more emotionally
secure so you can grow on different levels.
SUN; This line has to do with your basic selfhood and sense of individualism.
A contained, positive and consistent way of life can be realized by relocating on this line. The Sun line seems to add importance to any other line it is
connected with, personalizing the other planet. Individualism is the key to
understanding this line. Your need is to get in touch with your essential
self-identity; then youll be able to know what is important and what isn't
MERCURY: Mercury is similar to the Moon, taking on the qualities of the sign it is
in andits close aspects in the birthand Local Space charts. The major difference
is that the other planets take on a mental quality rather than an emotional
coloring, which happens with the Moon. The Mercury line always involves
the intellect in some way; it also can pertain to professional skills. Educational and business travel may be other reasons for following this pathway.
Learning is the key to understanding this line. Thinking, learning and
teaching needs are developed through the sharing of ideas; thus, on this
line you find deeper meaning in life, which can lead to self-knowledge.
VENUS; Naturally with the planet Venus, affairs of the heart will somehow be
involved. You may want to move to improve your social situation, to
search for a lasting partnership, to bring more beauty into your life or to
express a talent Keeping your desires in balance is the key to understanding
this line. The need may be to reduce stressful conditions so that you can
realize inner harmony.
MARS: Assertiveness, boldness and courage are needed to move forward
and begin some purposeful activity. In some cases impulsiveness and
acting prematurely can place you in dangerous situations. An energetic
push is the key to understanding this line. Only through definite action are
you able to attain your goals. 70 Relocation and Long Distance Travel I 71
PJPITER: Following the direction of this line in most cases improves your situation regardless of what your need and/or problem may be. Movement along
this line usually means that health, wealth and social improvement is in the
offing. Expansion, not excessiveness, is the key to this line. The need is to
step into the arena of success so that a lasting happiness will take place.
SATURN: When more self-control, organization and responsibility are needed
in your life, Saturn will point the way. Relocating along this line means that
you may experience some hardship or delay. At the same time, sober and
realistic experiences will bring solid development and maturity. Concentration is the key to understanding this line. You need to make a serious
commitment to self-development.
URANUS: Suddenly breaking away to start a new adventure is common with
this line. Certain rigid and restricting circumstances periodically need to
be altered, and if you are traveling along your Uranus line, something will
always get changed. While change can certainly be unsettling, at the same
time you may look forward to greater independence. Freedom is the key to
understanding this line. Your need is to start something new, so that you
may perceive the world in a new way.
NEPTUNE: You need to be reminded that there is more to life than what
meets the eye. Why else would you search out the mystical and mysterious
unless somehow, in some strange way, you could be made aware of
different realities? Eventhoughthis line can be confusing and deceptive at
first, it often allows for an inner awakening to take place. Refinement is the
key to understanding this line. Your need is to attune to your inner life
where true inspiration and unselfishness dwell.
PLUTO: Power, force and pressure... too much of it or too little in your present situation can cause you to follow your Pluto line to a new location.
Definite objectives drive you forward. Depth perception is the key to
understanding this line. Escaping from pressure and/or being pushed to
the limit can cause transformation.
TRANSPLUTO: This planetary line indicates that there are very set and
determined behaviors and motivations. This is a down-to-earth movement and one where emotional and/or financial factors play an important
role. Steadfast persistence is the key to understanding this line. Your need
is for pragmatic stabilization.
THE NODES: This line indicates that there is some connection, or association
between locations. The connection can be a telephone "WATS" line, a branch
office, a relative or even the direction your dream (astral) body can travel at
night. The Node, even more than the Moon and Mercury, takes on the
qualities of any planet that is close to it in the Local Space and birth charts. 72 / Planets in Locality
When two planets are within 5 degrees of one another, i.e., in
conjunction or opposition, the overriding need will be a blend of both
planets. Certain qualities of each planet will remain, but new meanings
will also develop. The following descriptions should prove helpful.
This table can also be used for travel in the community, and for other
close aspects between planets. (This table borrows heavily from R.
Ebertin's Combination of Stellar Influences).
Table Mercúrio Two-Planet Combinations
Sun/Moon: Very personal and important undertakings.
Sun/Mercury: Personal thinking; involved, creative ideas.
Sun/Venus: Personal and physical love/attractions.
Sun/Mars: Personal effort and leadership.
Sun/Jupiter: Personal creative advancement and success.
Sun/Saturn: Personal hindrance and/or concentration.
Sun/Uranus: Personal progressive reforms and/or rebellion.
Sun/Neptune: Personal deceptions, also imagination/mysticism.
Sun/Pluto: Personal objectives, force, egotism.
Sun/Nodes: Important male or authority contacts.
Moon/Mercury: Thoughts with feeling, emotional thinking.
Moon/Venus: Affection, tenderness, joy.
Moon/Mars: Frank, forceful, emotional actions and beginnings.
Moon/Jupiter: Happiness and generosity.
Moon/Saturn: Duty, loneliness and control of the emotions.
Moon/Uranus: Exciting and unusual emotions.
Moon/Neptune: Introspective, subtle tendencies. Gullible.
Moon/Pluto: Deep feeling and emotional extremes.
Moon/Nodes: Important spiritual (female) contacts.
Mercury/Venus: Balanced, funny, harmonious thinking.
Mercury/Mars: Very active (rash) thinking.
Mercury/Jupiter: Positive ideas and learning.
Mercury/Saturn: Problem solving, serious thinking.
Mercury/Uranus: Nervous, quick (technical?) thinking.
Mercury/Neptune: Intuitive and/or unclear thinking.
Mercury/Pluto: Mental challenges, overbearing thinking.
Mercury/Nodes: Mental and/or younger contacts.
Venus/Mars: Creativity, passion.
Venus/Jupiter: Sociable, enjoyable, wealthy qualities, overindulgence.
Venus/Saturn: Reserved, setting limits, dutiful.
Venus/Uranus: Social upsets, sudden attractions and desires.
Venus/Neptune: Romance, dreams and illusions.
Venus/Pluto: Strong sexual and artistic expressions.
Venus/Nodes: Pleasant, comfortable contacts. Relocation and Long Distance Travel / 73
Mars/Jupiter: Ambitious, enterprising, courageous, impulsive.
Mars/Saturn: Determination to overcome obstacles, anger.
Mars/Uranus: Stressful, hurried efforts.
Mars/Neptune: Inspired actions, exploitation, irritability.
Mars/Pluto: Confidence, force and compulsion.
Mars/Nodes: Energetic or physical contacts.
]upiter/Saturn Economic considerations, slow/stable progress.
]upiter/Uranus: Optimism, fortunate ideas.
]upiter/Neptune: Speculation, imagination, idealism.
]upiter/Pluto: Organization, leadership.
]upiter/Nodes: Successful efforts.
Saturn/Uranus: Separation, tensions, toughness.
Saturn/Neptune: Sacrifices, limitations, discipline.
Saturn/Pluto: Challenging work and research, cruelty.
Saturn/Nodes: Depressive contacts, separation from others.
Uranus/Neptune: Unusual inclinations, very different ideas.
Uranus/Pluto: Transformation and a totally new start.
Uranus/Nodes: Sudden contacts, a new network of friends.
Neptune/Pluto: The unknown, presentiments.
Neptune/Nodes: Strange contacts.
Pluto/Nodes: Fateful and powerful contacts. There is no fast and simple way of understanding all the possible
combinations of planetary lines. The best advice is to use the basic
attributes of the planets outlined in Table 8, regardless of the number
of planets that are bunched together. Then use Table Mercúrio to further understand the planetary combinations. 74 / Planets in Locality
Planets on the Local Space Angles
The Local Space chart for your present locality or any locality you
may visit (or speculate about visiting) is liable to have one or more
planets close to the major directions (i.e., north/Imum Coeli, south/
Medium Coeli, west/Vertex or east/Anti-Vertex), either in azimuth or
altitude or both. Any planet within three degrees of a cardinal direction will have the predominating influence in that particular locality.
Two of these cardinal directions are the equivalent of the standard birth/natal angles. In the Northern Hemisphere, due south is the
same as the Medium Coeli/Tenth House cusp, and due north is the
same as the Imum Coeli/Fourth House cusp. The Ascendant is in an
easterly direction but not usually due east, as is the Anti-Vertex.
Likewise, the Descendant is usually in a westerly direction, but rarely
due west as is the Vertex.
Even though it is rare that the Ascendant and Anti-Vertex are in
the same place, a planet can set off both. Any planetary body when
conjunct or opposite the Ascendant also triggers and/or includes the
Vertex. Likewise, when the Vertex or Anti-Vertex is aspected (conjunction and opposition only), it may trigger and/or include the
Ascendant/Descendant. The horizon and ecliptic are intimately related to each other, so they always work inclusively rather than
exclusively (see Chapter 6).
When the Ascendant/Descendant is receiving the aspect, the
effects are likely to be more subjective and psychological; dealing
with your attitude, outlook and personality inclinations. When the
Vertex/Anti-Vertex is aspected, the influence may be more objective
and event-oriented. The Vertex is a highly localized point; in a sense it
is right in front of you, ripe and ready to manifest. (For a more concise
geomantic/symbolic meaning, see Chapter 5.) Both angles must be
used to get a complete picture. Therefore the Astro*Carto*Graphy®
method of Jim Lewis and the Local Space methods work together (see
Chapters Júpiter and 6).
When you are looking at your Local Space chart, the houses
appear in reverse order from the standard horoscope (refer to Figure
2). The four sectors or houses that are most important in the Local
Space chart are the Fourth/north, First/west, Tenth/south and Seventh/east. The planets occupying different houses will have various
meanings similar to the standard interpretations of planets in Houses—
similar because at this point there just isn't enough information on Relocation and Long Distance Travel / 75
how the planets in Local Space Houses may differ from the standard.
See the end of this chapter and Table 11.
The accepted practice of "the closer the orb, the stronger the
influence" applies. If you have Jupiter 1 degree from the north and
Saturn Júpiter degrees from the east, then Jupiter would be the predominating influence. This is not to say that you would not feel the influence of
Saturn, but that it would not be as significant as that of Jupiter.
The closer your present location is to the equator, the more the
planets will tend to cluster either east or west. Two and even three and
four planets can be very close together, producing some complex
effects. Therefore it is suggested that the Prime Vertical/Campanis
chart should be used for equatorial latitudes. Aspects and interpretations are the same, but keep in mind that you are dealing with a
circle that goes east to west, above and below you, connecting the
zenith and nadir. The Fourth/zenith, First/west, Tenth/nadir and
Seventh/east are the positions of the angles. 76 / Planets in Locality
The following descriptions are to be used for planets conjunct
the Ascendant or Anti-Vertex, Descendant or Vertex, Imum Coeli/
north or zenith and Medium Coeli/south or nadir. Specific descriptions relating to planets on the Local Space geomantic compass are in
Chapter Júpiter , and Figures 8 and Mercúrio .1 strongly suggest the reader use both
when reading about a particular planetary line.
Table 10
Interpretations of Planets on the Angles
SUN d Ascendant/Anti-Vertex
Because the Sun rises in the east, you realize that there is a special
strength in this location. You can easily take on an attitude of confidence and
determination. Your will is strong and therefore you are able to deal authoritatively with life's problems. Your health can improve and this vitality effects
your way of meeting life. Some vanity and arrogance may creep in, but you
are able to deal with it in a positive way. If there's a battle to be fought, you
have a good chance of winning.
SUN d Medium Coeli/Tenth House
This placement suggests that your leadership and influence can crown
you "king of the mountain." You will find it easy to achieve your ambitions.
Certain over-estimation of self can occur, but your creativity and will can certainly make things happen in this locality.
SUN d Descendant/Vertex
The ability to share your sense of individuality with others can cause
positive social interaction. A very candid type of cooperation can develop.
The strength of stable relationships will go a long way in overcoming all
types of people problems.
SUN d Imum Coeli/Fourth House
Here the healing light of the Sun enters your home and can make your
personal life glow. Self-contained enthusiasm can guide you toward an
obj ective understanding of your basic needs. Family life becomes playful and
a creative source of joy.
MOON d Ascendant/Anti-Vertex
In this area your natural instincts take over, allowing you to encounter
life in a sensitive and receptive manner. On the surface your moods and psychic perceptions change quickly. This may seem inconsistent, but in fact it is
this changeable quality that helps you to remain flexible. When you feel confronted by conflicting forces, you will be able to use your sensitivity to adapt
to or avoid situations before they happen. Adopt a "wait and see" attitude.
MOON d Medium Coeli/Tenth House
Here spiritual ties and deep aspirations guide you toward your goals. A
dedication to public life can develop, yet outer achievements are seen as
symbols of internal growth. Your reputation and career can easily fluctuate. Relocation and Long Distance Travel / 77
indicating that you should look within as a way of dealing with external
uncertainties. Empathy and supportiveness are constant themes.
MOON d Descendant/Vertex
Strong emotion and sympathy through involvement with others is common in this locality. Yet being pulled into others' lives can cause problems.
They may seek you out for protection and emotional support, yet in time, you
may find that you are the one who needs protection from them. In spite of all
this, you feel drawn toward others; thus relationships become an abundance
of giving and receiving.
MOON d Imum Coeli/Fourth House
Home and family life are paramount in this place, and your roots tend to
run deep. You may find yourself becoming very protective, maternal, even
clannish. You may find it easy to hide in your own private little shell because
your home is a source of such rich feeling and productive activity. If you get
too wrapped up in domestic matters, however, it may lead to child-like
indulgences, worry and insecurity. Responsiveness to natural forces can lead
you to an understanding of personal life cycles.
MERCURY d Ascendant/Anti-Vertex
Life may become a maze of "data in, data out." Knowledge is catalogued
and pieces of the puzzle are found. Internal reasoning may improve your
learning ability. Sometimes you find yourself tangled up in restless and
worrisome dilemmas. This locality offers you the resources to learn and
express your professional skills.
MERCURY d Medium Coeli/Tenth House
Here is where your particular brand of knowledge goes to work for you.
Communication of your skills and an understanding of your mental framework entitles you to a new type of professionalism. What you write and say
may cause others to think along different lines. All kinds of knowledge flow
toward you, so you can't help being more versatile. The only problem encountered here seems to be acquiring a "head trip" (being overly intellectual), which could make you unresponsive to the emotional and subtle
feeling parts of your life.
MERCURY d Descendant/Vertex
A lively exchange of ideas occurs in this spot. Verbal contacts, agreements
and negotiations seem to be an ongoing affair. Learning reaches its peak in
this place, because your understanding of what others can offer is so clearly
defined. You are in a learning situation no matter what the general circumstances dictate. Generous amounts of talking and communicating are
accepted as part of the spirit of inquiry. In some cases you may be surrounded by young and/or intellectual people.
MERCURY d Imum Coeli/Fourth House
In this locality a dialogue opens up between the past and the present, the
inner self and the intellect. You question your natural surroundings and in 78 / Planets in Locality
turn nature instructs you. Ideas become highly personal, causing your immediate family to serve as your direct source of information. Indecisiveness
can plague you because you see things from a rather introverted viewpoint.
VENUS cf Ascendant/Anti-Vertex
This is a place where you find the surroundings and/or the people
beautiful. This locale has a relaxed and calming effect, so naturally you are
more affectionate and cooperative. Your personal charm is strong, and consequently this attracts others who enjoy being around you. Some people can
become "pleasure-bent" in this area because attractions abound. Keeping a
balanced and harmonious outlook seems to be the proper thing to do, and by
so doing you may avoid many hardships.
VENUS cf Medium Coeli/Tenth House
This is a place where the expression of real talent can find a profitable
outlet. One reason for this is that you enjoy what you are doing. Your social
network is filled with interesting people and places. You can be known for
your style and grace. A fair share of popularity and wealth can come your
way and along with it a certain frivolousness, which may result in too much
high living. Following the dictates of your inner heart will avert major
difficulties.
VENUS cf Descendant/Vertex
The need for a mate and/or partner is very pronounced in this locale. If
you are not married but want to be (or even if you don't want to be), this is the
place to live. The spirit of compromise and cooperation is such that any previous differences with partners will decrease. There seems to be a constant
interaction between you and others. You expect more from all types of
partnerships, so it is necessary for you to give more and put more into
them.
VENUS cf Imum Coeli/Fourth House
In this place the family intermingles with attractive, talented and congenial people, so advantageous meetings take place fairly often. It suggests a
down-to-earth lifestyle, where you enjoy the simple things of life. Affections
are openly displayed, because you feel that friends and family are a priceless
commodity. Depending on your basic make-up, both relaxation and practicality can flourish.
MARS cf Ascendant/Anti-Vertex
There is nothing indirect about your actions in this place. People may
think that you are overly bold and this may be true, but you do get things
done. Your physical strength and stamina are very pronounced; you have a
self-reliant and assertive attitude. Therefore, this is where you meet life
head-on. Your actions may get out of control to the point of causing destruction of the very things which you have fought for. Even though this place is
filled with adventure, the stress and strain built around a need to fight and
compete may at some point force you to leave. Relocation and Long Distance Travel / 79
MARS a Medium Coeli/Tenth House
The extra effort you expend here can keep you advancing toward your
goals. You may be known for your energy, enthusiasm and confidence.
Although fighting for a position is easy here, you also have to learn when to
be patient and wait for your efforts to pay off. People can only be pushed to
their particular limits and not beyond. Knowing these limits in others as well
as in yourself can prevent defiance and aggravation.
MARS 6 Descendant/Vertex
This is a combative place with a fair share of potentially dangerous
situations. (It's what you would expect to find in a chart of someone in a war
zone). It can certainly bring out the worst in people you have to deal with
everyday. You need to develop forthright and bold tactics when dealing with
others. This seems to work because this is what they understand... force.
After a certain period of time your argumentative confrontations with others
will begin to toughen you, unless you take care, and you could become
overly coarse. Then you find it necessary to relocate.
MARS 6 Imum Coeli/Fourth House
In this locale you tend to be actively involved with family matters and
domestic concerns can become a source of anger and frustration. This may
manifest in family feuds or accidents inthe home. The trick is to find an outlet
to direct your aggressive energy. Practical and physical projects can serve as
healthy outlets. You may feel a strong drive to protect and improve your personal life, but hasty actions can prevent any lasting good from developing.
There may be cases where Mars will work for and not against you, but in most
cases this line does not allow for a happy family life.
JUPITER d Ascendant/Anti-Vertex
This location promotes the very best of what you have to offer in life, and
the returns are abundant. Your capabilities are enhanced because of a healthy
optimism and an attitude of expansiveness. If you can truly radiate wealth
and success, then wealth and success must flow into your life. This is where it
becomes possible to realize this. Personal growth through a broader understanding of the universe makes life under this influence truly satisfying,
humorous and enlightening.
JUPITER d Medium Coeli/Tenth House
Generally speaking this place offers the best of the best. You find objective goals will manifest easily. Recognition breeds achievement; conversely
achievements add to your recognition. With this process going on, your
income and community standing can continually reach new heights.
JUPITER d Descendant/Vertex
Here you feel that you are in the right place at the right time; call it luck,
fate, or good karma—what really matters is that this location stimulates success. Since everyone is dependent on everyone else, here is where that right
person can walk right into your life offering needed advice, and/or money. 80 / Planets in Locality
Good business partnerships and happy marriages can unfold. It is not so
much how this happens as the fact that it does, and your life is greatly
improved.
JUPITER d Imum Coeli/Fourth House
This is a wonderful place to raise a family, build a home, explore nature
and honestly live the good life. When there is peace in the home and life's
basic needs are met, internal growth naturally takes place. Mother nature is
kind to you here, and if you pay attention, you may become aware of many
sources of hidden wealth.
SATURN d Ascendant/Anti-Vertex
You have the potential to learn a great deal in this area; in some ways it
may be seen as attending the school of hard knocks. We all learn to adjust to
difficult circumstances, yet this location demands a lot, and may cause you to
be more personally responsible and committed. You may perceive this
Saturn influence as the opposite of a sociable, warm and friendly place, but it
is where you realistically have to deal with the practical side of life. It can
function as ground on which you pay your dues and then move on to put
what you have learned into action. Avoid blocking your own efforts, because
time is on your side in the long run. The only way to deal with what seems to
be delay and denial is to fulfill your obligations through patience and
perseverance.
SATURN d Medium Coeli/Tenth House
This is where you feel the full weight of authority bearing down on you.
It may be represented by the responsibilities of your own position or suppression from higher-ups. Your ability to endure functions well here, and
you certainly can put in long hours. These factors will definitely solidify a
maturation process. The drawback is that you have to act within narrow
bounds of conventionality. Although you may attract some notoriety, fame
or position, you still have to deal within a confining structure.
SATURN d Descendant/Vertex
There is real irony in this area. You have to depend on others, but when
you do, they seem to limit you in some way. Dependable partnerships can
develop, yet most dealings with others have to be handled with the utmost
diplomacy to avoid repercussions. Dealing with dull, thick-headed people
can get old very quickly. If you give in to your inhibitions, it may aggravate
the situation. There has to be a certain amount of acceptance on your part,
when control is not in your hands. You learn humility and simplicity as a
strategy for cautious involvement.
SATURN d Imum Coeli/Fourth House
This can be an incredibly stable, yet lonely place. Harshness seems to
infringe upon your home life, feeding a variety of fears. Fear is a tremendous
motivator, but it isn't something that you want to deal with continually. A
dutiful adherence to family matters can cause a certain degree of enslave- Relocation and Long Distance Travel / 81
ment toward those that you love. Living in an environment filled with
limitations may foster a bad attitude—a state of mind which can easily submit
to pessimism and emotional melancholy. You will find that hard work and
methodical planning can be a passport out of this place, or a way to endure.
The Transaturnian Influence
The transaturnian planets have a special complexity all their
own. For most people they work almost entirely on an unconscious
level. Because of this fact there are powerful consequences for us all,
unless we somehow grasp that Uranus, Neptune and Pluto are really
attempting to awaken our inner potentials. When we try and repress,
divert or otherwise remain ignorant of their intentions, they seem to
be the enemy, when in fact they are only different types of teachers.
Life can never be normal under their influence, for normality means
stagnation and non-growth. These planets, more than any of the
others, reveal the degree of spiritual growth that you have attained.
They are truly mirrors of your self-conscious awareness.
The Influence of Uranus
Under the Uranus influence, people with pronounced technical
abilities, independent people and those who travel frequently don't
seem to experience as many problems. If you are really a free thinker
and progressive in any number of ways, then Uranus has less to disrupt and change. Society seems to be becoming more Uranian all the
time and this process accelerates many of the upsetting and erratic
qualities of Uranus, while at the same time causing you to perceive life
in new ways.
Uranus in many respects is a mental planet, i.e. it deals with
thoughts and ideas. Mental discipline therefore is vital in channeling
the new and unexpected thoughts and ideas. All freedom exists
within limitations!
URANUS d Ascendant/Anti-Vertex
This locality may bring out a wild and rebellious part of your personality. You can feel very restless because you are stimulated in a variety of
ways. Your personal magnetism is accented here and original ideas are quite
common. Your individual freedom becomes a big issue, so it may be necessary
to adopt some unconventional tactics to preserve it. There is nothing boring
about this place, however too much excitement can periodically scatter your
energy, leading to unstable and undependable behavior. 82 / Planets in Locality
URANUS & Medium Coeli/Tenth House
Instability can be experienced here due to the fact that your goals may
change so rapidly. If you run your own business or function in a position with
a considerable amount of autonomy, the inventive and entreprenurial side
will have its needed outlet. The problem with most jobs is that they do not
allow you to express individualism in a resourceful way. Many people
become rebellious and indifferent in this area because of the frustrating
situations they encounter with various structured livelihoods. At some point
you need to make the right chances by yourself, and for yourself. Your wealth
of creative ideas needs to be channeled and this could be the place to do it,
even though the prospect of going it alone and the thought of financial
independence is unnerving and unsettling.
URANUS & Descendant/Vertex
This locality offers you an assortment of novel and unpredictable encounters with people. From the altruistic to the perverse, the associations
you form are anything but conventional or common. People pop in and out
of your life, causing surprising insights, as well as sudden tensions. You may
try to be uncommitted to others, yet at the same time you seek the excitement
they bring into your life.
URANUS & Imum Coeli/Fourth House
This location can give you the opportunity to approach family matters in
a progressive way. Peculiar and strange reactions may crop up from time to
time, making you somewhat on edge about your home and family. Using
new avenues of approach to deal with the humdrum routine of family life is a
possibility. You may experience a strange aloofness which causes tension.
Odd situations never seem to totally calm down and this irregularity around
your home tends to promote discontent. Highly technical, unmarried or
travel-oriented people may find this place less disturbing.
The Influence of Neptune
How realistic is your belief system? How clearly have you identified bad habits? How well do you understand your dream symbolism? These are three of the most important questions concerning
Neptune. Over-impressionability and enticing desires can run rampant, promising satisfaction but not always delivering. Not only does
your imagination work overtime, but your susceptibility to so many
influences creates the feeling of a need to escape. Some forms of
escapism can lead to addiction or unhealthy behavior. You may be
treating internal problems with external answers. Only by directly
confronting your complexes on the level where they exist (the unconscious) will you be able to sort out your internal puzzle. Through the
process of meditation and exploratory therapy, you may be able to
unravel the mystery of your personal symbolism. Relocation and Long Distance Travel / 83
However, if unrealistic expectations, misguided beliefs and temporal intoxicants sway you, self-deception will have the upper hand.
Therefore, at some point you have to take the sword of discrimination
and cut through your illusions, stop the dream machine and reject
falsehood. Long-term meditators, and people involved with the arts
or any other creative expression, will have less of a problem with Neptune. In the final analysis, self-discipline and/or dynamic creativity
can keep Neptune in balance.
NEPTUNE d Ascendant/Anti-Vertex
Susceptibility to a variety of influences can be confusing. Your imagination works overtime in a place like this, projecting outward subconscious
ideas about what reality should be like. Unless you have a well-developed
inner awareness, you can expect to be surrounded by deceptive circumstances. Appreciation of abstract concepts and dynamic creativity help keep
Neptune in healthy perspective. You may be attracted to metaphysical
teachings, but there is no guarantee that they will be authentic. If you can
work through the indulgent and unrealistic side of Neptune, you have a
greater chance of establishing an intuitive and mystical approach to life.
NEPTUNE d Medium Coeli/Tenth House
This is definitely a difficult place to sort out dreams from reality. It is
more likely that your dreams will be your only reality. There are usually disappointing episodes concerning your career. Often it is a case of not seeing
eye to eye with the company and/or with cultural values. On the other hand,
once your belief system is ignited, devotion to goals (be they true or false)
will lead you onward. Different crusades, inspired ideals, and strange career
motivations continually interweave here.
NEPTUNE d Descendant/Vertex
Things are not on the up and up with partnerships, and for good reason:
you simply do not see others as they are; possibly because you as well as they
keep projecting expectations and assumptions that are in all likelihood false.
This produces a lack of trust, and disillusionment. You must be very prudent
in business and personal relationships, because an overdependence on
others, or conversely letting them depend on you, may only make things more
false and confusing. In some cases this area allows you to feel the problems and
suffering of others, and compassionate actions can result from this sensitivity.
NEPTUNE d Imum Coeli/Fourth House
There can be something physically and/or psychically toxic about this
place. The problem is that the danger is not usually detected early on. These
problems can subtly undermine your sense of security. Delving into your
past and the mysteries of nature can be one of your best therapies in this
place. Uncontrolled sensitivities and helpless, hopeless attitudes will only
feed a general depressiveness. Leading an ethical and contemplative lifestyle
can be very helpful and healing. 84 / Planets in Locality
The Influence of Pluto
Pluto is the prime mover of the unconscious, and nothing passes
its way without somehow being redefined, recycled and renewed. It
also is the key generational planet, and one of its major functions is to
connect the personal unconscious to the collective unconscious.
One of the significant issues with Pluto is the proper use of
power. The abuse of its power can unleash a destructive torrent, laying to waste the very things that it has built. If you have enough internal integrity, then you will somehow start again, but with a transformed
outlook. It's advisable to use Pluto's power to help others; not only
will this increase its depth, but it will allow the transforming process to
proceed at a comfortable pace.
Expect to be pushed beyond your self-imposed limits to a place
where being and doing are the same. Pluto demands a great deal, but
at the same time much can be discovered. The common problem with
Pluto is that it is difficult to be moderate; your reactions are too blackand-white, and often extreme.
PLUTO 0 Ascendant/Anti-Vertex
Personal power is developed in this place. You can feel very alive and
invigorated here. You are certainly more tactful and able to use the force of
persuasion. You can completely withdraw from involvement with the same
intensity that you jump into experiences. Your emotions are pulled to extremes
and this can lead to problems if you don't discover how to defuse them. This
place compels you to redefine and re-evaluate your life.
PLUTO 0 Medium Coeli/Tenth House
This is unquestionably a place where you can attain recognition and
demonstrate power over others. The corrupting aspects of power can be very
much alive in activating the obsessive and fanatical parts of your personality.
Pay special attention to the type of strategies and maneuvers that you employ;
there is a strong likelihood that something will get out of hand. Allow your
goals to take on contrasting demands; in this way you will directly benefit
from the transforming energies at work.
PLUTO 0 Descendant/Vertex
Partnerships and people in general can drive you to either excellence or
destruction. This is the place where a petty tyrant can play upon your weaknesses until you master them. If you resort to continual hostility against
others, you'll only wind up depleting your energies and punishing yourself
needlessly. Of course, partnerships are intense, complex and often demanding. Teamwork is needed, so that instead of battling with others you could be
urging each other toward excellence. Relocation and Long Distance Travel / 85
PLUTO <3 Imum Coeli/Fourth House
Active intervention by outside forces into your personal life can be
demoralizing, yet this is a typical happening in this area. The influence here
is too unconsciously provoking for most, producing compulsive behavior
which continually interferes with the promotion of a normal family life.
Fight-or-flight reactions continually surface over a variety of domestic issues.
For most people the constant struggle in clearing out discordant forces eventually compels them to leave.
What about Transpluto?
Transpluto can be described in a number of ways. The way that I
have found to be most descriptive is to view it as a Taurus planet, or
Venus in Taurus. In this way, many of the key words associated with
Taurus can be used in describing the influence of Transpluto. It can
also be described as an earthy-Pluto-type planet, which has led researchers like Hawkins to say that Transpluto has to do with the visible powers (not the invisible like Pluto) that enable you to do what
you normally couldn't.1 You can expect Transpluto to cause some
breakthroughs, yet because of its earthy nature, don't assume it will
happen overnight. Whether it is with your outlook, job, partnerships
or in the home, Transpluto can provide the ability to endure and enjoy
life, while at the same time making you somewhat more stubborn
and obstinate.
Houses in the Local Space Chart
In the Local Space chart the controversy of House systems is
avoided because the horizon is always measured equally. The 360
degrees of azimuth on the horizon around you can be used all throughout the middle and upper latitudes. It is most effective at the polar
regions and least effective at the equator.
The 360-degree constant allows for each sector or House to be
exactly 30 degrees in length. Take a look at Figure 2 (page Júpiter ) and it will
be apparent that the Local Space houses are in reverse of the standard
horoscope. The Seventh House is to your left (west), and the First to
your right (east); also, the Third and Fourth Houses are at the top
(north) and the Ninth and Tenth are at the bottom, which is south. On
all maps and compasses, this common figure is displayed:
N
W+E
S
The Local Space Houses have no rotation; they remain fixed in their 86 / Planets in Locality
directions. However, the transiting planet positions do change continuously throughout the day, placing them in any one of the 12
Houses, 16 directions, and in different degrees of azimuth. Remember that they are also at different degrees of altitude (0 to 90) above
and below the horizon.
Traveling within the community or for longer distances does not
always mean that a planetary line will be followed. Sometimes you
may travel into a sphere of life's activity, i.e. into one of the Local Space
sectors (Houses). Keeping within the standard meaning of the Houses,
let's say you wanted to meet other people while traveling to the westsouthwest, the Local Space Seventh House (see Table 11). Moving in
a northwesterly direction would put you in the Local Space Fifth
House, a place where you could meet a lover or take your current
lover to the movies. What if you just wanted to be by yourself? You
could travel into your Local Space Eighth or Twelfth Houses. As long
as you are not within 7 degrees of a planet, the Local Space Houses
will generally describe the activities. When you get closer to a planet,
its particular energy will override the general meaning of the House.
Besides the personal uses of the Local Space Houses, there are
some apparent historical implications. The westward movement of
civilization along with the destructive concept of "manifest destiny"
seems to fit in with Sixth and Seventh House matters. The Seventh
House is "others" and it can be viewed as the greener grass on the
other side of the hill. The migration of people westward caused wars,
intermarriage between various groups, new legal problems, temporary alliances, etc. These all fit very clearly with the standard meanings
of the Seventh House: open enemies, marriage, litigations, partnerships. The westward movement also caused the spread of diseases,
the interbreeding and domestication of many animals, the development of new skills to meet the challenge of the frontier, the necessity
for large armies, etc. These happenings correspond to the Sixth House:
health matters, small animals, job skills, hard work, military service.
The great civilizations of the past and present predominantly
conquered to the south; this is the Tenth House, where power, leadership, authority, position, fame are manifested. Isn't this what war and conquest is all about? The Ninth House is also to the south; after the
conquest, the new rulers introduce their philosophy, which caused the
educational system and laws of the land to change. Throughout history
the northernmost culture and/or the one with a higher elevation has
conquered and easily maintained the land and peoples to their south. Relocation and Long Distance Travel / 87
The previous examples dealt with past historical migrations of
many people; however the personal applications are many. You can
travel into friendships by going southwest, or into money through the
northeast. So Houses definitely work in Local Space astrology, but in a
more general sense than planetary lines.
Table 11
The Twelve Local Space Houses, with special emphasis on Home & Travel
First House: Outlook, outer personality, early environment, general constitution, physical appearance, love affairs on long trips (as Fifth from Ninth),
children's long trips (as Ninth from Fifth), friends' short trips, grandparents.
Second House: Finances, holdings and possessions, memory, value system,
home of friends and friends of the family (as Fourth from Eleventh), short
trips of hidden enemies (as Third from Twelfth), long trips connected to
health or job skills (as Ninth from Sixth).
Third House: Short trips (1-2 hours), everyday thinking, communications,
primary education, neighbors; homes, non-relatives that live in your
home, friends of children (as Eleventh from Fifth), long trips of spouse (as
Ninth from Seventh).
Fourth House: Least dominant parent, family affairs, property, meditative and
sexual experiences on long trips (as Eighth from Ninth), cars.
Fifth House: Love affairs, children, sports, gambling, entertainments, creativity, short trips of brothers and sisters (as Third from Third), long trips of
grandchildren (as Ninth from Ninth).
Sixth House: Health awareness, employees, work skills, armed forces, long
trips of most dominant parent and for business (as Ninth from Tenth),
small animals.
Seventh House: Marriage, partnerships, the public, open enemies, short trips
of children (as Third from Fifth), long trips of friends (as Ninth from
Eleventh).
Eighth House: Meditation, sexual energy, secrets, sleep, death, money of
others, short trips connected with health (as Third from Sixth), job skills,
long trips of hidden enemies (as Ninth from Twelfth), major problems on
long trips (as Twelfth from Ninth).
Ninth House: Long trips (2 hours by air), higher education, legalities, higher
mind, foreign lands, grandchildren, short trips of spouse (as Third from
Seventh).
Tenth House: Profession, standing, goals, gains, most dominant parent, authorities, long trips for money (as Ninth from Second). 88 / Planets in Locality
Eleventh House: Friends, group awareness, hopes and wishes, stepchildren,
long trips of brothers and sisters (as Ninth from Third).
Twelfth House: Troubles, seclusion, crimes, large animals, short trips of most
dominant parent (as Third from Tenth). Notes
1. Hawkins, John, Transpluto or Should We Call Him Bacchus? Dallas:
Hawkins Enterprising Publications, 1976. 89 CHAPTER Júpiter THE GEOMANTIC CIRCLE r w henyoustudy Figure 15 on pages 86-87, notice that ring
number 2 shows each of the four elements relating to a specific direction. Ether, the fifth element, is located above at the zenith, while the
individual occupies the bottom pole of the center line, the nadir.
Everyone has the four elements within them, biochemically and psychologically. Understanding how these elements help and hinder
your progress is one of the most important keys in the proper use of
the "geomantic circle."
The first step in using the geomantic circle is to ascertain which of
the four elements has been the strongest or most helpful in your life.
Typically, one element will stand out. Its qualities come naturally to
you, thus the statement "He's in his element." Another element will
be the weakest, with the other two elements falling somewhere in between. There are a few cases where two elements are strong and two
are weak; less frequently all four are about equal. (A balance is an
indication of a highly developed person.) The average person will
have a 1, 2, 3, Júpiter ranking—a rating of elements from strongest to
weakest.
I caution the reader not to attempt to rank the elements by simply
looking only at the birth chart. The chart constitutes a complex maze
of relationships, especially as regards the elements. Each signis assigned
an element, and each planet has an elemental assignment, with the
Houses and aspects also having their correspondences. A seasoned
and intuitive astrologer may be able to determine the ranking of the
91 sN na mimetic dev/AT/^ N 90
360 /O
L± neighboc ;s
CD
■Sn 0Rr
early en,,.
0\N&S
ucAr 'Ob
-Ck
S/fi*/*,G
pt\C; \J> TO TMF^ Pu
Yf-<&■
>s
CV^
& PLANER
aG.
t\N
OA/
6^ Mercúrio >
A*
o\0R PHYSICAL e>oc>
&
^0
. Netuno ®
qOIUS
yXV Vênus ^UENTAflnfi
U
5/ Plutão ^XS/CO)A|c
'U/>0
.0^ i. U Jr
w<o Vênus /.z
?f// -C
u/uu
/vTO
is\ / Uj /A -r
<<c
Or yj Oc a: I*
a or
05 o
tn Ul
> 1 W) -T CO
<0:
oO|ui<?
a. »~ol (Z«»; Cfeo) ^63;
c.^AU ( K AAfv)
OF WED/ 2A r
s OES £A/?
0vVTE £ol Gj
UDNIG/ Netuno eARr/ Netuno r>-feV
S,1y 1-\tf
^X^Xl
-r>-*13
\> V»'o'*'*'
"C.
-zXc
5
^m 1«A
2113"
2i 10 «?
o/?
>; 1** o/^
5Mir
•^J/? itH
ADlR LO
1V00M
£i//M'AAER V/A
fcl
^lrMOOP
0^
■^Iperfect mEP^f
(UO (ttl j-tJ
lU-O* Áries > Lua <S Saturno - A?-®'/®
Va? Saturno " 0^
54,
TV
»/ ^//v t^HOCKSA NMCVAE^, Plutão /s? Plutão ^EEN-KNIGHT OF «oP
SZ/o
Acr 'Wry DlSSOLiJ&S 0^ CAO
"0
>'- ligmt 1 ppO
4v
ZrER dream B<
<v».
BOD' '
7/?A^S
o* Júpiter '"/AJ
E"FS
PL AN
U. ■er *00 c
&
Or£6 AT'on
1
'on FB/PRR/lo A PARtN po
7
careep
, ?s
is
180
270
^GNEr/C deviati*ON
T—
s Fig. 15—The Geomantic (Local Space) Circle
92 < Lua nN ^AGNETIC 90
360 /
2
E NE Vua ~r.
EARty r^*s.
OAy
Otlr., o..
tr
K>'
IS TO THF^ ^ /-s
0^
^T^TlNG Pt-ANET^ O/v Gr
.xxO ^^R-phvsicaT^
Soc V
3.
«ol
\a* I V
■A
fpgMEN
5v
0^ O^il of disks/CO, Ns
nhAES Netuno fahp
'fz So v;
C6ol fti ?z;
(i<»
o.ySKAAL ^NJ
OF AAEO/ r-A
ovDE£ £a/? €
xMTER
.J
(^\DNlg7p
EARrr
3a% ;o, \( o
H Gz| (w
iUrv ZENITH
NAOlR t> ^0(1)
(J
i 4v 'Or 'VooN
-MER WA^ir HOOD Al
0
V £
0^
f «Ffa wtorti
{'VG IN
6
(R )
i"?.0
553: 035
«4J
^DCkSA NMCHE^:
V
£
^f£N
rPu" ^-KNI6HT OF
DlS OLUI
UGMT GROSTf^
,Att-AO^l
D
PfAM , r»V - PRO
AV c ^
w^
A5 I crA c, C
"til "-// Netuno '/T »/ opH/i.o, A PARENT
a
S CAREER
180
270 /, 7 / 1 . Aft iO* deviation
s 93 o/ The Rings of the Local Space Geomantic Compass
OONE. The zenith is directly above you and the nadir is directly below
you. The ancients used the Dragon's Head/North Node for the zenith and
the Dragon's Tail/South Node for the nadir. There are 90 degrees of altitude
between the horizon and the zenith and another 90 degrees below the
horizon to the nadir. Planets with a low altitude (+ or -10 degrees) have a
dominant influence in that particular locality.
Note: In rings one to seven, only north and south are reversed for the
Southern Hemisphere.
OTWO. The four cardinal directions used on the compass. These are
loosely connected with the signs of the zodiac: Aries/east, Libra/west,
Capricorn/south and Cancer/north. It is important to remember that the
signs are not stationary, but appear to rotate daily as the Earth turns.
OTHREE. The four major elements that are agreed upon or strongly
implied by almost every system studied. Additional information is contained
in Table 12, which is taken from the Chinese Feng Shui system.
OFOUK The apparent universal system of time correspondences.
OFIVE. The seasons and weather that seem to be consistent.
OSIX. The stages of life were mostly taken from the Feng Shui system,
but they are implied by others. The Hindus would use childhood, student,
householder and renunciate.
o SEVEN. The basic Kriya Yoga meditation formula. To explain it, the
meditator is represented by the east, where the Sun rises. The process leads
to the west, where the Sun sets: the Not-Self. The energy and wisdom of the
north is tapped and the perfect meditation merges with the personal divinity,
which is God and/or realizing one's true Self: south. In actual practice the
meditator would face east.
o EIGHT. The later heaven arrangement of the I Ching is used. The eight
houses of trigrams are placed in the proper directions. For the first time, we
have a designation for directions other than the major four, i.e. northeast,
southwest, etc. Contained within these eight major trigram houses are the
corresponding 64 hexagrams in the entire I Ching. In the Southern Hemisphere it may be necessary to reverse all positions, since the trigrams are
derived from the Chinese view of seasonal change (i.e. in the Northern
Hemisphere).
o NINE. In this ring the symbols for the four elements occupy the center.
These symbols are taken from Western astrology, magic and alchemy. (In the
Chinese system. Earth is in the center, wood is in the east. Fire/south, metal/
west and Water/north). In the Western system the fifth element, ether, is in
the center. In the yoga system of psychic centers, or chakras, the first center
along the spine is Earth, the coccygeal area. The next center up is Water, and
94 The Geomantic Circle / 95
it is the sacral. The third center is Fire and it is the lumbar. The next center is
Air, at the dorsal vertebrae. This puts the element ether at the fifth center in
the cervical area. The two head centers, medulla and cortex/mid-brain, is the
zenith point. The nadir represents dormant centers below the coccygeal, i.e.
the tail. Also contained in this ring is the Archangel place in Western magic
and folklore. (In Levi's Hebrew system and in the Gnostic there are some different placements and names). The names for the lower order of angels or
elementals are given. These forces are the builders and maintainers in the
biosphere of Earth—the hidden intelligence behind the nature. They have
been represented as elves, fairies, pixies, leprechauns, ewoks and protective
spirits in Western folklore. The four basic substances of alchemy are included
along with the four divinatory systems (north and south reversed in the
Southern Hemisphere).
0 TEN. The royal names for the four suits of court cards in the Tarot. The
Knight cards typify the four directions with the particular suits (elements)
being a general indicator for the directions. There are an additional 10 cards
for each direction, making a total of 56 cards in the minor arcana (4x14=56).
The minor arcana cards are used similarly to the astrological houses and
aspects in astrological interpretation. The 22 cards of the major arcana
(56+22=78 total) correspond to the signs and planets. The signs and planets
are always moving and this is the reason they are not assigned a specific
direction. (Reverse north and south if south of equator.)
o ELEVEN. The alchemical stages or process as it relates to the cycles in
nature, directions, etc.
o TWELVE. In this ring the various geomantic correspondences are
linked with a variety of indicators from various sources. The central position
takes into consideration the four functions or four states of man's awareness:
the physical body/awake state, thinking mind/awake and asleep, the dream
body in deep sleep and the essence or spirit in a self-realized state. The key
words to either side of the center are the male and female archetypes taken
from the depth psychology system of Wolff. For a more complete description
of these archetypes, see the explanations in Table 13. Directly below the central words are the four basic key words used in Western magic systems and
strongly implied by other sources. The other key words on either side are
taken from Amerindian and Mesoamerican sources like H. Storm and Don
Juan. In Table 13, more information is given (reverse north and south in the
Southern Hemisphere).
o THIRTEEN. This ring is for the positions of the planets, fixed stars or
whatever else you may be looking at in the Local Space circle. Ring sixteen
gives you the azimuth degrees; fixed positions as well as transiting positions
can be observed and compared for any locality. Rings thirteen and sixteen
can be used together or thirteen can be used for the transiting positions and
sixteen for the birth positions. 96 / Planets in Locality
o FOURTEEN. This ring is a reminder that even though we are concentrating on the horizon circle around us, the ecliptic, the path of the Sun and
the signs of the zodiac are always to our south in the Northern Hemisphere.
o FIFTEEN. These are the abbreviated versions of the standard astrological houses. It may seem odd to see the Fourth House at the top of the
chart, but remember that the Fourth House cusp is pointing to the north in
the Northern Hemisphere. If you face east with your Local Space chart in
hand and parallel (flat) with the horizon, then the First House is the first 30
degrees of azimuth on the horizon moving north. 22.2 degrees of azimuth
north of east is east-northeast and it is in the first Local Space House.
Northeast along the horizon is in the center of the Local Space Second
House, and so on around the chart (see Figure 15).
If your locality is below 30 degrees north latitude (or above 30 degrees
south latitude in the Southern Hemisphere), then face north and hold your
Local Space chart up, vertical to the horizon. Look to the east along the first 30
degrees above the horizon (toward the zenith); over your head is the First
Campanus House on the Prime Vertical.* More on this in Chapter 5.
o SIXTEEN. The 360 degrees of azimuth are listed twice in this ring,
because some astrologers prefer to start counting in the east. But it is standard for the compass to start at the north. This ring is used to take note of
where the exact positions of the planets are in azimuth. (Refer to your Local
Space map/chart).
OSEVENTEEN. This ring is used to indicate if any planets are near the
azimuth degree solstice points. These points will only be in the east and west
portions of the circle (see Table 7).
o EIGHTEEN. In the north and south portions of the circle, the points of
magnetic declination are listed (see Figure 8).
o NINETEEN. The final ring includes the 16 major and minor directions
on the standard compass.
See notes at the end of this chapter for source material. 'The Houses are the twelve-fold division of the Earth's surface, and in the standard astrological chart (ecliptic system), the zodiacal signs are placed or laid over the Houses. The proportional distribution of signs placed over the Houses depends on the distance from the equator.
The greater the distance, the greater disproportionate alignment there is between the signs and
Houses. At the equator, the signs and Houses are close to equal, because the ecliptic and
equatorial planes are closer together. As one travels above 40 degrees north or below 40 degrees
south latitude, an entire sign can be contained within the boundaries of a House and near the
polar regions. Two whole signs or more within one House is possible, while in the opposite area
of the chart a single sign is stretched over three or more House cusps). The Geomantic Circle / 97
elements, but it does not come easily for most. An Earth planet can be
in a Fire sign within a Water House, in Air aspect to a Fire planet which
is in an Air sign in an Earth House!
Thankfully, there is a faster and easier way to discover your
strong and weak elements, a method which makes it much easier to
avoid error. Think of your childhood and the relationship you had
with the four elements. I have found that the weakest element has a
way of revealing itself in a number of common childhood experiences. The strongest elements usually do not produce any alarming,
fearful or irritating experiences. Sometimes, however, the energy of
the element is so powerful that as a child your initial reaction may be
fearful. This may be a way in which additional time is obtained to
adjust to the force level.
When you look back at your early years, some of your childhood
learning and play experiences seem to be spontaneously understood,
while others evoke caution and fear, and create a challenge. Most
children in the process of growing up participate in a large variety of
activities. These activities depend a great deal on the family structure
and also upon your culture and geographic location. What has to be
determined is not so much your actions but your unique reactions: the
levels of your ease/enjoyment, or of frustration/pain.
Almost all children like to play with sand and water, but it would
be wrong to say that they are strong in Earth and Water, because we
don't know the amount of time they spend with these activities, nor do
we know the level of enjoyment they attain. Childhood memories are
usually quite vivid, and you may be surprised at how easy it is to relive
certain emotional responses. Only you know what you liked and disliked. It won't take long to sort things out, and once you have done this
you will be able to make better use of the "geomantic circle."
If Earth is a strong element for you, then playing extensively with
dirt and things of the Earth may have occupied much of your play
time. These activities may have included; planting a garden, building
things with wood, collecting rocks, learning how to cook, saving
money in your piggy bank. In their earlier years some (not all) Earth
children have the tendency to eat the crust from their noses and to
briefly contemplate their solid waste. I realize this is crude, but Earth is
crude. If Earth is not strong within you, you may have had an aversion
to or avoided the above activities. If you didn't like to get dirty and/or
muddy. Earth is not your strong element. 98 / Planets in Locality
Air children enjoy writing notes to one another, learning how to
use the telephone, climbing high in trees to feel the wind, flying kites,
and making paper and plastic airplanes. They also like books at an
early age. If there are rocks or old food under an Earth child's bed,
you're likely to find pens, pencils and plenty of paper under the Air
child's bed. Many Air children talk themselves to sleep. In fact, mothers
and fathers agree that they talk much more than is necessary. If Air is
not strong for you, you may not feel that these activities were all that
important, or you could have been annoyed with them. When the
wind blows and howls, how do you react?
Fire children unfortunately like to play with matches and generally
enjoy watching fire. They love the heat of the Sun, and often take on
leadership roles among their playmates. They are inclined to "play
doctor," as sexual themes are stimulating to them. Whenever there is
friction, emotional or physical, they are drawn to it. When you were
burned for the first time, how traumatic was it? All children have a fascination with fire, but only a Fire child will get in there and actually
play with it!
Water children love to swim, and many learn how at an early age.
Caring for pet fish, fishing, sailing and generally anything that involves
the Water element attracts them. Water children are noted for their
intense emotional responses—crying, laughing or just carrying a
mood for an extended period. If being in or under water bothered
you, then Water may not be strong in your chart. How much fear was
produced when you went in over your head for the first time?
Now that you have some important clues about your childhood
encounters with the elements, let's look at the ranking of elements in
the present and how they have affected your adult life. All you need
do is return to some basic astrological knowledge.
As an Earth-type person, you tend to be involved with life on a
practical level. All of us need to be practical about some matters, but
Earth people are generally more comfortable and successful with
money matters and material concerns. Earthy people can be boring
and thick-headed, and may often carry a self-created burden with
which they continually hassle. You are rarely the life of the party, but
could be the one paying for it.
As an Air-type person, you certainly stress communication in
some form or fashion. You usually know how to get a point across
through speaking and/or writing. You can be somewhat "bubbleheaded," i.e. more head and less heart. The Geomantic Circle / 99
Fire signs are fire starters. You instigate, lead or cause some sort
of friction or action, and have the energy to do, but carrying objectives
to a successful completion is not one of your strengths. You usually
are a starter, and not a finisher.
As a Water person, you love moods, emotions and feelings,
which you often use in conveying your intent. In fact, you may have a
hard time containing your emotions. You also enjoy escapism, because
then you can just "feel." You often indulge in an active dream life, and
accept intuitive powers more readily than other people.
An important point to remember is that you are always drawn
toward or into your weakest element. Circumstances in life that afford
you the opportunity of learning about a weak element will prove valuable, as will involvement with people, places and skills that are characteristic of that particular element. This is one of the best ways in which
you can begin to deal with your weaker elements.
Time after time I've observed that in personal relationships, she
needs him because he's down-to-earth (strong Earth) and stable, or
he needs her because Fire energy makes him feel more alive. I've seen
Air people search out Water people because they desperately need to
understand their emotions.
This concept of balancing the four elements also holds true for
relocating. If the cold planets (Saturn, Uranus and sometimes Pluto)
are dominant in your chart, you will have a tendency to move to a warmer climate. If the hot planets (Sun, Mars, Jupiter and sometimes
Pluto) have the upper hand, then you can tolerate cold weather, and
may even enjoy it. In one sense, tropical beaches are for cold-planet
people, and snow skiing is for hot-planet people.
The possible combinations of elements are numerous, but one
important point remains clear. As long as you have a very weak element, it will control you more than you can control it. Once you grasp
its message and incorporate it into your whole personality, you will be
able to use it to your advantage.
In reviewing what has been said, ask yourself: "Do I seem to always
be in need of money, stability and practical know-how?" That is weak
Earth. "Do I have problems in talking or writing about what I feel or
think?"Thenyou could be weakin Air qualities. "Doesthe energy and
drive to start new things seem to be lacking?" If so. Fire may be your
weak element. "Am I in the habit of repressing my emotions, and does
someone expressingtheir emotions puzzle me? or do I see them as out of
control?" This may indicate that you are weak in the Water element. 100 / Planets in Locality
The whole process of finding out which elements are strongest
and weakest can reveal which directions will help or hinder your life.
If Fire happens to be your strong element, then you probably already
know that your energies are higher at noontime, and that you may be
more productive in the summer months. Things in the southern part
of your home or office will tend to have more power (see Figure 15
and Table 13).
A strong direction is valid everywhere and anywhere you go. It
can protect you from the adversity which results from having certain
antagonistic planets in that direction. (Planets in different directions
are covered in Chapter 5.) The planets in your Local Space chart will
change as you change localities, but your good direction will always
be helpful. Unfortunately, the difficult directions will continue to
challenge you.
Practical Use of the Geomantic Local Space Circle
If you already have your Local Space chart, then you will be able
to line it up with the cardinal directions in the geomantic circle. You'll
be able to draw some interesting comparisons. This chapter offers a
start in the use of the cardinal directions, but it also offers a solid
method of getting people to explore and experiment on their own.
In order to get the most use out of the "Local Space Geomantic
Magical Circle," it is imperative that you think differently about your
relationship with nature. Some people who spend a great deal of time
outdoors, like surveyors, nature guides, rangers, hunters, etc. often
develop (consciously or unconsciously) a special relationship with
the forces of nature and with certain directions, if they are so inclined.
In agriculturally based societies, natural forces and horizontal directions are part of the prevailing folk wisdom.
The majority of people who are modern urban dwellers are up
against a difficult problem. Urban people are removed from most
animal life, isolated from the forces of nature, and are generally insensitive to the night sky. The natural learning process and communion
with nature takes place too infrequently to really be of any lasting
help. The situation is not hopeless; it can be worked on and changed.
In addition to what you have read, keep in mind that certain
elements are antagonistic or complementary to each other. If you look
at the geomantic circle (Figure 15), you'll see that there are Earth, Fire,
Air and Water planets. Basic astrology teaches us that Earth and Water The Geomantic Circle / 101
get along, and that Fire and Air are compatible elements as well. It is
also known that Earth puts out Fire and also clashes with Air, while
Water turns Fire to steam. Therefore in a general sense the north and
west directions work together. Isn't it true that almost all of the valuable moisture moves out of the north and comes across from the west
(a wet and cool direction)? South and east work in unison, too: the
heat flows from the south and the temperature rises when the Sun
comes up in the east (which is dry and warm).
Because of the planet-element-direction connection, the Water
and Earth planets—Saturn, Transpluto, Neptune, Pluto and the Moon—
will be more constructive when thay are in the northerly and westerly
parts of the Local Space chart. Likewise the Fire and Air planets—
Mars, Jupiter, Venus, Mercury, Uranus and the Sun—will function
better when contained within the southern and eastern parts of the
chart.
Prior knowledge of astrology and occult principles will be extremely helpful in working with this system. Yet geomancy is just like
any other system—the more you reflect upon its meaning and put it
into practice, the greater the benefits.
Each ring represents a different system of knowledge; some are
quite simple, but not unimportant. Take for example the four directions, elements or seasons. They are just brief statements, yet when
compared with other systems, many insights into their significance
are possible in Local Space astrology. If you are more comfortable
with the Western magical path than with the alchemical, Tarot references may prove valuable. If you use the I Ching, it too is represented.
Amerindian and depth psychology are also included. By the way, for
Table 13 the (non-graphic) rings 15 to 23 are explained in more detail
in the accompanying table.
The various meanings of the planets on the four directions relate
specifically to the geomantic circle (compass). In Chapter 3, the planets
on the four angles were described in a more traditional sense. In my
opinion, you should consult both toget a complete viewpoint (Tables
10 and 12). The focus in this chapter is on the physical and symbolic
meaning of the four directions. The mystical flavor is added without
excluding the practical indications.
The real beauty of the geomantic circle (a static and universal
form of the Local Space chart) is that it allows for a direct interplay of
the intuitive and rational worlds as well as providing access to many
areas of knowledge not readily available in standard charts. The cross- 102 / Planets in Locality
cultural and multi-level approach brings forth an unlimited number
of possible interpretations, each pertaining to a variety of life experiences (see Figure 15 and Table 13).
When explaining the horizon compass directions (especially the
Vertex/west and Anti-Vertex/east), one is inclined to encounter actual
events. The Horizon System places you on the Earth's surface, thus
grounding all activities. The events of everyday reality can no longer
just be passively observed, which is often the case with the Ascendant/Descendant axis. A greater frequency of direct involvement and
interactiveness can be expected. Events in the form of confrontations,
challenging involvements, and learning experiences are highly
probable.
To position yourself properly (generally above 30° north latitude
or below 30° south latitude), simply hold the geomantic circle and/or
your Local Space chart flat and parallel to the ground (as on a table). It
is now on the same plane as the horizon around you. Use a landmark
that you know to be correct—a map aligned to any angle of the circle,
and/or a chart with a direction, i.e. N, S, E or W.
Using east as an example, first align yourself in that direction.
Then check and see where your Local Space planets are (in azimuth)
on the geomantic circle, remembering that it represents the horizon
surrounding you. The houses on the chart divide the horizon circle
into twelve equal parts. The First House is to the east, the Seventh is
west. Fourth north, and Tenth to the south (in the Northern Hemisphere).
Below 30° north or above 30° south in the equatorial latitudes, a
different positioning is necessary. The Prime Vertical circle is used
because of the bunching effect on the horizon in the equatorial latitudes.
Face due north or south and hold the circle and/or chart upright, i.e.
vertical to the horizon. Now the Local Space Houses will be on the
Prime Vertical circle from east to west, above and below you. Instead
of the Houses being in a circle around you, they are now directly
above and below you in a circle. The Local Space First House is just
above east, the Second House is above it, and the cusp of the Third
and Fourth Houses are directly overhead at the zenith. The Ninth and
Tenth Houses will be directly below you (at the nadir), with the Sixth
and Seventh to the west. Take note of any planets that are very low or
very high in amplitude, i.e. near the zenith or horizon. They will have
the strongest influence for a locality. The Geomantic Circle / 103
Planetary Positions on the Local Space Geomantic Compass
Life energy (Ch'i or Prana) is always changing around us due to
the fact that the transiting planets are continuously moving while the
Earth rotates. In order to truly understand if the electromagnetic forces that flow through nature are good or ill, you need to be thoroughly
acquainted with the principles of Feng Shui and the Local Space
geomantic circle, and have a working knowledge of astrology. There
are many other specialties that are important, but you don't have to be
a specialist to begin. (Even with some simple facts in a Boy Scout
manual or from dowsing, you could discern many hidden facts from
the natural surroundings. Of course, a special sensitivity to nature is
always extremely helpful.)
Please keep in mind that your dominant planetary positions for
any locality will influence your interpretations. To illustrate: suppose
you had Jupiter in the north and also in this direction lay an undisclosed toxic waste dump. Jupiter, being what it is, would somehow
protect you from this adverse influence. You may not be in the direction of the prevailing wind, or you may get bottled water before anyone else, etc. On the other hand, Neptune in the same direction would
be very harmful because of its connection with toxic substances. Seeing the world through Jupiter or Neptune eyes can be quite different.
What if you had a waterfall V4-mile to the west of you, and Saturn
was in the west? You would not be able to receive the healing benefits
due to certain limiting circumstances caused by Saturn. Whatever the
quality of the natural or man-made surroundings, their effect ultimately
depends on the positions of your planets in that particular locality.
All the planetary positions listed in Table 12 are for planets
within 3 degrees of any cardinal direction. The altitude becomes
increasingly important below 30° north latitude or above 30° south
latitude, due to the east/west bunching effect described in earlier
chapters.
These descriptions can also be used for any planet which is less
than 7 degrees above or below the horizon, and generally positioned
in the vicinity of any cardinal direction. Say that Jupiter is at an altitude
of 2+ degrees; this would make it quite important. Jupiter with its low
altitude could be in any one of the four major, or twelve minor directions, If Jupiter happens to be closer to the east than to any other direction, you can look to the indications below pertaining to "Jupiter in the
East." 704 / Planets in Locality
What if a planet is not near a major direction but lies northwest or
southeast, etc.? Then you have to rely on the aspects. Houses, solstice
points and magnetic declination to properly understand how the
planet would function. However, don't limit yourself to just these
indicators, because there are many other possible correlations possible
... the seasons, meditation stages, I Ching, Tarot and the elements, to
name just a few (see Figure 15 and Table 13).
The question may arise: Just how realistic are the "Keynote
Event" statements in the following descriptions? They are intended to
give a symbolic approximation of a major event or series of events.
The probability of events occurring in the exact way described is
remote, however the symbolism remains as correct as possible. In
fact, these statements are open to numerous meanings.
In your home, the persons or events can literally come into your
life. These events can take place on your property or in your home and
often they will correspond to, and happen, in a certain direction. In the
community, it can be the direction you are taking when certain
encounters happen, or the direction out of which someone contacts
you. "Out of the west" could be someone from Japan or just a neighbor
from down the street; it all depends on the planets involved and on
their aspects.
The poetic content in the "Nature Signs" was simply the most
comfortable form of expression for the author. The wording, seemingly
abstract, may not become clear until such a time when an experience
(or memory of an experience) jells, matches up, or is otherwise found
to be similar or significant. It is likely that these statements will make
the most sense to people who are experienced in observing nature,
including human nature.
Consult Figure 15 and Table 13; also check with the descriptions
in Chapter 3. Please reverse north and south for the Southern
Hemisphere. Table 12
The Planetary Positions
SUN in the East
Here is where your self-identity is fed by the wind of the east. Air
always feeds a flame, and quite naturally your spiritual and physical
vitality is vibrant because of it. Your will to communicate in new ways
seeks a creative expression. Each word has a power all its own, and
this knowledge can clear your mind as well as inflate your ego. There
is a definite focus on individual development pertaining to leadership.
This locality demands identification of your personal power and
creativity. You may have to deal with a certain degree of narcissism,
and arrogance within yourself and/or in others.
Nature Signs: Read the shadows on the hills. Partake of the orange heat,
cerebral petals unfolding, the dance of photons and infra-reds—telling personal stories.
Keynote Event: On a warm and windy spring morning, an honorable and attractive young man comes out of the East with an important
message.
SUN in the South
The spotlight of outer importance and the inner light of self shine
brightly. It is here where external prominence and internal realization
support each other. Attainment of goals and creative growth abound.
Authoritativeness is a big issue. Corporate egos and conceit could
pose some problems. Don't let the gravity of who you are, or what
others represent, deflect your clarity.
Nature Signs: The white flames of sunlight brighten a landscape that is
reclaiming moisture, dispersing shadows. Reflecting heat mirages stimulate
the imagination, time for the cool-within—the siesta, the silence, the spinal
nectar.
Keynote Event: On a sunny summer afternoon a man comes from
the South to help with a new plan of action.
SUN in the West
The depth of experience in others reflects back to you, causing an
evaluation of needs. You are confronted with egotism, blind ambition
and selfishness from the people around you. Overcoming the strong
influence of others will bring forth fresh approaches and friendships.
105 106 / Planets in Locality
A connectedness with others will then allow a light to shine in dark
places... making the unconscious conscious, the unknown known
and the unseen seen.
Nature Signs: Long shadows, rain leaving, life force calming, the pink
twilight slips into blue, into stars, a fire is built near the medicine wheel.
Keynote Event: On a cool autumn evening a mature man from the
West silently reveals hidden facts about others.
SUN in the North
Your home life can become a creative activity, a statement of your
character. Make no mistake about it, what you will for yourself strongly
affects the family around you. The strength of your self-identity
demands that you give the best of what you have. Parents, children
and even friends rely on you to set standards and maintain the
household honor. You can easily be a big fish in a small pond, but
sometimes the pond may grow and the fish has to do the same.
Nature Signs: Pale light, star bright, the battle of fire and ice, other Suns
twinkle in the darkness. Hear the cosmic reverberations, the Aurora Borealis—
a movement in stillness.
Keynote Event: On a cold night in the winter, an older practical
man is observed to the North, where he has taught.
MOON in the East
Objective understanding of your strong emotional life and your
mood changes is necessary so that you won't be overly defensive.
Certain impressions of the man-made and natural forces in your surroundings can cause a variety of emotional responses. Fear and uncertainty may crop up, yet it is also likely that your presentiments will
fortify your decision-making abilities.
Nature Signs: Breezes on water, dew in the air, it's morning in the valley;
man and beast erupt with excitement.
Keynote Event: On a moist morning a young woman delivers her
message from the East.
MOON in the South
Involvement with the moods of the masses is somehow emphasized. Circumstances dictate that you learn how to flow with and
adapt to different attitudes, goals and lifestyles. Adaptation is not surrender; protect yourself, then navigate beyond the emotional storms. The Geomantic Circle / 107
Realize that the outer life will always change, but inner life stays
the same.
Nature Signs: The fullness bursts forth, multiplying, spinning threads of
moonlight, weaving new baskets of creation.
Keynote Event: An inspired woman and a small child from the
South advance in a search for meaning.
MOON in the West
People you come in contact with seem to leave an emotional
imprint upon you. Quite often their emotional condition is discordant, leaving you in a somewhat defensive posture. Playing defense
without following another is exactly the challenge that is presented,
i.e. in the sea of emotions it is necessary to keep your head above
water. Allowing others to cling or meddle in your life, or doing the
same yourself, can create dependencies which never really help
relationships.
Nature Signs: Water, whirling, churning, turning, splashing ions, onward, downward, inward, a carrier of feeling.
Keynote Event: On a rainy day a mature woman from the West
mirrors the unconscious, triggering introspection and inspiration.
MOON in the North
Strong bonds with family and home can override your own personal dictates. (By family, I mean parents, close relatives, brothers and
sisters, wife and children.) This is not an advantageous position to be
in, especially when your personal decisions are always filtered through
what the family would think. There certainly are times when decisions
as well as sacrifices are a necessity and an important ingredient of
family life, however, learning to draw the line somewhere is also
important. I suppose it's the difference of working with the family or
being worked over by them.
Nature Signs: Ice crystals hang, and the cool rain enters the Earth, moist
semi-dormant places.
Keynote Event: On a cold night an older woman from the North
spins the wife's (wise) tales that nature has taught her.
MERCURY in the East
Discovering the powers of thought and development of skills is a
major issue in this place. Circumstances continually prompt you to
say what you feel and speak your mind. Flexible thinking helps open
up a world of ideas to be thoroughly explored. 108 / Planets in Locality
Nature Signs: Buzz words, key words fall into place, a word is a symbol
and a thing. Objects and thoughts intermesh in a wind of re-definition. Small
creatures, each in its own way, display their routine and a message is
delivered.
Keynote Event: A young and fluent person from the East speaks his
piece; it's news you can use.
MERCURY in the South
Those around you (professionally) can't disregard what you say;
your words seem to stick in their minds. Therefore the choice of
words, how you say them, and when you say them, is an important
concern. Problems could develop if you become a little too intellectually cute and clever for your own good.
Nature Signs: The endless activity of movement in this ecosystem. Each
stage within a cycle tells its own story.
Keynote Event: A younger person out of the South speaks in ways
that offer fulfillment and direction.
MERCURY in the West
A smorgasbord of facts, thoughts and ideas are entering your
awareness. Your mind will become more discriminating and thoughtprovoking. You'll find that you need to know the difference between
talking at people and talking to them. You may discover that pondering upon something long enough helps it to become reality. Therefore
you need to search out the most advantageous ways of only giving the
proper ideas energy. At times, what you say and write can get you in
and out of conflicts.
Nature Signs: Interludes between work and play, stillness and movement, dark and light, a time of deeper thought.
Keynote Event: A younger person from the West whispers (as if in
a dream) ideas most difficult to express, saying things that aren't
usually said.
MERCURY in the North
Small worries can add up to mental distress. Establishing a system whereby you put your daily affairs in order can be the difference
between peace of mind or mental frustration. Learning to be more
objective is helpful, because quite often highly personal ideas harbor
narrow perspectives. Periodically, petty distractions can interfere
with your concentration level. The Geomantic Circle / 109
Nature Signs: In its own time the Earth teaches each person in a direct
way knowledge of the soil, the value of minerals, defining the specific functions of
living things, classifications and orderings.
Keynote Event: A younger person from the North displays the virtues of patience and studiousness.
VENUS in the East
The expression of talents, sociability, and congeniality is focused
on in this place. The question then arises; are you ready to express
talent, to be congenial and sociable? There is no guarantee that the
beauty of Venus will find an outlet; it is possible that indulgence and a
"party time" mentality could lead to a sort of empty social life. In order
to maintain a balance you need to relax, but not collapse; to give, but
not completely give in. A lot depends on the quality of your desires.
The philosophers have said: we bring the beauty to the sunrise.
Nature Signs: The contours, curves and pleasant rounded shapes revealed
on the canvas of life. The silent language of color seeks to merge with its
complements.
Keynote Event: An attractive and talented young man from the
East longs for companionship, as words do for a melody.
VENUS in the South
Popularity sometimes means that those around you may be
attracted to the quantity of your success rather than the quality of who
you are. The glamour that comes with greater popularity should be
secondary to the inner joy that comes from increased acceptance.
Don't let career satisfactions lead to laxity or sidetrack your giftedness.
Balanced cooperation and sharing moments of happiness with others
can become quite common, yet it is possible that a narcissistic aloofness could develop.
Nature Signs: The light of one to another, the passionate embraces of
plants to the Earth. The symmetry and fragrances of the landscape explaining
things to the heart.
Keynote Event: A spirited young man from the South desires love
and attention.
VENUS in the West
The strong desire for the right relationships and business partnerships becomes paramount. Wishing to please or be pleased and
generally bending over backwards can be overdone. Developing 110 / Planets in Locality
positive bonds with people is a two-way street of sharing, yet seeing
others for what they really are is not the easiest thing to do in this location. Many enticements pass your way, and they must be balanced
with the right amount of trust and realism so you can avoid letting
opportunities slip away.
Nature Signs: Everything blends near water, even the particles of earth
roll under its surface. The perfected crest of the wave, its mist, is reversed
before the pulse on the shoreline.
Keynote Event: A young woman from the West shows the deep ties
she has with others.
VENUS in the North
The strong emotions that you can feel for your immediate family
are a definite source of strength. Complications develop when this
relative harmony becomes a dependency. That which is comfortable
is not always the best path to follow. You can get stuck in your little
niche. Naive and superficial tendencies can definitely tarnish an
otherwise loving home life.
Nature Signs: The laws of the land; the chemistry of the soil. The quiet
eco-cycle, digesting and fermenting.
Keynote Event: A young maiden from the North displays her
wares, and cooks up a bounty of needed nourishment.
MARS in the East
The energy and drive in this place is more than enough to get
things done. You can feel sure about your abilities and want to improve
upon them. You may display impulsive and headstrong qualities,
making you more aggressive then need be, and this may be harmful to
your accomplishment. It is almost too easy to become self-centered
and competitive, walking around with a chip on your shoulder.
Healthy outlets for mental and physical aggression will not only keep
you from overheating but will also improve your attitude. Feeling that
something has to be fought for is quite common under this influence,
however you will need to put some energy into dealing with your
own shortcomings.
Nature Signs: The internal heat, the friction of doing, muscles and
machines performing the rolling, crushing, and turning momentum that
shapes and harnesses natural forces.
Keynote Event: A vigorous and bold man from the East starts
activities through confrontation, stamina and struggle. The Geomanlic Circle / 111
MARS in the South
An untiring effort toward goals is promised. Getting things done
in a brisk and intense manner becomes the norm. You may have to
undergo life in the fast lane, along with some problems with authority
figures. The issue of someone stealing your thunder can easily crop
up. Exercising tolerance and knowing when to act is something that
must be observed. Apply yourself to the tasks at hand and keep a safe
distance from all the big egos with, often, weak personalities.
Nature Signs: Rising temperature, thermo waves dance in the field of
vision. A burning dryness is present.
Keynote Event: A strong and capable man from the South takes
charge and exercises authority.
MARS in the West
To put it quite simply, people you come in contact with in this
locality can be argumentative, obnoxious, even violent. Under certain
circumstances you could find very honest and straightforward comrades, but it's the exception rather than the rule. This is a war zone of
sorts and you need to toughen up in order to survive.
Nature Signs: The clashing drums of thunder as the extremes of high and
low pressures meet, the furious storm pounds onward. The ongoing combustion of fossil fuels altering the atmosphere.
Keynote Event: A reckless and potent man from the West evokes
intense emotions and stirs up trouble.
MARS in the North
The natural forces around you are a source of energy holding
potential destructive powers. Sometimes it is necessary to buckle
down, mobilize and struggle to keep what you have, or to get what
you need. There is a struggle to protect and provide those tangible
and intangible necessities of life. Family activities can be emotionally
explosive and there may be a lot of in-fighting.
Nature Signs: The dominating providence of natural forces encounters
and overwhelms weaker defenses. The mark of man across the land.
Keynote Event: An imposing and knowledgeable man from the
North subjugates resources, demands structure, and imposes rules.
JUPITER in the East
There's no doubt that this place is filled with great and good
things; the only question is whether you will be able to avail yourself 112 / Planets in Locality
of the abundance offered. It's probably easy to get spoiled here, taking
too much for granted. Extravagance is a waste of money, often translating into a loss of time and energy as well. People may trust in you
more here, and without knowing it you could take unfair advantage of
them. Certainly you can take chances here, but it is unwise to press
your luck too far.
Nature Signs: Fair and dry, high, thin clouds disperse in the morning.
Keynote Event: A teacher/benefactor from the East brings clarification and understanding.
JUPITER in the South
Goals can be achieved, lucrative and important positions are
attainable. In situations that promise so much, it is vitally important
that you attempt to give back to life, as a means of sharing your good
fortune, also as a safeguard against corrupting influences. Be on guard
for conceit and dogma; they can definitely cause a lack of respect, and
lead to certain miscalculations.
Nature Signs: A beautiful day brings the idea of success and faith in the
natural order of things, as well as the vision of what can be done.
Keynote Event: A teacher/benefactor from the South explains
great ideas and ideals; expansive progress ensues.
JUPITER in the West
Tolerance is an amazing tool in dealing with others; it can help
them relax, while motivating them to do their best. Mutual acceptance
is alive in this area and can be turned into profit and satisfaction. You
will undoubtedly meet your fair share of big mouths, snobs and fat
cats along with generous and kind people who will see fit to help you.
Pompous fools still abound, so learning how to choose properly is
directly related to how fortunate you can become.
Nature Signs: The clear burning trail of sunset; the promise of a fulfilling tomorrow.
Keynote Event: A teacher/benefactor from the West heals conflicts, and unites factions.
JUPITER in the North
A relative prosperity predominates in this setting. A rewarding
family life based on understanding and dignity is indicated. There is,
of course, a tendency to sit back and assume things will take care of
themselves; this can be folly because those "sins of omission" can The Geomantic Circle / 113
come back on you. The honest, healthy lifestyle this area can promote
is a tremendous boon to whatever you wish to accomplish.
Nature Signs: The harshness of nature is held back and diverted, thus
fragile ecosystems can create new life.
Keynote Event: A teacher/benefactor from the North brings the
wealth and influence of the land.
SATURN in the East
In this place more than any other, you can get a realistic sense of
what you need to work on. This work will ultimately make you a better
person, but at times you'll probably feel that experiences in general
are much too hard and heavy. Many of your fears and undeveloped
qualities seem to be played upon until you apply proper concentration. Self-effort, discipline and organization continually come into
focus as a path that must be followed. There is, of course, the potential
problem that you will become too rigid in your outlook. In the process
of learning about limitations, you may underestimate yourself.
Nature Signs: Hot and cold weather and wind on rocks turns them into
sand; pressure on sand turns it back into rock—the ancient cycles of time. The
notch in the rock marks a calendar of light.
Keynote Event: A mature person from the East patiently helps to
turn the abstract into reality.
SATURN in the South
The laws of the everyday world are made strikingly clear. Orthodox and straight-laced conventionality are all around you. Work can
be hard and thankless, and the pay below average. In some cases the
job is dependable, yet very boring. Important situations depend on
you. Duty and obligations are pressed upon you, and in time your
experience and forebearance tends to bring even greater responsibilities. Undoubtedly, a place where you can attain solid maturity,
holding on to what you have learned for a lifetime.
Nature Signs: Baking flat rocks, heated quarries, petrified pictures, static
and sublime.
Keynote Event: A mature older person from the South adheres to
the structure that allows perseverance to flourish.
SATURN in the West
Exercising caution and reserve in your encounters with others
becomes a necessity. By observing the actions of those around you. 114 / Planets in Locality
learn what not to do. When you deal with others, there always seems
to be something lacking. Although some stable and simple relationships can transpire, most are weighted down with emotional and/or
financial deficiencies. Disappointments and the narrow-mindedness
of others may cause you to withdraw; sometimes this can mean a
sparse social life.
Nature Signs: Cool shadows of rock, sacred formations damp and low
lying, somber solitude.
Keynote Event: A mature person from the West solidifies relationships and dissolves attachments.
SATURN in the North
Dealing with limitations and making a little go a long way is customary. There always seems to be some ordeal or impending difficulty which complicates an already toilsome existence. You are
called upon to provide structure and security for others. An inability
in making ends meet can put you between a rock and a hard place.
Any progress is gradual, and slowly it is possible to overcome some of
the (self-imposed?) boundaries. One way to do this is almost too
obvious; relocate!
Nature Signs: Mountain chains, hilly borderlands defining regions.
Monoliths indicating the ancient pathways, the network of the past.
Keynote Event: A mature person from the North controls, restrains
and consolidates resources.
URANUS in the East
Ready or not, your personality will awaken to new and original
ideas. There is quite a bit of restless energy that accompanies this combination and no guarantee that youH be able to channel all of it into
practical use. Do you want to be a reformer or a troublemaker? Do you
easily scatter your mental energies? Even though you have all kinds of
exciting ideas, will others still see you as digressing all over the place?
Many of the things you do and say seem to be progressive, yet if you 11
stop long enough to be objective, you may find that in many cases
you've only learned to be different, simply deviating from one thing
to the next. Is the freedom of unrestricted expression worth the
price?
Life will never be complacent here, remaining turbulent in an
attempt to find a fulfilling outlet for your erratic and anxious
energy. The Geomantic Circle / 115
Nature Signs: Sudden winds rush across the upper atmosphere, the
shifting jet stream alters its route.
Keynote Event: Without notice a stimulus from the East interrupts
and alters your stream of consciousness.
URANUS in the South
Your independence is on the line and the big issue is: How can
you make the best use of your talent? In your sphere of activities there
could be people with empty or unworkable idealism, while others
may have developed into magnificent leaders of lost causes. You have
it in your power to be the catalyst for change and you must rely on
your own ingenuity to pull it off. Gathering your forces will not be
simple. Uncertainties seem to hang around, yet you have the willful
attachment to bring about unique innovations.
Nature Signs: Flashes of electromagnetic force spin across the subtropics, pumping and channeling ions.
Keynote Events: Suddenly out of the South comes exciting and
extraordinary aspirations and directions.
URANUS in the West
Dealings with people can be quite hectic and disruptive while
paradoxically awakening fresh and innovative vistas. Although it's
hard to categorize people in this locale, you could find yourself not
being able to live with them without certain associations. Partnerships
may lack a mutual give-and-take that is vital for a continuing healthy
endurance. Conflicts arise because demands are made without the
commitment to carry them through. The abrupt and alarming behavior
of others can, at times, cause some sort of estrangement.
Nature Signs: The purging storms, thunder crashing and lightning
recharging the atmosphere.
Keynote Event: Unexpectedly a person from the West with a contrary but inventive personality brings forth ingenious and extraordinary ideas.
URANUS in the North
Here your personal life is anything but typical. Unusual conditions come into play requiring you to alter standard behavior and
traditional beliefs. Another way to look at this place is where the
needs of family (or personal lifestyle) come up against your impersonal, selfish attitudes. Those in your immediate circle (including 116 / Planets in Locality
yourself) can be caught in a kind of future shock situation. The onrush
of new ideas and technology may cause a variety of uncertainties and
insecurities. These rapid changes impose irregularities on your
domestic life, possibly causing you to question the foundations of
what you stand for.
Nature Signs: Arching mesas as natural fortresses. Faults and fissures
marking the Earth's mantle, the flexible and rigid crust of electromagnetic
crystal.
Keynote Event: A stem and revolutionary influence from the
North divides and conquers.
NEPTUNE in the East
Abstract, mystical, and deceptive influences pervade this place.
Sensitivities which you may have been unaware of are now felt,
seemingly for the first time. Your psyche is often flooded with many
impressions which are not easy to sort out or understand without
some confusion developing. Your personal charm is pronounced
here, but so are feelings of inferiority and possibly a poor self-image.
You need to use your perceptions to protect yourself from all the
unseen, yet real delusions that are present. Your dream life should be
more active and in time you may develop into a medium and/or
mirror for others.
Nature Signs: The early breeze across the water, humid vapor softening
and moisturizing.
KeynoteEvents: Subtle and complex feelings from the East inspire
a receptive spirit.
NEPTUNE in the South
The ethics of the workplace and the soundness of your goals are
tested. Humanitarian justice is a big issue not easily resolved; in other
words it is important for you to feel right about your livelihood. All
kinds of intrigue and scandal are possible if you allow yourself to commit to false ideologies. You may feel close to what you consider
spiritual, yet without proper guidance these feelings can give way to
escapism and fanciful longings.
Nature Signs: Insect larva on the lake, plankton on the ocean, surfaces
that reflect and feed the chemistry of life.
Keynote Event: Devotional impressions from the South help
develop compassion and an inner knowing. The Geomantic Circle / 117
NEPTUNE in the West
There's a whole assortment of ambiguous and mysterious circumstances awaiting you here. In this locality it may be quite easy to
feel that you are surrounded by a host of devils and angels. People
have a strong effect on you and they can be a source of spiritual uplifting as well as great disappointment.
Relationships may have a strong undermining influence; the
habits of others and various skeletons in the closet interfere with your
ability to trust others. It pays to be very discriminating, because quite
often youU find that people aren't what they appear to be.
Nature Signs: Great waves and currents steering and driving the
oceanic planetary pulse.
Keynote Event: An undefinable force from the West reveals in a
dream the meaning of certain symbols of reality.
NEPTUNE in the North
This is a somewhat reclusive place with an atmosphere of psychic
escapades. Chronic family problems can surface, leading to depressing situations. A life of quiet desperations is promised unless some
other positive factors counteract it. You can find yourself pondering
the past while being receptive to the healing and hidden powers of
nature. There seems to be much more suffering involved in your
everyday living, and your problems seem to require more energy to
resolve. The need to get away and a general sense of escapism is
ever present.
Nature Signs: The weight of the polar ice, the cycles of freeze and thaw,
snow slides rumbling downward. A dense fog hides the material world but
condenses on the spiritual.
Keynote Event: Out of the North a transcendental mystery becomes
a reality; imaginative designs are made concrete.
PLUTO in the East
Under this influence the best and worst qualities of your personality are expressed. You live life to its fullest, reacting intensely to
many issues. It is quite easy to overshoot objectives and suffer the
consequences, burning out and bouncing back again. The testing of
your limits in different areas will occur, making it possible to really
learn about your own resources, and seeing if you have the "right
stuff." There is definitely a need to continually enforce your position
because of a sense that you are always fighting someone or some- 118 / Planets in Locality
thing. The common tendency is to be more compulsive, pushy and
nervy, thus evoking the anger and resentment of others. Your outlook
will tend to be too black and white—cut and dried. Finding ways to
relax and cool down is not only healthy, but mentally uplifting.
Nature Signs: Pelting rains, steaming mornings, water rising to its
limits.
Keynote Event: A force out of the East deciphers cryptic messages
from the unconscious.
PLUTO in the South
In this locality the transforming and corrupting influences of
power await you. It is common to be involved with some type of
hierarchy that rewards and punishes with impromptu swiftness. You
may encounter an assortment of despots and petty tyrants, as well as
highly specialized and dedicated people. Under this influence you
may live in a world of your own creation or manuever in the corporate
world. You somehow have to control your desire nature in order to
get to (what you consider) the top.
Nature Signs: Steaming vapors, a dripping humidity breeding life and
consuming life.
Keynote Event: A dynamic onrush of power from the North transforms and consumes, altering destinies.
PLUTO in the West
Psychological preparation, like speaking softly and carrying a big
stick, is very appropriate in this place. Anything from mass hysteria to
total isolation is possible. Periodically you will find it difficult to
separate yourself from the inclinations and destinies of large groups.
You can play the game of one-upsmanship, feeling many types of
undercurrents which are both manipulative and divisive. Others may
literally try to reverse your life for better or worse.
Nature Signs: Great volumes of water: the tidal wave, hurricanes. Vast
aquifers and tidal basins, pools of storage and life.
Keynote Event: In a deep silence a force from the West reaches
inward, drawing out feeling and renewal.
PLUTO in the North
That which is vital and full of personal meaning is eventually
uncovered in this locality, but not without hardship. Often youll feel
deep unconscious stirrings. You may have to become accustomed to The Geomantic Circle / 119
living with an ample amount of pressure. You may feel threatened
here and this could explain why you react defensively in personal
matters. Strong reactions and outbursts revealing your innermost
feelings can occur.
Nature Signs: Bubbling outpouring of mineral hot springs, cleansing and
purifying. Crystal ice structures mirrored in still waters; a frozen, timeless
world.
Keynote Event: The forces of providence from the North controlling, dominating, transforming the form and structure. Table 13
11. Cross-Cultuml, Multi-Level Geomantic (Local Space) Circle 1 North
2 Midnight
3 Winter Júpiter The Laws
5 Techniques
The Act of Meditation
6 Earth
Ch'i paths of Air & Water
7 Cold and humid
8 Older years, 63+ Mercúrio Winter/Solstice
10 Saturn, Transpluto
11 Frontal shield
Disks/Coins
12 Auriel, Pandochus
13 Gnomes, Body, Salt
Geomancy
14 4th-3rd Houses
Home and land
Basic thinking
A parent, car South
Noon
Summer
Light
Self-realized
One Perfect Meditation
Fire
Electromagnetic/Lightning
Warm and dry
Adult, 21-42
Summer/Solstice
Sun, Mars, Jupiter
Power objects
Rods, Wands
Michael, Thoth
Salamanders, Soul/Memory,
Sulphur, Pyromancy
10th-9th Houses
Higher mind
Education
Profession; a parent East
Sunrise
Spring
Life
The Self
The Meditator
Air
Wood/Vegetation
Wind
Youth, 0-21
Spring/Equinox
Mercury, Venus, Uranus
Magic weapons
Swords, Crystals
Raphael, Horus
Sylphs, Spirit, Azoth
Aeromancy
12th-lst Houses
Personality
Outlook
Early years; habits, limits West
Sunset
Autumn
Love
The Not-Self
Object of Meditation
Water
Metal Conductors
Wet and cool
Middle age, 43-63
Autumn/Equinox
Moon, Neptune, Pluto
Spirit catchers
Cups
Gabriel, Elurus
Undines, Mind, Mercury
Hydromancy
6th-7th Houses
Public
Partnerships
Marriage; work methods 15 Patience/purity
Renewal needed
16 Powers and Wisdom
17 Bad influence,
barren, the dead, mystery
18 Wife
19 Business gains
20
Strength
Resourceful, blunt, direct,
tenacious woman.
21 Knowledgeable
Scholarly, noble, calm,
dependable man.
22
Amazon
Practical, supportive,
strong, capable, efficient.
23 Hero/Warrior
Businessman, influential,
soldier, statesman.
Courage, drive. Love/friendship
is needed
Innocence, Trust,
Growth
Good influence,
growth, fertile
Travel
Fame
Growth
Nurturing, loud and shy,
warm woman.
Active
Highly volatile man. Energetic/earth
work is needed
Sees far and wide
Reflects laws
Good influence,
new birth, abundance
Life
Good family
Order
Optimistic, light-hearted,
smooth, persistent woman. Courier
An assistant; a silent,
somber man.
Mother
Hetaira
Protective, caring,
Gifted mind, cultured,
nurturing. Compassionate, artful, loving,
forgiving.
promiscuous.
Father/Hunter
Puer/Intellect
Supportive, sheltering,
Youthful, airy, flighty.
family values.
Flexible, changing mind,
Protecting, reassuring.
spirited. Teaching/leading
Evaluation needs
Introspection
Changing
Indifferent,
decline
Children
Children's fame
Feeling
Introspective, remorseful,
sly, cunning, fierce, loony
woman.
Organizer
Mysterious, unknowable
and secretive man.
Medium
Prophetess, seeress,
visionary. Intuitive,
inspiratrice, creative.
Wise Man
Insight, vision,
creativity. A magician. 322 / Planets in Locality
The Cross-Cultural, Multi-Level Geomantic Circle
The correspondences and correlations that could be added to this table are
quite numerous. Therefore in constructing this geomantic circle, I had to be
selective and include the most important cross-cultural data without excluding
any vital points. The information in the basic system offers an excellent place
to expand from, if the interested reader feels the need to add information. In
some cases I've added, taken away or substituted one or two words. This was
done for the purposes of clarification, and because of space constraints.
All the systems used in the construction of the circle were in agreement
with one another, with only minor discrepancies. This is really remarkable,
since in most cases the data used is from sources which are far removed from
each other geographically and culturally.
There are a number of items that I was unable to add either because they
did not fit into the directional format, or because it was found that they were
culturally derived and therefore not universal in nature. Two examples of these
cultural items were colors and animals which almost always differed from
place to place.
Explanation of Geomantic Source Material
oONE. The standard cardinal directions used on the compass.
o TWO. Apparent universal system for the Northern Hemisphere.1 In
the Southern Hemisphere noon would be midnight; also, in the Toltec system noon and midnight are reversed.
oTHREE. Reversed in the Southern Hemisphere, i.e., summer is winter and spring is fall. This is another universal designation, but the source for
this was the European magical tradition from Gray's book.2
oFOUR. A standard Western magical system taken from Gray.3
o FIVE. Basic Kriya yoga meditation formula.
oSJX. The four major elements are those agreed upon or strongly
implied by almost every system. The additional information is from the
Chinese Feng Shui system. Júpiter o SEVEN. Weather Ch'i taken from the Feng Shui system.5
o EIGHT. Another taken from Feng Shui, but implied by others.6
ON1NE. The seasonal/cardinal signs, for the Northern Hemisphere
only, i.e., the winter solstice/Capricorn, spring equinox/Aires, summer
solstice/Cancer and fall equinox/Libra. The Geomantic Circle / 123
oTEN. In reviewing all the sources for the geomantic circle nowhere
were all the planetary relationships mentioned for the ten known and two
unknown (i.e., not observed) planets. After much deliberation, I have assigned the planets to where they seem to fit best. The planets follow the
weather and element patterns; they do not necessarily follow their respective signs. Even though the planets have not been assigned places, keep in
mind that in actual practice they are the variables and can be foundanywhere
around the Local Space circle.
In the Feng Shui system, the planets are given directions but seem out of
place when they are compared to the other directional correspondences.
Only when we take the Feng Shui placements as an equivalent of the Western
Exaltation and Fall does it begin to make sense. Mercury in the north would
mean that you have to teach and talk about the mysteries of the north. Mars in
the south means that you have to take action for trust to develop, and for
growth to occur. Venus in the west suggests that calm and balance are needed
to deal with the emotions involved with subtle and abstract realities. Jupiter
in the east could indicate that travel and expansion are necessary for intellectual and artistic development.
In the Feng Shui system, Saturn occupies the fifth direction, the center
indicating a central structural permanence and stability of the physical brain/
body and ego.7
0 ELEVEN. These are combined categories from Gray's magic ritual
methods,8 and Don Juan's Toltec System. Mercúrio o TWELVE. The standard placements for the Archangels in Western
magic and folklore.10 Both Egyptian and Christian are given. Levi's Hebrew
and Gnostic Archangels are different in a few cases.11
o THIRTEEN. These listings come from Levi; they have an ancient
Egyptian and Greek origin.12
oFOURTEEN. Abbreviated versions of the standard houses that occupy
the four directions in the Northern Hemisphere.
o FIFTEEN. This listing comes from Sun Bear's Native American "Earth
Astrology." I have taken the liberty of adding the word "needed," since the
implication is evident when these listings are compared with the others.13
o SIXTEEN. This group is from H. Storm's "Seven Arrows" system.14
The correct name for this system is the Medicine Wheel, a common tool of
self-discovery and divination among Amerindians.15
o SEVENTEEN. This is the overly simplified version of Aztec astrological assignments as interpreted by Tunnicliffe.16
0 EIGHTEEN. This is the ancient eight-house Octopus System used by
the Greeks and brought to light by C. Pagan. It is speculation on my part that
this system had a use in the area of Local Space. However, the orientation
toward direction is indicated, and therefore I felt that it had to be included.17
In addition, this slot contains the Feng Shui eight-house system.18 224 / Planets in Locality
o NINETEEN. These are the I Ching correspondences taken from the
Feng Shui system.19 The entire set of trigrams are included in Figure 15.
o TWENTY. These are the four corners of winds that females are
drawn toward. Given by Don Juan in the "Rule of the Eagle."20
o TWENTY-ONE. These are the male counterparts to the female directions. Although the males are not assigned a specific direction in the Toltec
System,21 they all fell into one of the directions quite comfortably. This is
primarily due to their distinct characteristics.
o TWENTY-TWO. These are the four types of women according to the
Western depth psychological system of Wolff.22 They can be viewed as the
anima, the inner female half of the male unconscious or psyche. In both the
male and female, the words in the beginning describe the general characteristics along with what is called the "bright face." The concluding words
describe the "dark face" qualities.
o TWENTY-THREE. These are Whitman's four male types and also the
inner male half of woman, called the animus.23 Notes
References used for Figure 15:
Chu, W.K. and Sherrill, W.A., The Astrology of l-Ching. York Beach,
Maine: Samuel Weiser, Inc., 1976.
Gray, Edin, The Tarot Revealed. New York: Bell Publishing Co., 1969.
Hall, Manly Plutão ., The Secret Teaching of All Ages. Los Angeles: Philosophical Research Society, 1977 (Reprinted from the 1929 edition, Crocker Co., San Francisco, CA).
Wilhelm, Richard, The I Ching or Book of Changes. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, Bollingen Series XIX, 1967.
1. Gray, William, Magical Ritual Methods. Cheltenham, Engalnd: Helos
Books, 1969, p. 59.
2. Gray, p. 59.
3. Gray, p. 59. Júpiter . Skinner, Stephen, The Living Earth Manual of Feng-Shui. Boston: Routledge & Kegan Paul, 1982, p. 58.
5. Skinner, p. 58.
6. Skinner, p. 58.
7. Skinner, p. 58.
8. Gray, p. 59. Mercúrio . Castaneda, Carlos, The Eagle's Gift. New York: Simon and Schuster,
1981, p. 120-127.
10. Gray, p. 59.
11. Levi, Eliphas, Transcendental Magic. New York: Samuel Weiser, 1972,
p. 61.
12. Levi, p. 228-236.
13. Bear, Sun, The Medicine Wheel. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall,
Inc., 1980, p. 127-149.
14. Storm, Hyemeyhosts, Seven Arrows. New York: Harper & Row, 1972,
p. 6.
15. Storm, p. 6.
16. Tunnicliffe, K.C., Aztec Astrology. Essex, England: L.N. Fowler & Co.,
1979, p. 85.
17. Pagan, Cyril, Astrological Origins. St. Paul, MN: Llewellyn Publications,
1971, p. 163.
18. Rossbach, Sarah, Feng Shui. New York: E. Plutão . Dutton Inc., 1983, p.
109.
19. Skinner, pp. 58 and 62.
125 20. Castaneda, p. 175.
21. Castaneda, p. 176.
22. Wolff, Toni, Structural Forms of the Feminine Psyche. Bern, Switzerland: Herausgeber G.H. Graber, 1956.
23. Whitmont, Edmund, The Symbolic Quest. New York: G. Plutão . Putnam's 7 Sons, 1977. 726 CHAPTERS THE LOCAL SPACE CHART
AND PHYSICAL HEALTH T
JL he Local Space chart can provide a map to unravel the mystery of how any locality affects your physical, emotional and mental
functions. Geomancy and mysticism alike have taught that man is a
part of nature, and not apart from nature. This fact is one of the principles that we are constantly being reminded of in locality astrology.
When dealing with your physical body it is important to keep in
mind that you are composed of the same substances that you find in
your back yard. Your body is, in fact, a system of tubes and biochemical interactions, and in many respects you are an organic computer,
capable of responding to the most subtle of stimuli. Your mind even
registers an average brain wave pattern of 13 to 15 cycles per second,
which happens to be the same frequency as that of the ionosphere.
Although medical science has increased the life expectancy 25
years in the last 50 years, and cured many age-old diseases, there are
many physical problems that can't be changed at present. This being
the case, you have the viable option of getting the right amount of
physical exercise and eating fresh and wholesome foods, along with
an awareness of the effects of your immediate environment. In
attempting to really live a more healthy lifestyle, it becomes necessary
for you to make changes, and in doing so you come up against old
mental habits, as well as ingrained behaviors and emotional patterns.
Astrology says that these unhealthy habits can be traced to certain aspects in the birth chart; furthermore, we know that the birth
chart is constructed according to the exact locality (latitude and lon127 128 / Planets in Locality
gitude) of birth. Sociology tells us that most people are products of
their environments. If you change this environment, can you change
the product as well, and improve its health and productivity? locality
astrology responds with a resounding "yes."
Using the Local Space map for any locality provides you with the
necessary insights on how the planets will affect your health, thinking
and inner life. Examine Table 14, which gives basic correspondences
of planet, sign and sector to a general body area.
The Local Space Houses correspond to the signs and planets, e. Vênus ..
Mars/Aries/First House, etc. It has been my experience that the
twelve divisions of the horizon—the Local Space Houses—have a
mild or weak effect on physical health. Close planetary aspects have
the most influence.
Generally speaking, the two planets which promote physical
health are Jupiter and the Sun. When they are close to the angles, or
low in altitude, that locality will tend to upgrade health. Any soft
aspects with the Sun or Jupiter in the Local Space chart can also prove
helpful, but often to a lesser extent. Mars and Pluto can be quite helpful with body vitality; however, they need soft aspects to them, and it
helps if they are constructive in the birth chart.
Mercury and Venus by themselves may not be strong enough to
consistently affect health, however in most situations they can be
counted on as a positive influence. Saturn and Neptune usually cause
problems of one sort or another.
What I'm proposing is a theoretical outline of how stellar and
planetary energies relate to the human psychophysiology, and how
the vital force (Ch'i or Prana) in the universe functions on the Earth
and in man.
Whether you stay in or near your birth locality, or relocate to
other places, or are in the process of travel, the physical and nonphysical parts of yourself are always oriented toward the four great
circles. These circles, the equator, ecliptic, horizon and Prime Vertical,
are measuring systems whereby man can locate the positions of the
planets and stars. Each system was developed under a different cultural
emphasis and during a different time in history. The Chinese and
Egyptians developed and favored the equatorial system, perhaps as
early as 2000 B.C. The Greeks developed the ecliptic system around
600 B.C. The Arabian and Mesoamerican cultures developed and
worked with the horizon and Prime Vertical between 700 a.d. and
1300 a.d. The cultural and metaphysical orientation of each circle is Table 14
Anatomical & Physiological Correspondences with Planets & Signs
SUN/LEO: Heart, spine in general, overall constitution, circulation, right eye,
left brain, frontal cortex center.
MOON/CANCER: Pscyhosomatic reactions, skin, fat/water content, allergies,
stomach, blood, sleep patterns, left eye, right brain, medullary center.
MERCURY/GEMINI: Arms, lungs, parasympathetic nervous system, upper
throat, normal thinking, cervical center (right side).
MERCURY/VIRGO: Hands, upper intestine, sympathetic nervous system,
upper throat, concrete thinking, cervical center (left side).
VENUS/LIBRA: Ovaries (right), kidneys (right), small of back, buttocks,
bronchial tubes, dorsal center (right side).
TRANSPLUTO/TAURUS: Ovaries (left), kidneys (left), thyroid gland, throat,
neck, salivation, sweat glands, dorsal center (left side).
MARS/ARIES: The head in general, muscular system, body temperature,
overt sexuality, white blood cells, adrenals, lumbar center (right side).
PLUTO/SCORPIO: Covert sexuality, reproductive organs, rectum, colon,
fight or flight reactions, swellings, lumbar center (left side).
JUPITER/SAGITTARIUS: Hip bones, liver, thighs, recuperative abilities, fat
cells, sacral center (right side).
NEPTUNE/PISCES: Feet, pineal gland, lowered resistance, dreaming function, sacral center (left side).
URANUS/AQUARIUS: Ankles, pituitary gland, aura, spinal nerves, coccygeal
center (right side).
SATURN/CAPRICORN; Bones, knees, teeth, general skeletal structure, inner
ear, coccygeal center (left side).
NODES: Polarity functions of the astral/dream body. 129 230 / Planets in Locality
undeniable. The very fact that each system causes one to view the sky
in a different way relates directly to one's own psychophysical health.
It is a precept of Western metaphysics and of East Indian and
Chinese medicine that human beings unconsciously function on four
different levels. Each one of these levels in turn corresponds to a state
of consciousness. The first level is the physical, and it relates to the
waking state of consciousness. For most people, this state applies only
to the five senses. The second level is the astral body, which relates to
the dreaming state of consciousness. The third is the higher mental
body, which relates to the deep-sleep state. The fourth and final level
is the deathless/spirit or higher-self, relating to the cosmic consciousness state.
According to yogic theory and practice the four states of consciousness function within and through a series of chakras, or wheels.
These chakras, or psychic centers (as they are called in the West), are a
complex system of interrelationships on various levels of consciousness. Each of the non-physical centers is located along the spine and is
connected to a physical nerve plexus. The vital life force for any
individual flows from the higher levels of consciousness into the
spinal centers, where it becomes a kriya/kundalini current—the active
vital force in the human body, measured as nerve impulses.
Although the physiological and psychic functions of each center
are known, the exact locations, size, and degree of potential balance in
each center will vary depending on the birth chart, which in turn is
modified by location.
In the following Table 15 the standard twelve-House system
(with six centers) is listed. There are five dual and two single centers.
The single centers are the Sun/Leo/male at the cortex between the
eyebrows and the Moon/Cancer/female center at the medulla in the
back of the head. The remaining five centers are dual, with the Water
and Earth signs on the left/female side of the spine, and the Fire and
Air signs on the right/male side.
The way the four circles work relating to the states of consciousness depends on the position and location of the physical body, and
on the amount of self-conscious awareness that you as an individual
have attained. The Local Space Chart and Physical Health / 131
Table 15
Spinal Section Located at Coccygeal Base of spine Sacral Sacral Genital level Prostatic Lumbar Navel level Tepigastic Dorsal Heart level Cardiac Cervical Throat level Pharyngeal Medullary Eyebrow level Cavernous Plexus Planets Sign/House Saturn
Uranus
Neptune
Jupiter
Pluto
Mars
Transpluto
Venus
Mercury
Asteroids?
Moon
Sun Capricom/lOth
Aquarius/11th
Pisces/12th
Sagittarius/9th
Scorpio/8 th
Aries/lst
Taurus/2nd
Libra/7 th
Virgo/6th
Gemini/3rd
Cancer/4th
Leo/5th The sixteen system is looked upon as a semi-dormant system
predating the above in the evolution of consciousness. Here there are
nine centers—seven dual and two singular. The singles are the Nodes,
with the north Node at the top of the head and the south Node at the
(now non-existant) tail: the dragon's head and tail! The Moon was a
dual center in the head. The Sun (dual) was at the sternum between
the Mars and Venus centers.
The equator is really only a geographical measurement of the
Earth; therefore it represents the connectedness of spirit with the
physical body in any position or orientation. Table 16
Correspondences of Three Systems
Ecliptic
Observed Tract: 180 degrees, tilted; the tilt-a-whirl.
Type System: Solar, i.e. the Sun's path, relating to the celestial.
State of Consciousness: Awake, everyday awareness, five senses.
Psychic Centers: 12 system, 6 centers; five dual and two single.
Directions: North/south (zodiac belt), faces opposite ecliptic.
Body Positions: Vertical; sitting or standing.
Rotations: Both clockwise and counterclockwise. 132 / Planets in Locality
Horizon
Observed Tract: 360 degrees around; the merry-go-round.
Type System: Lunar; relating to terrestrial happenings.
State of Consciousness: Sleep state, dreams, desires.
Psychic Centers: 16 system, Mercúrio centers; seven dual, two single.
Direction: East/west, sunrise/sunset, east preferred.
Body Position: Horizontal, lying down.
Rotation: Only clockwise.
Prime Vertical
Observed Tract: 180 degrees, directly overhead; a Ferris wheel.
Type System: Planetary and stellar influences.
State of Consciousness: Deep, dreamless sleep.
Psychic Centers: Upper four.
Direction: Above the head, zenith; below the feet, nadir.
Body Position: Vertical in meditation but horizontal in sleep.
Rotation: Only clockwise.
The observed tract is the orientation as viewed by the observer; the type
system the main astrological concentration; the state of consciousness the corresponding states induced; the psychic centers the etheric and physical ganglia
activated; the direction the advantageous (natural) body position; the body
position the description of this position; the rotation the observed planetary
and stellar movement. From Table 16 it can be seen that when the physical body is
parallel, i.e. horizontal to the Earth's surface, sleep is induced. On the
other hand, keeping the body vertical to the surface promotes deeper
and more aware states. Thus good posture is not only physically
advantageous, but it also allows the spinal current to lift properly
through the centers. Therefore all meditation positions are vertical to
the surface. If they are horizontal, then dreams and astral projections
can take place; they may not be as productive as meditation, but on the
other hand, they are necessary for rest.
From Table 14 on page 129 you can ascertain what part of your
body will be sensitized by a significant planet. In Table 15 on page 131
you can see how a prominent planet will affect your psychic system. In
Table 16 on page 131 you can find out how the planets in the thre e systems operate in a variety of ways. The Local Space Chart and Physical Health / 133
Different views of the cosmos have been created because the
great circles are, in the final analysis, a blend of cultural and religious
beliefs along with personal preferences. In regards to health the
ancients have said: What a man thinks, so he is. Mind rules body and
form follows function.
The following are planetary pairs used primarily for conjunctions and oppositions—the two planetary aspects which affect
health more adversely than any others. With squares, the orb must be
two degrees or less. This is not a diagnosis.
1. Saturn/Neptune—Inert and inactive physiology, slow recuperation, persistent blockages, lingering problems, hampered progress,
adverse reaction from most drugs.
2. Mars/Neptune—Very susceptible to infectious diseases, strong
adverse reaction to drugs, build-up of toxins, mucus, or pus.
3. Mars/Saturn—Destroyed vitality, breakdown of organs, incisions into the body, muscle and joint problems. Júpiter . Neptune/Ascendant (Anti-Vertex)—Psychosomatic problems,
illusions of the senses, infections, oddities.
5. Saturn/Ascendant (Anti-Vertex)—Defective organs and/or glands,
hereditary problems, depressed functions.
When three or more of these planets and/or points appear
together in the same sector/house, then the probability of health
problems increases. Other planets involving hard angles to those
same planets in the natal or Local Space charts will compound the
situation. CHAPTER 6 RELOCATION TECHNIQUES T
A. he most commonly used system is the Ecliptic, the particular
plane of reference of which is the Sun's path across the Earth's surface—
which is another way of saying the Earth's orbit around the Sun. The
measurements along the ecliptic are in zodiacal longitude from 0 to
360 degrees in an easterly to westerly direction (see Figures 16
(page 136) and 17 (page 138).
Declination is the term used for a planet's position north or south
of the equator, measured from the ecliptic. Declination is measured
from 0 to 90 degrees both north and south. In relationship to the
seasons on Earth in the Northern Hemisphere, the Sun is 23 degrees
26 minutes declination south on December 20th, and 26 degrees
declination north on June 20th. On the 20th of March and 20th of September, the Sun is at 00 degrees declination—at the equator.
The 360 degrees of the zodiac are derived from the fact that the
ecliptic when viewed from the Earth passes through twelve groupings
of stars called constellations. These groupings of stars have been subsequently divided into twelve equal parts called the signs of the
zodiac. There are two major zodiacs, the Tropical/Seasonal and the
Sidereal/Constellational.
The most common zodiac in use is the Tropical. It is based on the
Earth's rotation and orbit, which determine the seasonal variations.
When the Sun is at its furthest point in the Northern Hemisphere (see
Figure 18, page 139), we experience the longest day of the year in the
235 NEP
Tangent
Oblique
2D£c1 iptic Plutão lane <3£> Vert- & /nW
Obiique
Tangent
SEP X3
V5 I
go O
My jnu 2D<—-J(6 j
FALL
EQUINOX
\ Netuno //
go< •o np
M ' 1/ 0 N1
Mi //T\\
SPRING
PP
A Moment of Summer Solstice
Fig. 16—The Ecliptic, the Signs and the Seasons
136 Relocation Techniques /137
Northern Hemisphere: the Summer Solstice (which means "standing
still"). The Summer Solstice is also the beginning of the zodiacal sign
of Cancer. In the Southern Hemisphere, this is the shortest day of the
year, and the beginning of winter. When the Sun moves southward
and is at the Earth's equator, the Autumnal Equinox ("equal night") is
reached. This is the beginning of the Tropical zodiacal sign of Libra.
When the Sun is at its furthest point south, then we have the Winter
Solstice, which is the shortest day of the year in the Northern Hemisphere, and the beginning of winter as well as of the zodiacal sign
Capricorn. (In the Southern Hemisphere it is the longest day of the
year, and the beginning of summer.) To complete the circle, the Sun's
energies are once again back at the equator, moving north, at the time
of the Vernal Equinox; this is the beginning of spring, as well as the
beginning of the sign Aries.
If the Ecliptic System coordinates are the ones that are used for
calculating a horoscope, then how do we arrive at the major angles in
most House systems? Look now at Figure 18 on page 139. You can see
that the M.C. (Medium Coeli: "middle of the sky"), or the Tenth
House cusp, is the point on the ecliptic where the celestial meridian
and the celestial equator intersect in the southern direction. The I.C.
(Imum Coeli: "under sky"), which is directly opposite the M.C., is at
the same intersection but in the northern direction. There are a number of ways in which to measure the Ascendant, but the most common
is the easterly intersection of the ecliptic with the horizon. Therefore
the Descendant is the same, only in a westerly direction.
The second major system is the Equatorial System. Its particular
plane of reference is the Earth's equator. The measurement along this
plane is in degrees of right ascension, from 0 to 360 degrees east to
west. The other name for right ascension is geographical longitude,
east or west (see Figures 18 and 19A). A generic term for a line stretching in a north/south direction is a "meridian." The meridian at Greenwich, England represents the beginning of the series of time zones
around the Earth, and the point of 0 degrees of longitude.
Distance north and south of the equator is measured in latitude,
which is the equivalent of declination. Latitude is expressed as 0 to 90
degrees in both directions, north or south, from the equator. When a
planet is in right ascension in the Equatorial System, it is not necessarily
in the same place in the Zodiacal/Ecliptic System. If you study Figures
17, 18 and 19A and C, you'll see that the ecliptic circle and the
equatorial circle run perpendicular to one another, except when a * ..
L_ Netuno 12 Lua 5 7 ■ 'r~ ■■
T■^V Fig. 17
The sky measured into twelve Local Space Houses and four systems. ZENITH
A
t-x Plutão .*
\\
AZIMUTH
WE5T/VT
sourH_ t
IMUM}*
COELI I xv"1 EAST/ANTI-V.T.
EQ ASC c. horizon/ SQaator
rp
NAD H Fig. 18—The Celestial Sphere 139 NORTH
i t^EDIUM
f "COELI Zen i th
NCP
/ Celestial
Men Id i an
Pr me
Vert ca I-)
rc Celestial
raI lei mucan
ta North
Poi nt South
Po i nt
or zon
East
Po nt estial
Equator SCP
Rotation Axis
Nad i r Fig. 19A
The Horizon Coordinate System
planet happens to be near the intersection at 0 degrees of Aries/Libra
—which is both 0 and 180 degrees of zodiacal longitude. Pluto is
usually the most out of line, due to its variable speeds in elliptical
orbit.
Let's look at the Horizon System and see where it fits with the
other two, and most importantly how it differs. The plane of reference
in the Horizon System is the visible or sensible horizon. This means
that if you were standing on the ideal surface of a flat plane, such as a
desert floor, you could see an even horizon in all directions around
you, assuming that there were no large mountains or hills in any
direction. This horizon is in fact tangent to the surface. The complete
circle around you is measured in azimuth, and it contains 360 degrees.
The other measurement is called altitude and pertains to the elevation
of a planet above and below the horizon, measured from 0 to 90
degrees. Regardless of the various altitudes of the planets, the important thing to grasp is that the planets are located within 360 degrees of
azimuth, and therefore they fall in line with the cardinal directions of
140 NEP
NCP Para 11eI of
Lat i tude
Celestial
Equator Eel ipt icl
Merit) ian
W i nter
So!atice Summer
Solstlce Ar i es Solst i tla 1
Co lure SCP SEP
Fig. 19B
The Ecliptic Coordinate System
ncp Solsti tial
Colure Eq
Co Iure Summer
Solstice 0\
Winter
Solstice
VernaI
Eau i nox Ec! iptic
Mer id ian
SCP Fig. 19C
The Equatorial Coordinate System
141 142 / Planets in Locality
north, south, east and west, just like on a compass. That's the beauty of
this system: the movement of the planets in time, and the actual visible sky in any location, are united with the compass directions.
Another unique feature of the Horizon System is that the zenith is
always directly above your head and the nadir below your feet. This is
an exact representation of time and space (place), and even more
exact than the natal chart, because it shows how the cosmos is seen by
an observer at any location and at any moment in time.
Therefore, the Local Space/Horizon is not just symbolically correct but actually correct from an observational perspective. To say it
another way, you become the center of the horizon circle, because you
are at all times the center of your own universe.
Looking at Figures 17,18 and 19B, you can see that in the Horizon/
Azimuth System, due east (Anti-Vertex) is the intersection of the
Prime Vertical and the celestial equator on the horizon. The Vertex in
the west is in the opposite direction. Notice that the celestial meridian
intersects the horizon at the north and south points.
There is one other coordinate system; although it is not usually
considered one of the three major systems, it is a very important one.
The plane of reference in this system is the Prime Vertical, the east/
west circle that is always 90 degrees vertical to the horizontal/horizon
plane. This circle is always directly above and below your location; it
makes a large circle from east to west and in doing so connects the
zenith and nadir. The height factor is called amplitude. It is a measurement that shows a planet's position on either side, i.e. north or south of
the plane of the Prime Vertical circle, which runs east to west directly
overhead. Amplitude is measured from 0 to 90 degrees aK we and below
the horizon, i.e., there are four 90-degree angles, two above and two
below.
The Prime Vertical System is also known as the Campanus Houses,
or mundoscope. It is very useful in Local Space work when the locality
is below 30 north latitude (or above 30 south). When the locality gets
closer to the equator, the three major systems converge. This is
because the 23.5° tilt of the planet with respect to the ecliptic is not as
obvious at the equator. You are at the center of the sphere and not
toward either of the poles. Although the convergence is not exact, it
does nullify some of the horizon's unique measurements. This is
especially true of the Horizon System, in which the planets will bunch
up in an east and west direction for a Local Space chart drawn near or
at the equator. The Prime Vertical, however, remains intact at the Relocation Techniques /143
equator, and the Local Space planetary positions can be shifted to this
plane of reference (see Chapter 5).
Johndro gave some very descriptive terms for the above systems.
He called the Horizon System the "merry-go-round," which gives a
clear picture of what is represented: a circle on the horizon around us,
with ourselves at the center. The "Ferris wheel" is the Prime Vertical
placed 90 degrees to the "merry-go-round." We are still at the center,
but the Ferris wheel is directly above and below us.
If the horizon and the Prime Vertical are the merry-go-round and
Ferris wheel respectively, then the ecliptic has to be the "tilt-a-wheel."
In the northern and southern latitudes, the plane of the ecliptic is
tilted above and below the horizon. It appears untilted when we reach
the equator, where horizon and ecliptic are very nearly the same.
Edward Johndro's Contributions
There's no more fitting introduction to relocation techniques
than the work of L. Edward Johndro. His work in locality predates
everyone except Sepharial. In 1929, Johndro introduced a whole
group of theories which he had been using.1
It's very inspiring to know that back in the 1920's, locality astrology was already being practiced. When Johndro talked about various
methods in locality astrology, he attempted to explain them by relating them to what were at that time the most advanced theories in
physics and electromagnetism. Although he lacked the laboratory
and extensive research to prove many of his theories, he nonetheless
set forth some of astrology's most original and intriguing ideas.
One of his main points, the one he hammers home time and time
again, concerns electromagnetism and the chart angles. He likened
the Earth to a crystal*—as a charged body rotating in space. He pointed out that planet Earth's relationship with the cosmos is measured by
astrological and astronomical great circles: the ecliptic, equator, horizon.
Prime Vertical, and meridians.
He described the ecliptic, the Ascendant/Descendant axis, as
basically "electromagnetic" in nature, and the right ascension M.C./
I.C. as "electrodynamic." He further explained that when planets are
aspecting the Ascendant/Descendant they manifest as psychological
inducements, i.e. various attractions and repulsions. In Johndro's
theory the Ascendant/Descendant reveals the "intensity of current"—
the voltage in its static state.
"Similar to Buckminster Fuller's "spaceship Earth" concepts. 144 / Planets in Locality
In reference to the M.C./I.C, Johndro makes a very important
distinction. Planets in aspect to these angles are basically electrodynamic in nature; they "deliver the current," thus producing
current events and/or the turn of events.
In making these distinctions, Johndro said that there are really
two Ascendants: one electrical and one magnetic. Magnetic current is
the standard Ascendant/Descendant, but the electric current is none
other than the Anti-Vertex/Vertex employed in Local Space. Johndro
maintained that anything connected with the ecliptic is usually an
indicator of potential. However, anything relating to right ascension—
M.C./I.C. or the equator—actually "causes" the events. Of course,
when you're talking about the M.C./I.C., which is really south and
north, you have to include east and west or the Anti-Vertex/Vertex of
the Horizon System. This is one explanation as to why many astrologers
have found the four directions/angles in the Local Space chart characteristic of direct events.
Johndro pointed out that the electromagnetic and electrodynamic currents and their flows are in constant interplay, producing many of the effects that astrology attempts to identify and place in
time. In the matter of timing, Johndro recommended that an orb of 16'
(minutes) be used, basing this on the fact that the Sun's light frequencies are 32' in width (the ecliptic is approximately 16' wide). He said
that events usually occur at the beginning, the middle or the end of the
orb, i.e. 0', 16', or 32'. He continued his analysis by saying that important factors are the type of event(s) and planet(s), the amount or degree of aspects involved, and what angle is highlighted at any given
time. He called all the above "couplings," and likened these various
systems and planets to the geometric and trigonometric problems of
Einstein's "tangle of world lines" (see Figure 20).
Making the system more complete and at the same time more
complex, Johndro also used secondary and solar arc directions, along
with eclipses and planetary stations, to predict events.
Johndro's theories did not stop with planetary influences. In his
second book. The Stars, he examined ways in which the fixed stars
related to certain geographical areas. He didn't feel that the stars had
specific qualities in and of themselves; instead he felt that they were
points of radiant energy which were amplified by the planets aspecting them. He did point out that large magnitude stars were more
important than the hundreds of visible stars and approximately 71,000
very dim stars. According to Johndro, the main function of the stars ★ ORANGE
N.J
wye Áries /am LAT to
/9Z9 lat to M ANDAOMEDAE Tr
'*?) £■06^ TOR is"*15 r b ^:
CM* Ci pr/c
/ -VS ECL
fie±2. 39^ 6
0
OPAnuE, N.J HORIZON LE OF W/OP Fig. 20—Johndro's R.A.-Ecliptic Star Location Lines 145 246 / Planets in Locality
was to amplify the good, bad or mixed influences of the planets in a
given locality. He felt that in some cases, they could cause an influence
to be felt for a longer duration than one would normally expect. This is
due to the fact that the fixed stars move at a rate of 1 degree every 72
years. Later in this book we will return to the fixed stars and their
various uses.
Johndro's view of the inner workings of astrology is both revolutionary and complex. He basically saw the Earth and all the planets
as charged bodies. He described the Earth as a charged crystal oscillating at a certain frequency with the Sun, Moon and the other planets.
Therefore, to him the solar system was in a constant state of induction
with respect to electromagnetic fields of the charged masses.2 He felt
that each planet reflected many harmonics while staying within its
own fundamental note/tone and frequency. He believed that events
came forth from the various forms of electromagnetic induction in
respect to the interactivity of planes and planets, which all happened
at the speed of light. He also felt that because gravity was functioning
within this set of coordinates, our rate of consciousness could perceive events as happening separately.
In honor of Johndro's achievements, every two years some outstanding astrologer receives the coveted Johndro Award (changed in
1986 to the Johndro-Jayne Award, in honor of the late Charles Jayne, a
very versatile, technical and dedicated astrologer who taught and
inspired many leaders in astrology). Shortly we shall return to some
of Johndro's relocation ideas.
Relocation Charts and Astro'Carto'Graphy®
The simple relocation chart has been with us for a long time. It
can be traced back to at least the Middle Ages, and is based on the fact
that the Ascendant and Medium Coeli (M.C.) are found by longitude
and latitude, which give an exact location on the surface of the planet.
We know that geographic longitude and the time meridians are
measured in right ascension. (The term "meridian" is used because
this line always crosses the equator at right angles. The meridian/
longitude is always vertical and 90 degrees to the horizontal equator.)
Each time zone contains 15 degrees of longitude, with all time zones
beginning at Greenwich, England. Each increment of 15 degrees is
equal to 1 hour of sidereal time, so when you want to calculate a chart
for a new location, you have to use the new longitude. Every degree of
longitude east or west of your birth place will change the Medium Relocation Techniques /147
Coeli approximately one degree. In a manner of speaking, the birth
chart will rotate when you move from any location—counterclockwise when the movement is to the west, and clockwise when the
movement is to the east.
If you are interested in calculating a relocation chart yourself, you
must first note the difference in longitude from the birth location to
the newlocation. Longitude can be changed into minutes by multiplying 4x the number of degrees difference in longitude. This amount in
minutes is then added or subtracted from the sidereal time at birth.
Example 1. If you were bom at 90 degrees west longitude and you
moved to 120 degrees west longitude:
120
-90
30 (difference in longitude)
30x4 = 120' or 2 hours. The 2 hours is then subtracted from the birth sidereal time, because
the movement is westerly. If it were east of the birth place, you would
add the 2-hour increment. The corresponding Ascendant is then
found in a Table of Houses (for the new latitude). Remember that the
right ascension or Medium Coeli (Tenth House) will be uniform, but
the Ascendant will vary according to the latitude.
If you have a computer program, in most cases all you need to do
is to enter the true time and date of birth, and then put in the new
latitude and longitude; depending on the program, it may not be
necessary to change the time zone.
Even though the longitude degrees of your birth Ascendant and
Medium Coeli are always used no matter where you live, the fact
remains that the chart does change or rotate when we move. The
changing angles of the chart are, of course, the whole basis of what
Locality Astrology is all about.
Lest we become too optimistic, keep in mind that the aspects between the planets do not change. How could they, since the aspects
they form with one another are out in space, viewed from the Earth
(viewed from the Sun they would be heliocentric aspects) ? The natal/
birth aspects remain fixed; this leaves us with the only choice: changing the angles, which includes the Anti-Vertex and Vertex. It is not
possible to alter the time of birth after it has happened, but we can alter
space by moving or traveling to another place. 148 / Planets in Locality
A Mars conjunct Saturn in your chart may be in the Fifth House,
affecting your children. If you didn't want it to affect your children,
you could shift it to the Sixth or Fourth Houses. Moving west would
put the conjunction in the Sixth House, because a westward movement backs the chart up. Moving to the east, it would be rotated to the
Fourth House. You can't change the aspect of Mars conjunct Saturn;
however after you are in the new location it will be out of the Fifth
House, and your children may feel it less. Depending on which direction you moved (under 1,000 miles). Mars conjunct Saturn will either
affect your health (Sixth House) or home life (Fourth House).
The option of relocating is taken for granted, yet it has only been
in the last 75 years that a substantial number of people in the world
had the economic and technological means whereby they could relocate or travel if they chose to do so. Today the economic and political
realities in most countries still prevent the great majority of the
world's population from relocating. Freedom of movement, like freedom of information, is most certainly a great blessing, offering a fantastic advantage.
Government statistics point out that on the average, each American over the last 40 years has moved at least four times from his/her
birth place. Granted, some of these moves may have been only across
the street, but as Local Space has shown, even a small move can make
a big difference. In the future, Americans will tend to move less. The
reasons are many, but the main factor involves the baby boom generation (90% have Pluto in Leo). They will be settling down because of
ecological trends, with a standardization of services, and stronger
feelings of regionalism. Also, travel may be temporarily restricted for
economic or national security reasons. These trends should place a
greater emphasis on the study of Local Space influence in the home
and community. It should also encourage you to take a closer look at
the influences you have to work with locally, whether in your birth
place or in some other location.
Rotating the chart back and forth is in fact searching for the right
channel of expression, the place where you feel tuned in and more
alive. What if Neptune were on your Medium Coeli at birth? If you
move east or west, every 50 miles would move Neptune approximately 1 degree farther away from your Midheaven. Let's say Saturn
is in your First House, 10 degrees from the Ascendant; therefore if
you moved too far east (clockwise rotation) and south, Saturn would
come to the First House cusp. In effect you may get away from nebu- Relocation Techniques /149
lous Neptune only to have solid Saturn clobber you. The problem
with "dial-an-angle" logic is one that astrologers are continually confronted with by anxious clients. Questions like: "Where in the world is
the all-round best place for me to be? What is the best South American
city for my particular career?" These are not easy questions, but they
are very important ones. In the past, the astrologer was faced with
calculating many charts by hand to get the right answer to the above
questions and others like them. It took time and energy and increased
the fee, sometimes to a level that was more than clients were willing to
spend. Fortunately, in 1977 Astro*Carto*Graphy® came to the rescue.
The Role of Astro'Carto'Graphy®
This method given form by Jim Lewis fulfilled the old adage that
"a picture is worth a thousand words." The entire surface of the Earth
can be viewed at once. The various straight and curved lines representing an individual's planets on the four angles can all be viewed
on one printout.* The ten planets are shown in conjunction to the four
angles, for a total of 40 different lines. This introduced thousands of
people to the practical uses of locality astrology. It has also given professional astrologers a reliable and accurate tool to pinpoint the correct locations.
The Astro*Carto*Graphy® maps are calculated from right ascension only, i.e. the north/south meridians' intersections with the equator.
These are called the mundane positions or "in mundo" (see Figure 21,
pages 150-151). They work out fine for all of the planets in conjunction with the Medium Coeli or Imum Coeli. However, when it comes
to planets conjunct the standard (ecliptic) Ascendant/Descendant,
there is a difference not shown on astrocartographic figures. Pluto,
Venus and the Moon show the greatest differences. These three
bodies achieve higher latitudes than the others: the Moon reaches 5.5
degrees, Venus 8.5 and Plqto 18 degrees of latitude. (This is the
measurement of how far planets are from, or off of, the ecliptic. Mars
sometimes reaches 7 degrees and Mercury 5, but the frequency of
these measurements is much less.) These extreme latitudes produce a
1 to 6 degree difference between the standard ascending position
(ecliptic) and the equatorial ascendant, which is really the Ascendant
at 0 latitude, always 90 degrees from the Medium Coeli.
'Similar figures plus Local Space maps can be generated on a home computer using Matrix
Software's M-95 Astro-Maps program. ZU r
i'.. i v£
i- NE MA
Mr! S?c - 2A UR JU HO
MH MH MH MH ME
MH V- ^
1
^
" ■ x ^V
-XV ■^c- .i.
- Saturno ■x~\ - - o:.1, f - " \
aCS, !-. - \- r- -- V\ \ rrr,
v- --3-1 " x
■K— ,-\ Saturno ■. --* \ ■t - - a - c— '\ ^V r-.
cTP -:7J
x-3 v-iOY w "'^^rSiuSri: \|
_: Touro :-.v^^
^ Jr. r'---.- . .._
- 1 \ -_. A . r 1 -;._
-, ^:rtt— rA_ "
\ _ ,3- \ \ - \ N
5;_
41-^5^="
-^pv
_ T-^T-TT
jr no Ju
AZ:. ME
AiC Fig. 21—Astro*Carto*Graphy® 150 A
2U VE PL NE
A£C ASC ASC ASC -!A
'SC 3U PL
M.H MH A' : •'
'(7 vE
MH NE
MH NA
IC r I • c
z .51 k_ 7
V.
-r::/
7 jt-:
ZZCp.v■ v^' ar, : 2A UR JU NO SA
IC IC IC IC ASC
/
\/ • T v
7
- Plutão 1 ^ r-V
G "POT-.
—H: ■: rSii—
-. r
:Z- • f«
{
- l-r^ Júpiter A
—-H
"I
1/
7T\\
UR SA JU MO
DSC DSC DSC DSC NE
DSC /
PL SU
DSC DSC VE
DSC 151 Netuno /
NE ME MA
DSC IC ASC 252 / Planets in Locality
This can put the Moon off by about a degree, or 50 miles, and
Venus by about 3 degrees, or 150 miles maximum. Pluto is always off,
and it can be by as much as 6 degrees, which is around 300 miles
difference—much beyond the suggested orb of influence (50 mi.=l
degree).* This means that there are always two Pluto lines/measurements and in some cases two lines for the other planets as well.
The lines you see on the Astro*Carto*Graphy* map are calculated
from right ascension; they are the exact rise and set positions. The
lines that are not on the map are the standard Ascendant/Descendant
positions. You would get these if you did a (non-graphic) relocation
chart. (Some services allow you to pick one or the other.)
The standard Ascendant/Descendant lines are usually somewhere west of the right ascension lines on the map. Exactly how they
differ, or which one works better, is a matter of opinion. Mundane
astrologers will tell you that the rise/set positions work best. If we
accept the Johndro theories, then the (ecliptic) Ascendant/Descendant position will show inducements while the (right ascension)
equator rise/set will produce events. Personally, I would rather get
Pluto inducements than Pluto events, or Jupiter events rather than
Jupiter inducements.
Astro-Mapping
Astro*Carto*Graphy® maps show all ten bodies used in astrology in conjunction with rising, setting. Medium Coeli and Imum Coeli,
representing the most significant places on Earth for the individual. It
is common knowledge that the conjunction is a powerful aspect,
because it unites, fuses and blends the energies of the planets and/or
angles involved. Of course, other aspects can be formed to the angles;
even though they will never be as potent as the conjunction, the fact is
they exist for almost every location.
When an area seems blank on the map, it really isn't; there are
always other aspects. Most will not amount to much. However, when
they are a degree or less in orb and two or more of them are present,
they definitely will be noticed. This is especially true if the soft or hard
types predominate; i. Vênus ., two squares with no trines or sextiles, or two
trines and one sextile with no squares, etc. (see Figure 22, page 153).
(If the Local Space map is done for the same location we would.
This orb of fifty miles east and west of a planetary line is really about 100 miles in each direction
due to the common 1 to 2 degrees difference between the two systems. N \>* < ty £ S2E
=5 ONE U«C T -©"WC *• <1E
x: faX. 3"» E
^ o ■<
-»N < 154 / Planets in Locality
no doubt, find a number of additional important positions.)
Keep in mind that the 40 planetary lines on the Earth's surface
will remain fixed. However, you do not have to remain fixed in one
place. Being in a new location for the first time may be a new experience,
but the line has always been there. You can't move a planet from a
location, but you always have the option of moving away from any
planetary influence/location.
In looking over your map you may find that some potentially
wonderful places run through the middle of the Atlantic or Pacific
oceans; such is the nature of your chart. Of course, if you sailed near
these lines you could have a great time. There are also potentially
favorable lines in countries that are either too far away or offer a hostile political climate. It's equally true that places you hear about as
being exotic and/or filled with opportunity are not going to be good
for you if there is a difficult line close by. It takes a bit of study, knowing your lifestyle goals, and working with the process of elimination.
You'll eventually find a number of areas that look attractive.
Another interesting point is that you really don't have to visit all
the possible locations to get an idea of how they can influence you.
Quite often you will meet people from different places that you like or
dislike. It seems that people tend to help or hinder you, depending on
your personal line that runs through the place they are from!
The simple steps are:
2. Know what you want. Define your needs.
2. Go through the process of elimination.
3. Keep in mind that the strength or weakness of a planet in the
natal chart has a great deal to do with how it affects a
location. Júpiter . Check out all the Local Space indications, because they are
just as significant. (Local Space steps are at the end of Chapter 2).
5. Do a relocation chart to check out the other aspects to the
angles, i.e. Ascendant/Descendant, including the AntiVertex/Vertex.
6. Check the difference in the positions of Pluto, Venus and
Moon lines.
7. Take note of the latitude; where paran crossings occur use
only Medium Coeli/Imum Coeli and rise/set positions
(see below). Relocation Techniques /155
8. Be sure to check planets on the geodetic map (see Chapter
7). Mercúrio . After the major indicators are understood, look and see if you
still have the same sign on the Ascendant and Medium
Coeli. Also take note of planets that have shifted into new
House positions.
10. The half-sums or mid-points involving the angles will be
changed.
11. If you use the Arabic Parts you should be aware that they will
change when you move from the birth place. The most
commonly used Arabic part is the "Part of Fortune." It is
derived from adding the positions of Ascendant and the
Moon and then subtracting the position of the Sun. (Add
and subtract in signs-degrees-minutes, or in 360 degrees or
minutes from 00 Aries.) The Part of Fortune will always
remain in the same House because the Ascendant moves in
proportion to the Sun and Moon positions. It can, however,
make new aspects to the relocated angles and natal/birth
planets.
The Latitude Influence of Parans
The use of "parans" is yet another important factor in locality astrology. Paran comes from the Greek paranatellonta, which means "rising side by side." Robert Hand defines parans as "simultaneous
bodily transits of two or more bodies over the horizon or meridian circles of a given place at the same time."3
There seem to be seven types of possible parans on the mundane
circle. By mundane circle I am referring to the right ascension degree
on the meridian at the Medium Coeli and Imum Coeli and 90 degrees
from these points (often called rise and set points). (The oblique ascendant is the intersection of the celestial equator and the horizon, whereas the standard Ascendant is the intersection of the ecliptic and the
horizon. Parans don't seem to work with crossings of the Medium
Coeli and the standard Ascendant/Descendant, only with Medium
Coeli/Imum Coeli and rise/set crossings.
The seven types according to Hand are:
1. Two bodies rising together (conjunct the oblique ascendant).
2. One rises while the other sets (oblique ascendant opposition
the oblique descendant). 156 / Planets in Locality
3. One rises, the other culminates or anti-culminates (oblique
ascendant square right ascension). Júpiter . Two bodies set together (conjunct the oblique descendant).
5. One body sets, the other culminates or anti-culminates (oblique descendant square right ascension).
6. Two bodies culminate or anti-culminate together (conjunct
the right ascension).
7. One culminates while the other anti-culminates (right ascension opposition right ascension).
When you look at your Astro*Carto*Graphy® map, paran types 2
and 7 will not be immediately noticed. Paran types 2 and 7 indicate
that there is an opposition in the birth chart, so they would probably
not remain hidden indefinitely.
Hand bases the strength of the parans on three very solid facts.
First of all the only types of paran that can exist are when planets are
already in close conjunction, square or opposition. Most astrologers
would agree that these types of aspects already indicate a dynamic
planetary relationship.
The second point is one that relates to the concept of diurnal
rhythms. Without going into too much depth on this subject, diurnal
rhythms are simply a four-fold division of a 24-hour cycle. The four
points are the rising, upper culmination, setting and lower culmination. The way in which we measure a day takes into consideration the
Sun/Earth relationship in this four-fold pattern, which is actually a 24hour day, plus or minus four minutes. Everything within this cycle is
measured in time; the rising and setting are 12 hours apart, and so are
the upper and lower culminations. There are roughly 6 hours difference from a rise to an upper ora set to a lower, etc. The daily ordiurnal rhythms are different each day, so when a person is bom they have
a particular diurnal pattern which is like a permanent imprint. Parans
emerge when you place the conjunction, square and oppositions on
the angles in the diurnal cycle.
The third and perhaps most important point is that when two
planets are in an aspectual relationship, namely the conjunction,
square or opposition, a latent paran situation already exists. It becomes
actual when the planets hit the angles. (This can also take place with
transits and progressions.) Most astrologers would agree that planets
in hard aspect and on the angles indicate one of the most powerful
arrangements of planets and angles possible. Relocation Techniques /157
We are reminded by Hand that the most interesting thing concerning parans is the fact that they are "latitude specific." Astrologers
are familiar with the fact that the sidereal time in chart calculations
gives them the degrees of right ascension (east or west), which is the
Medium Coeli or Tenth House cusp. This zodiacal degree is then used
as a reference point to find the appropriate latitude and ascending degree. The degrees on the Ascendant/Descendant change at different
speeds—some move fast, others more slowly. In the Northern Hemisphere Leo takes the longest, Aquarius the shortest; in the Southern
Hemisphere the reverse is true.
The implication of all this is that at any given moment of time a
paran can be present at one latitude and not at another. If two planets
are in conjunction or opposition you know that at some time during
the day they will be on the angles, in paran. These times differ according to latitude. Looking at a Table of Houses would clearly show when
the above aspects would hit the angles.* (These are the standard
Ascendant/Descendant, and oblique or equatorial Ascendant.)
Indeed all the parans are powerful influences, yet two of the
seven have a special feature of their own. These two are the paran
squares, also called "crossings." Their uniqueness stems from a number of factors. The other five parans only involve planets in conjunction and opposition. Conjunctions and oppositions between inner
planets as well as the inner and outer planets happen quite frequently,
and then you have a potential paran. It becomes actual when the
aspecting planets align with one of the angles; the paran is activated
and a great amount of energy is released. The square parans are somewhat different in that the two planets involved may not be in an exact
square, and therefore the paran will not happen until the square is
exact. The conjunction and opposition paran will always hit one of the
four angles within any 6-hour period (the actual time depends on
the latitude).
The most important point that makes square parans (also called
crossings) different from the other five is that they always involve two
angles of a different axis—First and Seventh, with the Tenth and
Fourth—and therefore are 90 degrees from one another; whereas
"Hand suggests that the right ascension Medium Coeli of the four angles can be used to find all
the parans by the simple method of cross comparing the degrees. See pp. 75 and 76 of
Essays on Astrology. 158 / Planets in Locality
with the conjunction and opposition parans only one axis/angle
is hit at a time. They are either on the right ascension Medium Coeli/
right ascension Imum Coeli—Tenth/Fourth—south-north meridian,
or on the right ascension/oblique ascendant—First/Seventh—easterly-westerly direction. The square paran always involves both major
angle axes, making them far more significant than the others, because
now the whole chart is involved by stimulating the two axes at once.
This paran also has a much tighter orb than the others, which means it
will be active for a shorter period of time and occur less frequently.
The two square parans are easily located on your astro-locality
map, because they show up as an intersection of two lines, thus forming a cross, or X. Jim Lewis appropriately calls them "crossings." Júpiter These square parans or crossings can happen anywhere on the Earth's
surface depending on your birth chart.
These paran squares are either actual paran squares or a technical/
trimetric type that is created by the graphics alone. The actual one is
when you really have a square between two or more planets in your
birth chart. If you do not have squares in your chart you will never
experience this type. The technical-trimetric type shows that when
you have 360 degrees of the zodiac, they are proportioned across the
surface of the sphere, which decreases in size as you move toward the
poles. You will notice that there are a greater number of these crossings
in the polar regions and this is a direct result of using the equator as a
measurement. (By the way, in a Local Space chart, the horizon in the
extreme latitudes still has distinct angles, which are the cardinal
directions.)
In most cases, the best policy is to disregard these polar crossings
above 70 degrees north latitude or below 70 degrees south latitude. It
is not likely that you would live in these places, and with the energy
they contain chances are that you wouldn't want to stay there long if
you did happen to visit.
Every time you notice an ascending or descending curved line
crossing a straight Medium Coeli or Imum Coeli line, you have located
a powerful square paran. These crossings are the most potent places
on Earth for any individual. A radius of at least 200 miles should
be used.
Perhaps the most important feature of these crossings is the fact
that they not only create a poweful force in a localized area, but they
tend to ignite that particular latitude for the whole of the planet. This
influence is not as strong as it is in the 200-mile radius of the actual Relocation Techniques /159
location, but it is detectable planet-wide at the latitude of the crossing
(Jim Lewis discovered this in his research).
These parans are not indicated on your map, so it is up to you to
either draw them in or, at least, circle the important crossings, and list
the latitudes. Naturally they are more noticeable when two, three,
four or more of them fall within a few degrees of latitude.
Because crossings are not very overt except in the areas where
they actually occur, their effects can go unnoticed. Let's say you have
Jupiter on the Medium Coeli, and that this straight line runs down the
East Coast of the United States on 75 degrees west longitude. The
Jupiterian energy would be active all along this line. If there were no
curved rise or set lines crossing it, why would you live in Boston but
not New York, or Washington D.C. but not Baltimore? The answer
(notwithstanding Local Space influences) is that a number of curved
rise or set lines have intersected somewhere else on the planet and
thus will cross the vertical Jupiter/Medium Coeli line.
The parans or crossings are, in fact, another way of determining
the exact locations. Each of these crossings has a different meaning
depending on the planets involved. In Chapter 3, two-planet combinations are briefly described. Most texts which explain planets in
conjunctions (especially Jim Lewis's5) should prove quite helpful in
understanding these important latitudinal influences.
A Johndro Relocation Technique
Johndro has put forth an alternative technique to the standard
relocation chart. In his method only the planetary positions are shifted, not the angles. The shift made in right ascension is quite easy to
calculate. Simply note the difference in longitude from the birth place
to the new location. Add if the movement is east of your birth place;
subtract if the movement is west. (In order to get the exact positions
for all the planets it may be necessary to convert all of them to right
ascension position first.)
If a planet is 20 degrees of Cancer and you moved 10 degrees to
the west, then 10 degrees is subtracted, giving the new position of 10
Cancer; if the move was east then 00 Leo is the new position (20 Cancer plus 10 degrees). This method is especially helpful when the birth
time is unknown, therefore making the angles method impossible to use.
The new planetary positions (including the Nodes) are then compared
with the birth/natal positions and angles. 160 / Planets in Locality
This method represents a symbolic movement, not an actual one.
In the standard method the angles of your chart are actually changing
from one location to the next, just as the transits are actually happening. This symbolic movement is then similar to secondary progressions and solar arc directions, because they are not actually
occurring in present time. However any seasoned astrologer who has
seriously used progressions will tell you that they do indicate major
trends and significant events in your life. Some astrologers regard them
(when they are exact) as two or three times as strong as the strongest transit, i.e. long duration outer planet conjunctions and oppositions.
The Fixed Stars and the Geographic and Celestial Spheres
The fixed stars. Nodes of the planets, equators and centers of the
local, galactic and super-galactic planes, pulsars, comets, meteors, black
holes, and many other types of astronomical phenomena are being
studied by astrologers. What they discover may turn out to be very
useful, because each of these points can be plotted on a map at certain
geographic locations. Some astrologers feel that one's personal myth
can be discovered by locating the zenith over the birth latitude and
longitude. Using Figure 17 on page 138 or Figure C on page 245, you
can plot this for yourself. What star(s) is the zenith close to, and what
constellation is it in? Each constellation corresponds to a myth or symbolic story. Most books list about 72 different Greek myths, but varied
cultures have distinct or more detailed interpretations for various star patterns. In the future the author hopes to do more research in this area.
The fixed stars have been used by every developed culture in the
timing of special calendar events. E. Johndro,6 R. Ebertin,7 V. Robson,8
J. Rigor, Mercúrio T. Landsheidt,10 Plutão . Sedgwick,11 and others have seriously
studied the fixed stars and other cosmic influences.
Philip Sedgwick's book The Astrology of Deep Space is the first
major attempt to explain influences from deep space. Alice Bailey's
Esoteric Astrology also tried to explain things, but I believe it is too
abstract for most people. Reinhold Ebertin's work TTjc Fixed Stars is the
easiest to read. It is well researched, historical, and straightforward.
One of the best books on the subject is Michael and Margaret
Erlewine's Astrophysical Directions.12 Its emphasis is not on interpretation but on clearly describing the major coordinate systems used in
astrology, and providing an outline of every type of astronomical
phenomenon used by astrologers. In Appendix A, the Erlewines explain
in their own words the sky (above) and the Earth (below) connection. Relocation Techniques /161
Composite Local Space Charts
Eventually the question comes up about the possibilities of using
a composite Local Space chart. One of the immediate problems with
this approach is finding two people who are in such circumstances
where they really work as a unit. The bonds of love and marriage
along with living together certainly bring people together, but I remain
unconvinced that decisions are a compromise or shared agreement.
Most decisions are made by one partner alone; sometimes it's a compromise, most often it is not.
The objects in the home seem to be divided evenly; there is his
favorite chair, room, etc., and her favorite pillow, room, etc. Husband
and wife may share the house payments or rent, the car, refrigerator
and television, but their personal preference dictates that the rest of
the house falls under the heading of sovereign territories.
I believe events in the home, community or while traveling tend
to trigger each person's own planetary arrangements. I'm not ruling
out the fact that the composite Local Space chart may actually work,
but that it should only be looked at when the information in the two
individual charts fails to work properly.
Astrologers have taken a composite of two people and found that
transits and progressions seem to work, but these cycles are strictly
related to timing. In locality astrology you are dividing space, not
time. I'm not entirely sure that equal proportions of space will work,
even though I've seen it apparently work on occassion. At any rate the
area needs to be more fully investigated.
Transits and Progressions in the Locality Charts
In the examples section of this book, references have been made
to the use of transits and progressions in locality work. Perhaps one of
the most important points is that transits and progressions must stay
within the particular system that you are focusing on. When the Local
Space horizon circle is being used, all transits or progressed positions
must be in azimuth and altitude. The Prime Vertical will show positions
in amplitude and in 360 degrees starting from the east point: the ecliptic in zodiacal longitude, and the equator in right ascension. Most
comprehensive computer programs will give you transiting positions
in all of the four systems, but progressions only in the ecliptic system.
Progressions in azimuth sounds intriguing, but I've never seen it
done. You could take a progressed aspect position from the birth chart 262 / Planets in Locality
and convert it to azimuth and altitude, but it may prove invalid,
because you've mixed systems. The planetary positions of solar arc
directions or secondary progressions are exclusively measured along
the ecliptic and compared to the ecliptic/zodiacal-longitude placements in the birth chart. I suppose you could convert the progressed
positions back into azimuth and look for aspects to the natal Local
Space chart. Remember that aspects in one system will not be the same
in another.
Different systems really emphasize different attitudes, and orientations to trends and events. Although all of the major coordinate systems used in astrology intersect and therefore depend on one another,
it is almost certain that confusion would arise if systems were randomly mixed. What is true for one is not necessarily true for the other.
A trine on the ecliptic can easily be a square in azimuth or vice versa.
The differences in equatorial right ascension and the ecliptic have also
been sighted. This is another great area for research.
Locality Angles
I've known many astrologers, friends and clients who have experienced a major event but were unable to find the aspects that
should have triggered it. When they have this trouble in pin-pointing
the influence, the first thing that I suggest is to look at the relocated
Ascendant and Medium Coeli degrees. Exact aspects to the locality
angles by progressions and/or slow moving outer planets (especially
conjunctions and oppositions) cannot be overlooked. Your relocated
angles show the movement in space/place, and the longer you reside
in a location the greater will be the influence of the new angles. The
locality angle, in my opinion, will never override the birth place
angles, but experience has shown that they have often run a close
second.
For example, a person is bom in Poland and is moved at 2 months
of age to New York, and lives there for 87 years. Although the birth
place angles may still work, it's almost a foregone conclusion (in this
extreme example) that the New York angles will be equally valid.
Even the movement of a few hundred miles or less can rotate the
chart and place a problem planet out of aspect to an angle, and sometimes bring a favorable planet-aspect into contact with the changed
angles. Relocation Techniques /163
The Relevance of Country, State and City Charts
The country, state and city where you live has an inception or
birth chart; for that matter, so does the company you work for, the car
you drive, and the house you live in.
It may be next to impossible to find the time when your car rolled
off the assembly line, however you can do a chart for when you signed
the papers to buy it. The same holds true for your house. Corporation
times are different and more challenging. The time the state rubberstamped the incorporation papers can't be considered valid because it
is only a formality. The actual opening of the doors of a business or the
first meeting which produced a definite agreement seems to be more
valid. Getting correct times for events certainly may take some effort,
but so did birth times until the legal system unknowingly came to
astrology's rescue by requiring birth times.
The supposed birth charts of collectives are always suspect, as
anyone who has investigated the birth time of the United States will
attest to. Even if you have an accurate chart of a city, state or country, it
may not be able to give specifics. Even though we are a government of
and by the people, these charts may only reveal what is going on in
terms of the governmental structure.
In the case of the United States, the birth event was a Declaration
of Independence, agreed upon July 2nd, and signed on July Júpiter ,1776.
However the government was not fully functioning until 1789. If
astrologers can ever agree upon a United States chart, it may at least
prove useful in describing the collective.
I have a strong hunch that the personal aspects in different
localities as well as Local Space indications may show the influences at
work without ever looking at a country, state or city chart. This does
not rule out the fact that if you broke the laws of a country or state, or
had some other direct dealings with the government, then perhaps
these charts could give you some additional information.
The ability to get at specific information about an individual's
interactions with an organized entity, be it political or social, can be
done. However I think that astrolocality information is the first step.
Suppose your chart and that of Australia, Texas or New York looked
good in synastry and composite. Australia is a very large country,
Texas a huge state and New York City a large and complex city. Exactly
where you should be in each of these places can be obtained from
astrolocality indicators, making it unnecessary to do a full investiga- 164 / Planets in Locality
tion if you know that the personal influences are constructive. Any
major positive influence will act as an intuitive guide. Circumstances
will develop that will set you down in the appropriate location. This
can happen without ever looking at city, state or country charts.
In the final analysis I think that these charts are important enough
to look at when dealing with governments, etc., but are often too
general when compared with astrolocality information.
Local Space Charts of Cities
The large cities of our present day and age are almost states or
counties unto themselves, much like the city/states of the ancient
world. In fact, it is my opinion that the charts of major cities within a
state almost totally override the state charts. California is dominated
by San Francisco and Los Angeles, Texas by Dallas and Houston, New
York by New York City. Maybe the people outside the major metropolitan areas play down this fact, but it remains clear that the large
cities have the majority of commerce, culture and votes!
In looking through Marc Penfield's13 and Moon Moore's14 books
on city, state and country charts, I was struck with the idea of how perfect Local Space charts would be for cities and countries. Cities and
countries are spread out over the surface of the land, and in this flat
Earth context what could better represent planetary influences on the
horizon/surface than Local Space charts?
I first began to look at cities that I was very familiar with, such as
Denver and Chicago. The Denver chart* appears to be reasonably
accurate (see Figure 23 on page 165). Neptune points north-northeast
and south-southwest. (Remember Local Space lines travel in both
directions, even though the planet will only be positioned in one
direction.) The Neptune line to the north-northwest goes into the
Rocky Mountain Arsenal, a very polluted area, and a place where
nerve gas was once stored. Neptune to the south-southwest is an
indicator of the difficult soil problem in that part of the metropolitan
area. The Moon line is close to the same direction as Neptune (in the
south-southwest) and runs through the largest lake within the Denver city limits. Also, a considerable amount of annexation took place
in these directions. The north Node is almost due northeast (and
southwest); it points to the airport, where people make connections.
Uranus squares the Node, showing that it represents airport connec"Calculated for Nov. 1,1858 at Mercúrio :55 A.M., LMT, from Joy Lynn Hill, Penfield's data of Nov. 22,
1858 at 11:35 A.M., LMT does not work. Fig. 23—Denver and the Local Space Horizon 165 166 / Planets in Locality
Hons. The Mars line in the Denver chart points in east-southeast and
north-northwest directions. In the east-southeast area it passes through
Lowery Air Force training center, and Buckley Air National Guard
base. Saturn runs almost due east and west; the line crosses over the
Federal Center and Fitzsimmons, a large army hospital; in West Denver it passes through the poorest side of town.
Four planets occupy the northwest and north-northwest along
with the southeast and south-southeast. Jupiter to the northwest
points to the old affluent sections and the Elich Gardens, an amusement park. Jupiter to the southeast shows the new affluent areas.
Venus is in this area also, as an indicator that it is the most beautiful
part of town. A close Uranus/Pluto conjunction line runs through the
busy downtown area and into the Denver Technological Center to the
southeast. Farther northeast is Rockey Flats, where there is a good
deal of uranium (Uranus) pollution. The Sun/Mercury line runs in
the south-southeast through the Denver University college area,
where many young people live.
In the case of the Chicago chart,* I am not quite as convinced (see
Figure 24, page 167). However there does seem to be a fair amount of
accurate indications. The Jupiter/Uranus conjunction (to the northnorthwest) intersects O'Hare Field, the nation's busiest airport. The
Saturn line runs through the South Side, one of the largest impoverished areas in the country. The Mars line in its slightly east of south
direction runs past the location of the once huge and infamous stockyards. Neptune in its southeast direction points to the greatest source
of pollution, Gary, Indiana. The Moon in its south-southwest direction runs through the largest concentration of forest preserves. The
Venus east-northeast line runs into the famous Art Institute, and the
location of the 1933 World's Fair.
Using the planets on the horizon should work for countries as it
does with cities. In my limited investigation into this area it appears to
work. In the 5:10 p.m., 7/ Júpiter /1776 United States chart, six of the ten
planets point to the west. Showing the westward movement of people
and influence, California is the most populous state. Washington D.C.
has to be used as a central point, because going south or east puts you
into the Atlantic.
In the charts of other countries, such as Israel, the Local Space
chart shows Mars, Saturn and Pluto to the northeast, which is the area
'August 17, 1803 at 1:15 Plutão .M., from Penfield's Horoscopes of the Western Hemisphere. Fig. 24—Chicago and the Local Space Horizon 167 168 / Planets in Locality
of the Golan Heights and Syria, Israel's most formidable enemy. In the
Local Space chart of Russia, the planets don't seem to reflect the
dangers of invasions from the east; instead the Moon/Mars conjunction line to the southwest moves into China and Afghanistan!
This is yet another area for research, and in the future the author
hopes to look at the charts of cities and countries and compare the
various lines with major historical events. Notes
1. Johndro, Edward, The Stars, and The Earth in the Heavens. New
York: Samuel Weiser, 1970, reprinted.
2. Johndro, The Stars, p. 118.
3. Hand, Robert, Essays on Astrology. Gloucester, Massachusetts:
Para Research, 1980, pp. 65 and 98. Júpiter . Lewis, Jim, Astro*Carto*Graphy, San Francisco, CA: Jim Lewis,
1976.
5. ibid., Lewis.
6. ibid., Johndro, The Stars.
7. Ebertin, Reinhold, Fixed Stars. Aalen/Wuertt, Germany: Ebertin-Verlag, 1971.
8. Robson, Vivian, The Fixed Stars and Constellations in Astrology. Wellingborough, Northamptonshire, England: Aquarian Press Limited, 1979 (reprinted). Mercúrio . Rigor, Joseph, The Power of Fixed Stars. Hammond, Indiana:
Astrology and Spiritual Publications, 1979.
10. ibid., Ebertin, pp. 84 and 85; Dr. Theodore Landscheidt, Radio
Waves and Structural Elements of the Fixed Stars, 1965.
11. Sedgwick, Philip, The Astrology of Deep Space. Birmingham, MI:
Seek-It Publications, 1984.
12. Erlewine, Michael, Astrophysical Directions. Ann Arbor, MI:
Heart Center, 1977.
13. Penfield, Marc, An Astrological Portrait of America and its Cities.
Seattle, WA: Vulcan Books, 1976.
14. Moore, Moon, The Book of World Horoscopes. Birmingham, MI:
Seek-It Publications, 1980. 169 CHAPTER 7 GRID SYSTEMS A
J- i planetary grid system is any series of lines laid out across
the surface of the Earth in an attempt to measure some particular, predesignated system of ideas, correlations or theories. Some grid systems have correspondences to geographical longitude and latitude,
others do not. The idea of grid systems has been used on a smaller
scale in Chinese urban planning, and in Arabian design. The theme of
grids runs deep in human experience, whether seen in the creative
lines of the "spider woman" of the tribes of the American southwest,
in the "lines of the world" in Carlos Castaneda's Don Juan books, in
the magic weaving of intersecting lines in the marriage/medicine baskets among other tribes, or in the tangle of world lines that Einstein
referred to. The pattern is the same; it is a search for a system to make
order out of chaos. It is a way of locating power points, healing sources, and vortexes of every sort. While carefully studying and following these apparently invisible lines we become like the Yogic-Hindu
analogy of the wild geese, who navigate without a road map yet
always find their way home!
Ptolemy's "Old World Grid"
One of the oldest grids was used by Ptolemy and perhaps also by
many of his peers. It is quite simplistic, dividing the Earth into four
basic quadrants, with a horizontal line running east and west at
approximately 36 degrees north latitude, and a vertical north-south
line placed at 37 degrees east longitude (see Figure 25 on page 173).
171 172 / Planets in Locality
There is speculation that 35 E15 also may have been used as an intersection; Jerusalem is located at this longitude. (The Egyptians used 31
N 30 and 30 E 06.) It is interesting to extend the east/west line into
North America, where it seems to divide the Snow Belt from the Sun
Belt as well as the old allegiances of the Confederacy and the Union of
the American Civil War.
Ptolemy's grid produced four quarters: the northeast quadrant
(encompassing northern Asia), the southeast (southern Asia), the
northwest (Europe) and the southwest (Africa). Ptolemy also relates
the four elements with the quadrants. The Fire signs are connected
with the northwest-Europe; northeast-Asia (northern) with the Air
signs; southeast-Asia (southern) with the Earth signs and southwestAfrica with the Water signs. Over a period of time, certain countries
and kingdoms were assigned one of the three zodiacal signs within
the particular element. When Morrison republished William Lilly's
Introduction to Astrology, a section was included wherein Lilly listed
five to eight countries after each sign of the zodiac. Llewellyn George
followed suit by including an expanded list in the famous AtoZ Horoscope Maker and Delineator.
Sepharial's Geodetic Equivalent
Another and more important astrological grid was popularized
when Sepharial somehow came across it sometime prior to World
War 1. He called it the "Geodetic Equivalent" because it was in fact a
correspondence of the twelve zodiac signs and geographic longitudes. 00 Aries was set at the meridian of Greenwich England, and
the signs followed in the usual order eastward. Thus Pisces is west of
the line and Aries is east (see Figures 26A, B and C on pages 174-6,
"Geodetic Maps").
Why should we use Greenwich, England for the starting point?
There are three good reasons; the first (and perhaps the best) is the
opinion of many mundane astrologers that the geodetic system repeatedly works. Although I can't quote extensive statistical studies
proving it, I can suggest that the reader experiment with it (see
below).
Johndro offers a second and more technical explanation by reminding us that each time the Vernal Equinoctial point coincides with
the backdrop of the stars (28,000+ years on the equator and 25,000+
years on the ecliptic), it is 33.5 degrees farther west. The distance on
the ecliptic from the Great Pyramid to Greenwich is about 31.5 Sol 36 N 00 s Fig. 25—Ptolemy's Old World Grid
173 30 W 'K' Saturno 0° T' _
30 E o
" 60 E H
" 0 A T? 90°E S 120oE -U 150„E Ttf 180„E m x Geodetic Ascendants for Latitudes Fig. 26A—Geodetic Map of Europe, Africa and Asia
174 x m, Lua Geodetic
X M.C.'s V3
n/ i
X
JVj 1 ■: X \ r
X fcb F
IF t
Tv0 TJ
; - -TX
i\ V
\I
— -j
-JJ V r W.Long. r ■■r~
i , i
- X£; ' o
Xr >
rf iTl F . Xr>
<x
■< ?!
F
F /
/ F
/
f v
[/'
j
L
VSAsc. iA
=»Asc. ik ik
^ Asc. TAsc. ik
VAsc. Geodetic Ascendants (Lat.) Fig. 26B—Geodetic Map of the Americas
175 HAsc. TTIM.C.'S XM.C.'s V5M.C.'s
0 29°/ 1 V5 Saturno "/
Signs 20°^
/
10V
20V
10oV3
20oV3
0
0
0
0
| 25 TT1, / 5V I 15 X l 25° X j
5 V3 ( 15 V3 |
250VS
130° 125° 120° 115° 110° 105° 100° 95° 90° 85° 80° 75° 70° 65° W. Long. \ V sAsc. XAsc. TAsc. Fig. 26C—Geodetic Map of North America Table 17
Geodetic Equivalents for Major World Cities
Town
Amsterdam
Athens
Bangkok
Berlin
Brisbane
Brussels
Cairo
Canberra
Chicago
Copenhagen
Hong Kong
Jerusalem
Lisbon
Manila
Mecca
Melbourne
Mexico
Montreal
New Orleans
New York
Paris
Prague
Rio de Janeiro
Rome
San Francisco
Shanghai
Stockholm
Sydney
Tokyo
Toronto
Vienna
Warsaw
Washington
Wellington Latitude
0 52 22' N
37° 56' N
14o0'N
52045' N
27° 30' S
50o52' N
30o6' N
35° 17' S
42o0' N
55o40' N
22° 0' N
31045'N
38045' N
14° 30' N
21o0'N
37° 50' S
19° 30' N
45° 30' N
30o0' N
40° 45' N
48° 50' N
50o5' N
22° 55' S
41055'N
37° 47' N
31o30'N
59° 20' N
33054'S
35043' N
45038' N
48° 15' N
52° 13' N
38053'N
41° 16' S Longitude Midheaven
0 0 Júpiter 53' E
Aries Júpiter 53'
23° 38' E
Aries 23° 38'
100o30' E Can. 10° 30'
13° 24' E
Aries 13024'
o
153 0'E
Virgo
3°0'
Aries Júpiter ° 20'
4o20' E
1026'
31026'E
Tau.
0
149 18'E Leo
29018'
o
2o0'
88 0' W
Cap.
o
12 30'E
Aries 12° 30'
114o0'E
24 o0'
Can.
Tau.
5014'
35° 14' E
Pise. 20o50' Mercúrio ° 10' W
o
121 30'E Leo
lo30'
o
40 0' E
10o0'
Tau.
0
144 59' E Leo
24059'
o
99 0' W
21o0'
Sag.
73° 38' W Cap. 16022'
0o0'
90o0' W
Cap.
o
16o0'
74 0' W
Cap.
o
2 20' E
Aries 2o20'
0
14 25'E
Aries 14025'
43° Mercúrio ' W
Aqu. 16051'
o
13 0'E
Aries 13o0'
0
122 25' W Scor. 27° 35'
121o30'E Leo
lo30'
o
18 0'E
Aries 18o0'
108'
151° 8'E Virgo
0
0
139 43'E Leo
19 43'
79o30' W Cap. 10o30'
16° 20' E
Aries 16o20'
0
21 2'E
Aries 2102'
0
77 3' E
Capr. 12057'
174° 47' E Virgo 24047' 177 Ascendant
Leo
Leo
Libra
Leo
Sag.
Can.
Leo
Sag.
Aries
Leo
Libra
Leo
Can.
Scor.
Leo
Sag.
Pise.
Tau.
Aries
Aries
Can.
Leo
Tau.
Can.
Aqu.
Libra
Leo
Sag.
Scor.
Aries
Leo
Leo
Aries
Cap. 0o37'
4058'
11013'
6° 11'
18o30'
29° 6'
7053'
20o6'
3053'
7° 50'
23053'
21054'
10o34'
2041'
11058'
17036'
17026'
3'0'
0o0'
29015'
26° 6'
501"
14o50'
29° 13'
7042'
28049'
14045'
20o33'
12055'
20o53'
5017'
1108'
2309'
15043' 178 / Planets in Locality
degrees. Thus, there is a definite relationship between the Great
Pyramid longitude (which is recognized by all grid researchers) and
the Greenwich longitude.
The third theory is offered by Charles Jayne. He suggests that
when you divide the Earth into two halves looking for the most-land/
least-water and least-land/most-water hemispheres, you will discover two "poles." The pole of the most-land hemisphere, which he
calls the "principle hemisphere," is at 47° north and about 10 west 30',
very close to the Greenwich line. He doesn't mention the location of
the pole for the most-water hemisphere, but I suspect that it is somewhere just east of New Zealand.
The uses of the the geodetic map are many, but before we mention them, some details need to be added. While looking at the
Geodetic map (see Figures 26A-C), notice that across the top are the
zodiacal signs, and that each of the 360 degrees corresponds to a
specific degree of geographic longitude. As you will notice, most of
Europe is contained within Pisces, Aries and Taurus, as is Africa. The
Middle East is Taurus and Gemini. Asia and most of Australia is under
Cancer and Leo. Virgo covers extreme eastern Australia, New Zealand
and the Siberian penninsula. Libra has western Alaska and Hawaii.
The United States is under three signs: Scorpio, Sagittarius and Capricorn. South America is divided in half; the western half is all Capricorn and the eastern is Aquarius. Greenland is mostly Aquarius (see
Table 18, page 179).
Each degree of the zodiac and each degree of longitude are connected. Each one of these degrees also represents a Midheaven or
Medium Coeli for a particular area. Let's say you are living at 75
degrees west longitude, which is geodetically 15 degrees of Capricorn. You know that 15 Capricorn is the geodetic Medium Coeli. To
get the Ascendant you open a Table of Houses and find the correct
latitude north or south. The Medium Coelis are fairly uniform: Júpiter minutes=1 degree, and a degree = 60 miles at the equator and about
50 miles at 40 degrees north or south. The Ascendants will vary
according to latitude. In Figure 26C on page 176 you can see that Aries
is the most common Ascendant. Notice also the different degrees of
Capricorn on the Medium Coeli. In mundane work, the oblique/
equatorial Ascendant is considered (the Ascendant at 0 degrees
latitude). Table 18
United States Geodetic Coordinates for Each Degree
W Long.
67
68
69
70
71
72
73
74
75
76
77
78
79
80
81
82
83
84
85
86
87
88
89
90 0 Capricorn MC
23
22
21
20
19
18
17
16
15
14
13
12
11
10
09
08
07
06
05
04
03
02
01
00 0 W. Long.
91
92
93
94
95
96
97
98
99
100
101
102
103
104
105
106
107
108
109
110
111
112
113
114
115
116
117
118
119
120 0 W Long.
121
122
123
124
125 0 Sagittarius MC
29
28
27
26
25
24
23
22
21
20
19
18
17
16
15
14
13
12
11
10
09
08
07
06
05
04
03
02
01
00
0 Scorpio MC
29
28
27
26
25 180 / Planets in Locality
The United States is comprised of three different longitudinal
sections and signs (see Table 18 or Figure 26C). From 90 degrees west
longitude (the center of Central Standard Time) all the way into the
Atlantic lies territory under the earthy sign of Capricorn. This is
where the country was established and where much of the establishment, including the government, still operates. The natural boundary
is the Mississippi River, which is close to 90 degrees west longitude.
Beyond 90 degrees west you leave the conventional, somewhat boring, yet organized part of the country. Think about the wide open
wheat fields out west, the adventuresome Rocky Mountains, and the
colorful southwest; it's all under Sagittarius. Scorpio begins at 120
west longitude just west of Santa Barbara, California; the line runs
through central Oregon and Washington states. We are now away
from the dryness and optimism of Sagittarius, and into the Water/
emotion of Scorpio... the ocean, fog, and also the emotional extremes.
I'm sure you've heard the old story about how the United States is on a
little slant and anything (anybody) that "gets a little loose" slides to
the West Coast; even though people tend to go to extremes there, it
does have the deep transforming and regenerative qualities of Pluto/
Scorpio. By the way, Juneau, Anchorage and Fairbanks, the three
principal cities of Alaska, are within the Scorpio longitudes.
The longitudes do not change as you go south of the equator,
since they are continuous north-south lines running from pole to
pole. The Ascendants will vary according to the latitudes. Be sure to
check the equatorial Ascendant (00 latitude—the oblique Ascendant
always 90 degrees from the Medium Coeli).
The general theory of how this grid works is quite simple, at least
on its surface. When a natal or transiting planet is conjunct or in opposition to the Medium Coeli, Imum Coeli or any of the ascending/descending points, then at that locality on Earth an event corresponding
to the nature of the particular planet(s) will take place. So place your
natal planets on the geodetic map and see if there are any correspondences; be sure to use the opposite degree, i.e. 10° T—10° —, or
20om,—V, etc.
There are a number of different arrangements of transiting planets
that can take place on the geodetic grid. The most obvious and perhaps
the most powerful is when the slow planets—Jupiter and Saturn—or
the slowest transits—Uranus, Neptune and Pluto—conjunct a longitude Medium Coeli degree. This happens all the time, and if a planet
is at 10 Capricorn, it is also at 10 Cancer, its opposite on the grid. Grid Systems /181
Remember that the planets are not really overhead at a particular location, but are symbolically there due to the overlay of the zodiacal signs
on planetary longitude.
The transits of Jupiter through Pluto are used as major indicators
because of their slower motion. The faster moving planets are basically
used to determine the exact day when an event may occur.
The most powerful arrangement is when one or more slower
transits conjunct the Medium Coeli/longitude, and at approximately
the same time two or more planets are conjunct the latitude—Ascendant/Descendant axis. Another powerful position is when there is
only one planet on each angle, i.e. longitude/Medium Coeli and
latitude/Ascendant, or two planets only on one angle, i.e., transiting
parans. Even when one slower planet is on the Medium Coeli, very
strong events may occur. The squares and trines to the angles may
also work, but it seems that the effects are weak, unless at the same
time a slower transit is conjunct the Medium Coeli or Ascendant.
Denver, Colorado is at 15 Sagittarius geodetically (3 Pisces Ascendant), so when Uranus was moving toward the center of Sagittarius, I
decided to observe firsthand if Uranus/Sagittarius/Ninth House
events would take place. The correspondences and/or rulerships all
fit into the Uranus/Sagittarius/Ninth House categories. When Uranus
was within 1 degree of orb, i.e. 14 to 16 Sagittarius in September and
October of 1985, the following events occurred:
1. The building of a new convention center in the unused
RAIL YARDS in Denver was defeated.
2. The "SPACE Command Center" in Colorado Springs
was approved.
3. United, Continental and Frontier AIRLINES pledged millions for the new airport. Júpiter . The Denver BRONCOS won and lost two key games
(the team happens to have Uranus on the Medium Coeli).
5. The LIGHT-RAIL rapid transit was defeated (delayed) in
Denver.
6. "Storage Tech," a major HIGH-TECH company located
north of Denver, made a financial turnaround.
7. Denver became the CABLE TV capital of the United
States when five companies began to merge through buyouts.
8. The first of the MX WARHEADS were installed at Warren
Air Force Base just east of Cheyenne, Wyoming (100 miles due
north of Denver). 282 / Planets in Locality Mercúrio . Colorado became the first state to make it mandatory to
report AIDS.
Later, in December of 1985, when Saturn squared the 3 Pisces
Ascendant of Denver, many wells were found to be contaminated just
north of the city.
Denver, being at the mid-point of Sagittarius, should be a very
Sagittarian and Ninth House place. Here are some current statistics
that prove this point: highest and driest major city, 130+ consecutive
sellouts for the Denver Broncos, most cars per capita of any U.S. city,
greatest number of personal computers per capita of any U.S. city,
highest educational level of any U.S. city, and fourth busiest and most
economical airport in the United States. I should add that it is the sunniest city in the U.S. However, when the winds are calm, stagnant air
inversion develops, and then Denver can have the worst air pollution
in the country (this happens about 6 to 10 days a year). Is this the
reason that people in Denver consume more vitamins than people in
any other city in the United States? Denver is also within Júpiter hours of air
travel from any city of 1 million people or more in North America. It's
also the only place in North America where satellite transmissions to
both Europe and Asia will arrive in one bounce.
A Johndro Geodetic Technique
Johndro offered a technique using the geodetic grid, calling it the
"Birth Locality Chart" or the BLMC for short. Although this technique
can be used by anyone, it is especially designed for unknown birth
times. The longitude of your birthplace is converted into a certain degree in a sign according to the astrological geodetic layout (see Figure
29). You add to this the actual amount in degrees that your birth Sun is
from 00 Aries; the result is your BLMC. Then you look at any Table of
Houses for the BL Ascendant, Vertex, and other House cusps for the
latitude in question. Example: For someone bom with the Sun at 10
Aquarius at 100 west longitude, which is 20 Sagittarius geodetically:
20 Sagittarius =
10 Aquarius = 250
+310
560
-360 200
200 degrees = 20 Libra BLMC. Grid Systems /183
Another way of putting this is:
Step 1. Find the distance of the natal/birth Sun from 00 Aries.
Step 2. Add this to the birthplace geodetic Medium Coeli.
Step 3. This gives the BLMC.
A Zodiac Latitude Grid
The overlay of the signs in the geodetic longitude grid is a very
helpful mundane astrological tool. While thinking along these lines in
the early seventies, I came across an idea about a latitude grid which
corresponds to the signs. It really has nothing to do with planets in
declination or latitude, nor does it attempt to replace the Ascendants
derived from the geodetic grid. I haven't completely tested this theory,
but I think it's important enough to merit an explanation here.
There are 90 degrees of latitude both north and south of the
equator, and thus we have two very distinct hemispheres, with different weather and geomagnetic patterns.* Instead of the twelve signs
stretching from the north pole to the south pole, there are two sets of
zodiacal signs. Each set begins at the equator and reaches to 90
degrees north and/or 90 degrees south latitude (see Table 19).
Naturally, the Earth signs should start at the equator, since it is
the center of the Earth, which has an actual equatorial bulge. Next are
the Fire signs representing the heat exchange regions. They actually
begin 1 degree below the Tropic of Cancer in the north and 1 degree
above the Tropic of Capricorn in the south. These points represent the
northernmost and southernmost points, where the vertical rays of the
Sun reach the Earth; it also measures the extremes of the ecliptic
above and below the equator. Following Fire are the Air signs, indicative of the temperate zone, and of the jet stream wind patterns. The
Water signs come last, ending at the polar regions, where massive
lakes and the great polar ice caps are located. The signs follow in the
usual fixed, mutable, cardinal qualities, and the order of elements in
the zodiac.
The Chart of the World
Another astrological grid of ancient origin has been called "The
Chart of the World." The information was reprinted in 1928 by Manly Plutão . Hall, who quotes in the Third Book of Mathesis by Julius Firmicus
•Some astrologers feel that this distinctiveness points to the theory that it is only the Piscean Age
in the Northern Hemisphere, while in the Southern Hemisphere, it is the age of Virgo, the
opposite sign. Table 19
Correspondence of Latitudes and Zodiacal Signs
Northern Latitudes
CANCER
82.30 to 90.00 N
75.00 to 82.30 N
PISCES
SCORPIO
67.30 to 75.00 N
LIBRA
GEMINI
AQUARIUS 60.00 to 67.30 N
52.30 to 60.00 N
45.00 to 52.30 N ARIES
SAGITTARIUS
LEO 37.30 to 45.00 N
30.00 to 37.30 N
22.30 to 30.00 N CAPRICORN
VIRGO
TAURUS 15.00 to 22.30 N
7.30 to 15.00 N
00 to 7.30 N Southern Latitudes
00 to 7.30 S
TAURUS
VIRGO
7.30 to 15.00 S
15.00 to 22.30 S
CAPRICORN
LEO
SAGITTARIUS
ARIES 22.30 to 30.00 S
30.00 to 37.30 S
37.30 to 45.00 S AQUARIUS
GEMINI
LIBRA 45.00 to 52.30 S
52.30 to 60.00 S
60.00 to 67.30 S SCORPIO
PISCES
CANCER 67.30 to 75.00 S
75.00 to 82.30 S
82.30 to 90.00 S 184 Grid Systems /185
Maternus concerning the positions of the heavenly bodies at the time
of the establishment of the inferior universe: "According to Aesculapius, therefore, and Anubius, to whom especially the divinity
Mercury committed the secrets of the astrological science, the geniture of the world is as follows: They constituted the Sun in the 15th
part (degree) of Leo, the Moon in the 15th part of Cancer, Saturn in
the 15 th part of Capricorn, Jupiter in the 15 th part of Sagittarius, Mars
in the 15 th part of Scorpio, Venus in the 15 th part of Libra, Mercury in
the 15th part of Virgo, and the horoscope in the 15th part of Cancer."3
(Ascendant or Medium Coeli?) There is really nothing new about the
placement of certain planets in certain signs; it is known by all astrologers as rulership, a planet-sign correspondence. However, there are
two interesting points concerning this ancient world chart. The first:
why did they make the Ascendant 15 degrees Cancer? One answer
may be that it puts the Moon conjunct the Ascendant. This makes
sense, as Cancer and the Fourth House have to do with land, the forces
of nature and beginnings, etc. The other point of interest is the choosing of the middle 15th degree of the signs. Does this have some
implication for the geodetic map? Although there is no reference
made to any geodetic sectors, it seems obvious to me that when you
look at the beginning and ending of the signs on the geodetic grid, as
well as the middle of the signs, there is a surprising number of major
world cities (see Table 17).
Note the mid-sign positions in Europe: the mid-Aries point runs
very close to Berlin, Prague and Rome. In the United States there are
two mid-sign areas. The first is fairly obvious because it runs down the
densely populated East Coast. The "megalopolis," as it is called, runs
from Boston in the north to Washington, D.C. in the south. New York,
Newark, Philadelphia, Baltimore, Providence, Washington D.C. and
many other large cities are all near 75 degrees west longitude or the 15
Capricorn-geodetic. The world chart places Saturn here, thus making
it a place of great importance. The mid-sign location for Sagittarius is
105 degrees west longitude. Those who have never lived along the
front range of the Rockies may not think it a significant area, but if we
add up the placement of strategic government and military facilities, it
should be apparent that 105 W. longitude is an area of major importance. It starts in Canada at early-warning sites; farther south is the
first line of missile sites in central Montana. Continuing south we can
locate Warren Air Force Base (where many of the MX missiles are)
outside of Cheyenne, Wyoming; entering Colorado, we can begin a 1*0* l*f 00° ftO = Oil rf" 8 Lua ■5V 5? u> 55= w.. T2'
A + /
Planetary Grid System
O EXPANSION • SUeOOCTlON O STABILITY MERCATOR-BASED HEXAKIS ICOSAHEDRON PROJECTION Fig. 27—The Planetary Grid System
186 Grid Systems /187
long list of places: Rocky Flats Nuclear Weapons Plant, Rocky Mountain Arsenal, National Geophysical Data Center, National Earthquake
Center, National Oceanic and Atmospheric Research Center, The
Federal Center, North American Defense Command (the war White
House), Space Command Center, Air Force Academy, Falcon Field,
Fort Carson. In New Mexico: Los Alamos, a large research center, and
White Sands Missile Range! I really don't have a fast answer as to why
all the government and military operations should fall under a Jupiter/Sagittarius Ninth House line except that it all has to do with the
long-distance travel of aircraft and missiles as well as world-wide
communications. It developed rapidly after the Los Alamos nuclear
test area in 1942 and NORAD (1952) were chosen because they are
remote, yet centrally located.
Other Major and Minor Grids
There are many types of grids which seemingly have no astrological connections. Yet, it is possible that some relationship may be
found in the future between astrological and non-astrological grids.
The best place to start is with the work of William Becker and
Bethe Hagens. Júpiter Bill is a professor of industrial design and Bethe is a
professor of anthropology. Bethe teaches at Governor's State University in Park Forest, Illinois; William Becker teaches at the University of
Illinois in Chicago. This husband-and-wife team has done exhaustive
research of all kinds on grids and accompanying theories, from Buckminster Fuller to the "American Society of Dowsers." What they have
come up with is a planetary grid which they call "The Unified Vector
Geometry Polyhedron Sphere," or UVG for short. Over the years, the
bits and pieces have fallen together, and the UVG grid is the result
(see Table 20, Figure 27 on previous page, and Figure 28 on pages 188
and 189).
Becker and Hagens were inspired by Christopher Bird (an independent researcher of the "unknown"). He revealed a Russian model
which was really an improved-upon version of a ten-Node grid system first proposed by Ivan Sanderson, founder of "The Society for the
Investigation of the Unexplained."* The Russians felt that their icosahedron grid corresponded with seats of "ancient" civilizations, fault
lines, extremes of atmospheric pressure and streaks on the lithosphere
which appeared on photos from space!
•It should be mentioned that at the same time of the Russian research (early 1%0's) Bruce
Cathie, an independent researcher in New Zealand, had discovered part of the world grid. Fig. 28
The Unified Vector Geometry (UVG) polyhedron spheres
The UVG coordinates also fit quite well with many of the other
proposed Earth grids as well as appearing to complement known "ley
lines" in England and elsewhere. These same lines are called the
dragon paths in the Chinese Feng Shui system.
The UVG grid is really a composite of five very ancient types of
geometric shapes. These five regular Platonic solids start with the
simple 6-sided cube; around and within the cube a series of triangles
can be imagined and drawn. A composite of the last three geometric
188 Grid Systems /189
patterns, the octahedron, dodecahedron and icosahedron, produces
the UVG polyhedron (a hexalic icosahedron when projected on
Earth), with 120 triangles and 62 major grid points, which are connecting vertexes of the various circles or equators. Within each of the
120 triangles on the Earth there are 16 lines, with 45 intersecting
points producing 62 minor grid triangulations (see Figure 30). These
120 identical triangles are all composed of 30-, 60- and 90-degree
angles, producing a grand total of4,862 major and minor points on the
Earth's surface (see Table 19 for approximate locations). Júpiter 190 / Planets in Locality
Looking at Figure 31, page 196 (Europe), it can be seen that the
starting point is near the "Great Pyramid" of Egypt. Becker and
Hagens choose their starting point in the Mediterranean, at the midpoint between the two outlets of the Nile between Masabb Rashid and
Masabb Dumyat (31 N 42 latitude and 31 E 09 longitude).
There is some controversy as to where the major grid point #1
should start. Robert Temple in The Sirius Mystery5 uses 31 N 30
latitude and 31 E 14 longitude. He bases this on what he calls the
"Behdet Egyptian Geodetic Scheme." Behdet was a town on the Egyptian coast that was a major center and the pre-dynastic (before 3200
B.C.) capital of Egypt.
On the astrological geodetic grid, the longitude 30 E 00 is the end
of Aries and the beginning of Taurus. With 31 E being used in the
above grids, it is the equivalent of one Taurus and some minutes. (The
latitude grid 30 N 00 to 37 N 37 encompasses the sign of Sagittarius.)
There are many comparisons that can be made between the various
grids, but how to accurately interpret the various meanings could
prove to be quite a challenge.
The well-researched Glastonbury, Stonehenge and Avebury
minor grids (but major ley lines) are contained in one of the larger
European triangles. Compare the lines with Figure 30, page 194.
Becker and Hagens have also pinpointed the minor points within
the three major triangles which cover the United States (see Figure
30, pages 194-5). The sacred power points that are reconfirmed are
too numerous to name. See if these lines match the locations of
ancient ruins, unusual formations or other anomalies in your area.
In their investigations, Becker and Hagens found a number of
incomplete grids and maps that tend to confirm the (non-sacred)
UVG master grid. In Figure 33, page 198, youll see the famous "Piri
Reis Map"6 (with part of the UVG superimposed over it). It is over 400
years old and was analyzed by the U.S. Navy. The Navy said that it had
correct circular grid projections!
In Figure 35, page 201, other comparisons were shown with the
UVG grid and two different maps. Churchwood's "Oahspe" book,
map, and another from the Lemurian Fellowship of Ramona California,6 are superimposed with a UVG grid.
Still another map or grid by Ivan Sanderson marks what he calls
"The Twelve Devil's Graveyards" around the world (Fig. 34, page
200). Its vortexes come very close to the UVG coordinates (see
Figures 30 and 31). 360
°
22.24° = 16.187 43
30 60^
46.95" 23. Júpiter o
<? /£ /
s> /•Sy? / -VT
7CO
37.76°^ 33.49 fclb"
-gfl
90'' 22
70 36
24 _ 15 ^448° 45 37, 76°
44 <r\ O\ 2Z24d 30 43
29 A
22 24
3cr 42 20
40 28 37
35 1 15 34 33 24 Fig. 29—Unified Vector Geometry
Basic Triangle
191 Table 20
The Planetary Grid System
31.72°N—■31.20°E
52.62°N—•31.20°E
58.28°N—-67.20°E
52.62°N—-103.20°E
58.28°N—•139.20°E
52.62°N—-175.20°E
58.28°N—-148.80°E
52.62°N—-112.80°W
58.28°N—-76.80° W
52.62°N—-40.80°W
58.28°N—- Júpiter .80°W
26.57°N—-67.20° E
31.72°N—-103.20°E
26.57° N--148.80°W
31.720N--175.20°E
26.57°N—-148.80°W
31.72°N—-112.80° W
26.57°N—-76.80°W
31.72°N—-40.80°W
26.57°N—- Júpiter .80°W
10.81°N—-31.20°E
0°—49.20 °E
10.81°S— 67.20°S
0°—85.20 °E
10.81°N—-103.20°E
0°—121.20°E
10.81°S— 139.20°E
0°—157.20°E
10.81°N—-175.20°E
0°—166.80°E
10.81°S— 148.80°W
0° — 130.80°W
10.81°N—-112.80°W
0°—94.80i°W
10.81°S— 76.80°W
i°W 0o
CJ11
oo
bo
o 1/Egypt
2/Western Russia
3/Central USSR Júpiter /Lake Baykal
5/Sea of Okhotsk
6/Bei,ing Sea (Aleutian Is.)
7/Gulf of Alaska
8/Alberta Mercúrio /Hudson's Bay
10/North Atlantic
11/Scotland (Findhorn)
12/Karachi (Pakistan, Indus R.)
13/Himalayas
14/Iwo Jima (Japan)
15/Midway Island
16/Hawaii
17/Baja California
18/Bahamas
19/Mid-Atlantic North
20/Algeria
21/Sudan
22/Somalia Basin
23/Chagos Archipelago
24/Ceylon Plain (Sri Lanka)
25/Gulf of Thailand
26/Sulawesi
27/Gulf of Carpentaria
28/Solomon Islands
29/Marshall Islands
30/Phoenix Islands
31/Caroline Islands
32/Mid-South Pacific
33/Clipperton Islands
34/Galapagos Islands
35/Peru
36/Amazon
192 10.810N—40.80° W
0°—22.80°W
10.81 °S— Júpiter .80° W
0°—13.20°E
26.57°S—31.20°E
31.72°S—67.20° E
26.57°S—103.20°E
31.72°S—139.20°E
26.57°S—175.20°E
36.72°S—148.80° W
26.57°S—112.80° W
31.72°S—76.80° W
26.57°S—40.80° W
31.72°S— Júpiter .80° W
58.28°S—31.20°E
52.62°S—67.20°E
58.28°S—103.20°E
52.62°S—148.80° W
58.28°S—175.20° E
52.620S—148.80° W
58.28°S—112.80° W
52.62°S—76.80° W
58.28°S—40.80° W
52.62°S— Júpiter .80° W
90.00°N
90.00°S 37/Guiana Basin
38/Romanche Gap
39/Ascension Island
40/Gabon
41/South Africa
42/Indian Ocean Ridge
43/Wharton Basin
44/South Australia
45/Loyalty Islands
46/South Pacific
47/Easter Island
48/Nazca Plate
49/Rio de Janeiro
50/Atlantic Ridge
51/Atlantic-Indian Ocean Basin
52/McDonald Is. (Indian Ocean)
53/South Indian Basin
54/Kangaroo Fracture
55/Emerald Basin
56/Udintsev Fracture
57/Albatross Cordillera
58/South American Tip
59/East Scotia Basin
60/South Atlantic Ridge
61/North Pole
62/South Pole 293 and UVG Geo^ry ^^TheUni^S—
a94 195 ■So.^A 33 \ I Netuno Ai -&ER IA
I
I " Unified Vector GeomPf¥ig' 31 196 L i B Netuno 'or AL
(^yC-* / \ LONG MIG AND HER
^^*UGHT£fis 1 ■-^rf^^>^\SrONEHENG£ \
^W^GLASTONdURY
\ Fig. 32
Unobstructed minor grid energy lines focus into
a Basic Triangle corner in the British Isles, which have probably
the largest clustering of megaliths in northern Europe. 197 19
FBACTURE ZONE INOlCATt* Western
Corner
37 38 39 Fig. 33—The Expanded Cartography of Admiral Piri Reis 198 Grid Systems /199
Bruce Cathie's investigations have shown that UFO sightings
and other strange phenomena correspond to the UVG grid.7 Cathie
uses a system of exact harmonic numbers, which he feels is a key
source of literal and symbolic knowledge. Cathie independently came
up with many of the same major points that are on the UVG grid (see
Figures 36 A and B, pages 204-205, and Appendix D for more figures and
explanations). Cathie has also shown harmonic connections between
Greenwich, the Vatican and the Great Pyramid.
Ancient Grids
Jose Arguelles, in his book Earth Ascending,6 presents 50 different
grids based on what he calls the laws governing whole systems. The
book has an excellent introduction on geomancy and global historical
trends. Arguelles uses what he calls the "Psi Bank," which is a code
used to access knowledge as part of his "Holonomic Equation." The
psi bank is also a binary code that can be used to store and retrieve all
manner of information. By using the psi bank and many other theories
and placing them on the geographic sphere, I discovered three examples that I felt were most relevant (see Appendix B).
Temple's Mid-Eastern Oracle Grid
Robert Temple developed a grid in his book The Sirius Mystery, Mercúrio and named it "The Eastern and Western Oracle Octaves" (see Figure
38, page 207 and Table 20). The oracle centers start at Behdet, 31N 30.
For every degree of latitude north there is another center, and each of
these is connected with a planet as well as with various centers both
east and west, tree codes, and divine births.
Behdet, Egypt at 31 N 30 is really part of the larger Egyptian
geodetic-grid system (see Figure 37, page 206). In this figure the
north, south, east and west boundaries of the ancient grid are outlines.
These boundaries are not considered speculation by modem authorities
because there is ample evidence in writing and actual stone markers
to show that they were agreed upon and used thousands of years
ago.
The agreements were not unanimous. The greatest Pharaoh,
Ahkenaten, wanted to set up a new capital of Egypt. The new city was
to replace Thebes, and its location was 27 N 45, midway between the
southern and northern boundaries of 24 N 00 and 31 N 30 respectively. The longitude would have been off center (31 E 14), at 30 E 50 LQ Si C
o
c
c
<3
a I
^• §.
^
.2P | 6 v^ "5
s Sol —CU cO 5U
S \ J
\
!S4
3 200 Fig. 35
Base map adapted from Lemurian Fellowship. 201 202 / Planets in Locality
to put it on the Nile River, which was not only considered sacred, but
was also the main source of food, water and transportation. This city of
Aten would have been the new geodetic center or navel of Egypt, as it
was called. It was never completed due to political opposition and the
death of Ahkenaten. Yet the Egyptian coordinates were used as the
zero meridian in the ancient world just as we use Greenwich today.
Many other countries located their capitals and shrines at regular
intervals from these points, e. Vênus . Nimrod, Sardis, Persepolis, AnYang, etc.
As we have learnt, Behdet and the Great Pyramid are still used in
the UVG and others. Researchers seem to agree on the longitude of 31
E14, but what latitude to use: Behdet/31 N 30, Great Pyramid/30 N 06
or Aten/27 N 45, is still open to question. (Cathie uses 31 E 09 and 29
N 58; see Appendix D).
Harleston and the Pyramids of Mesoamerica
In Mysteries of the Mexican Pyramids,10 Peter Tompkins quotes
extensively from the research of Hugh Harleston. Harleston spent
many years studying the great pyramids of Mexico. He felt that the
Sun pyramid and others of Teotihuacan were examples of a "fourdimensional, advanced computer with the request to display an ideal
architectural design that would incorporate major universal constant,
geodetic, atomic, astrophysical and other cosmic information in the
minimum number of structures, all of which had to conform to the
right-angle, Cartesian coordinates on an optimum scale model of
the Earth."11
Harleston discovered many extraordinary facts about the dimensions of the pyramids, which exhibit a basic grid system. Harleston
took the four-faced tetrahedron (which is like the four-faced Sun
Pyramid he was studying) and placed the apex of it at the South Pole
(see Figure 39B, page 210). The base of this equilateral triangle closely
matched the latitude at the Sun Pyramid of 19 N 47. The tetrahedron
and the sphere with a diameter of 12 is a unique pairing, because with
a radius of 6 the ratio of the area is 2 to 1, an occurrence possible only
once.12 We are reminded that the tetrahedron is the shape of the carbon atom, the basic building block of living organisms. Grid Systems / 203
Livio Stecchini's Egyptian and Ziggurat Grids
Peter Tompkins in his first book on world pyramids. Secrets of the
Great Pyramids,*3 asked the specialist Livio Stecchini to look into the
geodetic and measurement systems of ancient Egypt. What Stecchini
produced was an incredibly detailed, comprehensive system. He systematically pieced together the dimensions, measurements and historical references, creating an odyssey of discovery and wonder.
The Egyptian geodetic system was no mere abstraction, but like
the Great Pyramid, it was based on exact measurements. Even the
natural length of the Nile river measured out as one-third of the
latitude of the Earth, as it started at the equator and ended at 30 N 06.
The Great Pyramid lies at 30 N 00, a difference of 6'; the
Egyptians favored 6' because it was one-tenth of a degree of latitude.
This was how they measured latitude in 6' "Belts," as they called them.
Later the Greeks would call them "zones."
In studying the ecliptic they noticed that Mercury (the Egyptian
god of measurement and travel) would deviate more than any of the
other planets—to 7 degrees north or south of the ecliptic. They
therefore determined that the ecliptic was a total of 14 degrees wide,
and called it the "great highway." As measured by Mercury, half the
highway was 7 degrees; the Egyptians related the number 7 to the
seven known planets and also to their geodetic grid. Seven degrees
added to the southernmost boundary of Egypt gave them the northernmost boundary: 24 N 06 + 7 = 31 N 06, and in turn 31 N 06 was
6/7 of a degree of longitude at the equator (refer to Figure 38).
When Ahkenaten started his geodetic revolution, his intent was
to restore once and for all the true geodetic center of Egypt. It has been
stated that this new center was located at 27 N 45 and 30 E 50 on the
Nile and one degree off the central longitude. The Egyptian grid
ended at 55 N 30. The latitude was 2 x 27 N 30, or 55 N 30. This latitude
of 55 N 30 was also significant, as it marks the spot where the distance
of a degree of latitude equals that of a degree of longitude measured at
the equator. The exact latitude where this takes place is 55 N 12; this
wastakeninto consideration when theancient Egyptians laterrevised
the geodetic navel to 27 N 33 x 2, or 55 N 12. In these northern
latitudes the river Dnieper in Russia was used as a systematic counterpart to the Nile.
It is interesting to note that Delphi, the geodetic navel of ancient
Greece, is at 38 N 28; this is the Sun latitude according to Temples' * UFO
>AUCKLAND• NEW PLYMOUTH
Mt. EGMONT | NAPIER . WANGANUI
FEILDING
•«
PALMERSTON NORTH
D'URVILLE ISLAND
/
OTAK1 FORKS
WELLINGTON
NELSON
" WESTPORT
Fig. 36A—New Zealand
Showing section of first trackline discovered of world grid system. This
map was originally published in my first book, Harmonic 33, in 1968. The
trackline extends from the position of a UFO sighted in the Kaipara Harbor,
Auckland, to a position at D 'Urville Island where two large UFOs were seen to
disppear in a flash of light.
204 Júpiter —t m
[ST
Kaipara Harbor
"T T' Áries Júpiter —^
AUCKLAND
m
V ^ Tauranga Rotorua ^ t
New Plymouth
r
fill
.D'Urville Island Palmerston North
.L- Z. tfl WELLINGTON
-r^ ■
Uenheim T Z
z
W i d
-IVddiP CHRISTCHURCH
kT -A DUNEDIN- Invercargilli
lOS Fig. 36B—New Zealand
Original grid map produced in 1965. The map shows a section of the grid
over the New Zealand area. The small circles are positions of UFO activity.
The grid lines are spaced at thirty minutes of arc. Note the frequency of
sightings occuring at grid intersections.
205 B« Saturno <Ut 3lo30N EASTERN
AXIS
32038 E. s^oe'N0
I 24 0 I 24 Apex 30o06N
i
) Mem p his Thebes 25042 N 2 N - i ?trL _ _
Position ot Tropic when
geodetic system of Egypt
wot estoblished
(co. 2600 B.C.) (Asswoh)
LiltleotCalaroci
Boundary
Edypid syener, 0^oqs'N
s„
_in jia rrOyrjitnj' ap_s2l
5o_w_ _
Philae Zd^OO N Great Catoracf
Boundary of Egypt
in Drood sense Fig. 37—The Sinus Mystery 206 10° BL CK SfA 0 o 2>0
S3 ,^
hcditerraheah sea EGYPT
EASTERN AND WESTERN
ORACLE OCTAVES
Fig. 38—The Oracle Octaves (with latitudes)
The latitudinal bands—such as those that criss-cross the omphalos stones—graphically
demonstrate the oracle octaves descending from Dodona to Behdet and from Mount Ararat to
Hebron. Table 21
Chart of the Oracle Octaves
W. Center E. Center Tree-Code 'Planet'-Code Divine Births 8. Dodona
(Mt. Tomaros) Metsamor
(Mt. Ararat) oak (phegus) Saturn? Mankind born from
stones (bones of Earth)
at Dodona 7. Delphi
(Mt. Parnassus) Sardis
(Mt. Sipylus) laurel Sun? (Mankind born
from stones at
Delphi according to
rival tradition) 6. Delos
(Mt. Cynthus) Miletus
(Didyma, also
known as
Branchidae, its associated oracle center)
Mt. Latmus palm Moon
(Artemis was
born first, not
Apollo) Artemis (Diana)
and Apollo born on
Delos 5. a. Somewhere on NE coast
of Cythera?
b. Rhodes
c. Thera on island of Thera?
(If so, destroyed
by the volcano) Hierapolis
(Bambyce) Mars? Júpiter . Omphalos
(Thenae) near Knossos on Crete near Latakia? willow Jupiter Zeus (Jupiter)
was born on Crete 3. Somewhere on south
coast of Cyprus?
(associated with Paphos?
Akrotiri?) Cape Gata? near Tripoli?
Palmyra? Venus
cypress
(the word cypress is derived
from Cyprus) Aphrodite (Venus)
born at Cyprus 2. Lake Tritonis (also
known as Lake Triton)
in Libya/Tunisia Sidon
(Mt. Lebanon) cedar Mercury?
Athena (Pallas) born
(seb in Egyptian at Lake Tritonis
means both 'cedar'
and 'the planet
Mercury') 1. El Marj (Barce)
Libya Babylon 0. Behdet Hebron wild acacia Earth? Note: At one degree of latitude north of Dodona and Ararat is the mystery center of the Cabeiroi on the island of Samothrace. 2,/2
75°
69° |
63° | " 5'/2
7
8'A |1
|1 13 15 Fig. 39A—The Ziggurat of Babylon
The ziggurat of Babylon, says Stecchini, would have been perfect trigonometrically if the height of the first three steps had been as originally conceived: 30,48 and
55 Va degrees. But the Babylonians raised the first step to 33 °, the approximate parallel
of Babylon.
A ^tiiTlTUOt ■ Mercúrio ^7*N j
-R- 6 —-A m
r. o/ ~ Fig. 39B—Harleston's Sphere
Harleston finds it significant that if you stand a tetrahedron on its nose at the
South Pole it will form three triangles above the equator, splitting world into four
equilateral great-circle triangles which will exactly divide into areas of 1/3 above and
2/3 below the equator.
210 Grid Systems / 211
grid. Dodona, a Greek sister center, was approximately 1 degree
north at 39 N 32, and this corresponded to Saturn in Temples' grid
system. The significance of these two places is further clarified when it
was discovered that the length of these latitudes is equal in scale to the
passage of a minute and/or second of sidereal time on the equator.14
The ancient Egyptians were great adherents to what they called
"Maet," or cosmic order/measure, and their geodetic system is only a
part of a much more profound cosmology.
The Babylonians also had a geodetic system, although it is less
well-known than the Egyptians'. The Babylonians built "ziggurats,"
stepped pyramids whose corners pointed in the four directions. The
seven steps were called the "House of Seven Bonds of Heaven and
Earth," and they were painted in certain planetary colors. The steps/
degrees of latitude can be seen in Figure 39A, page 210; each of the
seven steps represented a specific latitude, and each had a key number assigned to it. In turn, each rectangular face was in proportion to
the increased shrinking of longitude while moving north toward the
pole. The latitudes were 6 degrees apart; Stecchini says that this was
done so that an easilyrememberedcosine could be obtained by dividing its length by 2/3. Also, each latitude could be found by multiplying
the height of each step by 6, e. Vênus . 6 x 5.5 = 33N.
The Andes Lines
The whole continent of South America has much to tell us about
the planetary grid, as well as grid systems in general. In the Nazca area
of Peru there are hundreds of ancient lines that criss-cross the desert
floor (see Figures 41, page 213). These seem to be a miniature grid
system or what looks like an enlarged local space chart. The lines have
some astrological/astronomical purposes, but it seems the major
reason for them was for ancestral worship. As the Indians say: "They
pointto the Gods," i.e. the powers and forces of the Earth and in space.
These incredibly straight lines have yet to be connected with the
larger planetary grids.
Skinner's Isometric Grid of Chinese Rural Markets
Skinner's hexagon structures (Figures 42A and B, pages 214-5),
which connect major and minor Chinese cities and towns, are not a
simple flight of imagination but are based on extensive integration of
past research and deep understanding of Chinese economics and
social structure.15 212 / Planets in Locality
Skinner says that each town is connected with six neighboring
towns and that a standard marketing area includes about 18 towns.
Each town has six major paths that radiate from it. Skinner sees these
paths as an arterial system of social and economic energy—a kind of
Ch'i of commerce.
It seems very probable that many other ancient civilizations had
their own grid systems. There are many mysteries yet to be discovered. The grids that are known seem to directly or indirectly
validate certain other grid systems. All the particular grids are apparently part of some grand puzzle that is only now beginning to take
shape and reveal its hidden meaning. r4 OOO
<£ t-CD
ii I 'I
A.
ia
41,V
18 Xa 2160 HUNABS ABOVE SEA Leva.
HUNABS or*&wal BASE E-LEVATJON
FOCAL POINT OP FACei
lo
\C> 3.0
ATZlb STU.
PCJOTIMfci AT
sru. Fig. 40
Conversion of the Sun Pyramid's metric measurements to hunabs is shown by
Harlesion's theoretical reconstruction. The solid lines indicate the restoration by Batres in 1906 to 1910, and by the Mexican Institute of Anthropology and History in
1963 to 1964. The dotted lines use the Citadel logic and are based on refilling almost
exactly the parts left off. The mathematically sequenced lengths of the pyramidal
bodies follow a series of increasing sums. The individual heights and also the
elevations above sea level are factors of the number 3. I . Urano 1'
^ \
.\ Júpiter 1M
* 1
/\
>• X-' Urano A" _ - A
r -A ^
\A
< \ / -::, As?
r-Ax.fP::
ovF^ Urano \ \ rr'vi
r
—0' w
"x \
A^\ 1 V V. >
-o , Vxs
N ^
>
M
\
>- Fig. 41—Nazca Lines of Peru
213 cx T A xr Limits of standard marketing areas O Standard market towns Limits of intermediate marketing areas ^ Higher-level central places Fig. 42A
Mode/ of Chinese marketing areas. Standard market towns are arranged
as hexagonal structures arranged around a central city. Both standard and
intermediate marketing areas are indicated.
214 b
_o b
o- ©
o
o— Limits of standard marketing areas
Limits of intermediate marketing areas o O Standard market towns
0 Higher-level central places Fig. 42B
Marketing areas with interconnecting roads indicated.
215 Notes
1. Sepharial, Geodetic Equivalents. Tempe, AZ: AFA, 1970, reprint.
2 Manly Plutão . Hall, The Secret Teachings of all Ages. Los Angeles: Philosophical Research Society, 1977.
3. ibid.. Hall, p. LVI Júpiter . Bill Becker and Bethe Hagens, The Planetary Grid: A New Synthesis
in Pursuit, 2nd Quarter 1984.
Also see: Christopher Bird, The Planetary Grid in New Age Journal, May 1975, pp. 36-41.
5. Robert Temple, The Sirius Mystery. New York: St. Martin Press,
1975, Chapter 5.
6. Becker-Hagens, Pursuit, op. cit. pp. 56 and 57.
7. Bruce Cathie, Bridge to Infinity, Adventures Unlimited.
8. Jose Arguelles, Earth Ascending, Boulder Co; Shambala, 1984, pp.
55, 85, 93. Mercúrio . ibid.. Temple, pp. 124, 146, 149.
10. Peter Tompkins, Mysteries of the Mexican Pyramids, New York: Harper & Row, 1976, pp. 279-281, 251, 252.
11. ibid., Tompkins-Harleston, p. 263.
12. ibid., Tompkins-Harleston, p. 279-281.
13. Peter Tompkins, Secrets of the Great Pyramid. New York: Harper
and Row, 1971, pp. 183-189.
14. ibid., Tompkins-Stecchini, appendix.
15. ibid., Tompkins-Stecchini, pp. 184-188.
16. Tony Morrison, Pathways to the Gods. New York: Harper & Row,
1978.
17. William Skinner, Marketing and Social Structure in Rural China, Journal of Asian Studies Vol. 23, No. 1, Nov. 1964. 236 CHAPTER 8 HOROSCOPE EXAMPLES T! Carlos Castaneda he elusive and mysterious teacher Carlos Castaneda, author
of The Teachings of Don Juan, The Eagle's Gift and six other books on the
Toltec magical system, is a source of excellent material for relocational
astrology (see Bibliography on page 238).
The life experiences of Carlos are rich with supernatural, magical
and bizarre episodes which catapulted him into separate realities
unknown to most people. His books are incredibly entertaining, and
at the same time filled with lucid insights on the nature of life.
One of the main reasons for his sustained popularity is his natal
Jupiter within one degree of the Tenth House cusp in his natal chart
(see Figure 43A, page 218). His writing ability stems from two sources: his Mercury in Sagittarius in the Eighth House gives him literary
flair in writing about the mysterious side of life; also. Mercury is quincunx (150°) Pluto in the Third House of writing, indicating the right
amount of stress to drive him to express his writing ability. (The
inconjunct or quincunx is known as an irritant which leads to fulfillment.) Jupiter conjunct the Medium Coeli is also Jupiter in the northerly
direction. It is not southern, because his place of birth is in Peru, which
is below the equator. The northerly direction is one of mystery and
adversity (see Figure 15), but with Jupiter there one would receive
guidance and protection from various forms of destructive energy.
One would be made aware of certain laws that could act as shields for
the mental and domestic well-being of the person.
227 Fig. 43A—Carlos Castaneda
From Jansky, Astrological Review 73/74, 1:51 p.m. EST; rectification by
Steve Cozzi.
218 e
U1AZ
A 125A2 M AZ
3) 37AZ -f
^ 35AAZ Saturno ZZl AZ 2 325 AZ cf 234 AZ
305 AZ 250 AZ.
O 270 AZ Fig. 43B
A Local Space chart for Don Juan's Sonoran home. 219 220 / Planets in Locality
Although Carlos doesn't talk much about his early life, we can
assume that Jupiter's influence was present because of his strong
philosophical direction. Jupiter also points the way north, being the
closest planet to any of the cardinal points, including the Ascendant
and Descendant. The azimuth from Peru to Los Angeles (a temporary
home) is not within 10 degrees of any planet; perhaps this means he
left South America from somewhere in Brazil, a move he has alluded to.
When we look at his chart in Los Angeles (where he lived for
many years), a different picture unfolds. His Venus (in right ascension) is in very close sextile to the Tenth House cusp, which could in a
mild way enhance his popularity. Uranus squares the Tenth cusp (2°
orb) and produces very unsettling and erratic conditions in his life
direction. Pluto trines his First House cusp (1.8° orb), helping somewhat by adding depth and resiliency, while at the same time contributing to his withdrawn and solitary nature. Mercury square the
Ascendant (12' orb) again shows the need to communicate through
writing. However, the writing of eight books would seem to point to
more than just Mercury square the First.
In the Local Space map, Uranus is conjunct the east and it also is
the closest planet to the horizon (6° orb). This makes Uranus very
powerful in this locality. Uranus is an Air-type planet and it is in the
east, which is also connected with the mental Air element. Uranus
therefore is most responsible for the continuous outpouring of writing over a period of ten years.
Carlos learned the ancient Toltec system from two teachers, Don
Juan and Don Jenero. Most of his learning experiences took place in
two locations in Mexico: the Sonoran desert in northern Mexico, and
around Oaxaca in southern Mexico. From careful research I have
been able to find the approximate location of Don Juan's house in
Sonora (Figure 43B). Looking at the Local Space map for Carlos in Los
Angeles, and plotting the azimuth to Sonora, we find that Carlos had
to travel on his Venus line. This Venus line has extra importance, as it
is within two degrees of the azimuth of the Winter Solstice azimuth
degree. Therefore traveling on this Venus line involves matters of the
heart, but in a serious way. The Winter Solstice point always brings a
Capricorn/Saturn influence to the planets that are within three or
four degrees of it. What in fact happened is that Carlos formed a stable
relationship with Don Juan, one that continuously brought him back
for more teaching, even though Don Juan frequently subjected him to Horoscope Examples / 221
unexplainable and life-threatening encounters with unknown forces.
Carlos had to discipline the desires of his heart, and bring into balance
his life's direction. Love is what brought him back, love of the path,
and of his teacher. Don Juan had told him on many occasions that you
must follow a path with heart and no other.
In the Sonoran desert, his Uranus is six degrees away from the
east, much weaker than in Los Angeles, where it was almost exact.
However, the Sun here is a little less than eight degrees from the
south. Considering the leadership qualities of Don Juan in his neverending assaults on the ego of Carlos, this may point to the possibility
of error in the birth time, which would make the Sun closer to the
south. The direction south is the place of self-realization, and this is
what eventually happened to the self-image (Sun) of Carlos. It was
redefined and merged with the real self within (south). Uranus trines
his First cusp there, causing sudden and positive personality changes.
The Node also trines the Ascendant, showing the success of personal associations.
The latitude of the central Sonora location is 29 north; the altitude
(especially in the Prime Vertical) becomes increasingly more important as you get below 30 degrees north latitude (or above 30 degrees
south). Venus happened to be the lowest planet to the horizon at that
location. The most sacred planet in Mesoamerica, Venus was to have
an added meaning for Carlos.
Don Juan asks Carlos to search in his heart (Venus) and find out
why he wants to learn the Toltec path of knowledge. Carlos asks Don
Juan if he will at least accept his desire to learn. Don Juan says that he
would if Carlos can find his "spot," that he has a spot of his own, and
that he knows where the right one is for Carlos. But Carlos must find it
for himself to prove his intent to learn. Don Juan explains that the spot
is a direction that can vary from place to place, and that a person will
feel strong and happy when facing in that direction. The spot also
wards off fatigue and offers protection from enemies.
Don Juan does not give any hints to Carlos on how to find the
spot, but he encourages him to experiment. Carlos then goes through
a series of body positions while facing in different directions. After
marking different directions in his mind and with his shoes and jacket,
at about 3:00 a.m. he thinks he has found the spot. Don Juan informs
him that it is not the one. Finally at about 5:15 a.m. he notices a bluishgreen light in a southeasterly direction. After he falls asleep on that
spot, Don Juan informs him that the spot to the southeast is in fact his 222 / Planets in Locality
spot. Looking at the Local Space chart for Carlos at the location of Don
Juan's house in Sonora, it can be seen that Venus is in the southeast
(325 azimuth), with Jupiter at 19 degrees of azimuth, more towards
the south.
Jupiter and Venus, the great benefics (as they have been called),
should give the strength and protection that Don Juan had mentioned. Also, at this time of day, transiting Venus was in the eastsoutheast.
Don Juan also said that there was a bad or enemy spot and that
Carlos had found it as well. Although the exact direction is not given, I
believe it to be in the southwest, because Mars and Saturn are in that
location for Carlos (Saturn at azimuth 196, Mars at azimuth 204).
There have been many critics of Castaneda's works. Most of the
criticism centers around how much was fact and how much was fiction. If Carlos was only fictionalizing, how could he have guessed at
the right location for his spot?
Albert Einstein
Although there is no way of verifying the accuracy of this chart
with solid evidence, nor with personal statements, the fact remains
that the chart does tend to prove itself from a Local Space point of
view. Einstein was bom in Ulm, Germany (southwest of Berlin) on
March 14, 1879, at 11:30 SM LMT. He had Jupiter sesquiquadrate
(135°), the First within a 45' orb, and Mars semi-square (45°) the
Tenth House cusp (56' orb). These are not very powerful aspects, yet
they are close in orb. Jupiter adds positivity to Einstein's outlookMars gives an added push toward his direction (see Figure 44A, facing page).
In Berlin, he still has the Mars aspect plus a sesquiquadrate of
Uranus to the First House (41' orb) and a square of Venus to the
Ascendant (1° 23' orb). Jupiter is not in aspect with the Ascendant
here, and so it doesn't neutralize the other adverse aspects. The three
aspects in Berlin taken by themselves would not be considered difficult, however when the minor aspects pile up in a certain locality
they begin to reinforce each other. Mars is about 8 degrees above the
horizon in Berlin, closer than any other planet. This of course would
tend to aggravate the Mars First House aspect along with indirectly
feeding the discord of the other aspects. So Berlin for Einstein was an
unsettling (Uranus), unpleasant (Venus), and potentially violent
(Mars) place. Fig. 44A—Albert Einstein
From German birth registry 223 >262 AZ Fig. 44B
A Local Space chart for Albert Einstein's Princeton home. 224 Horoscope Examples / 225
Perhaps if this discord were not present, he may have delayed his
permanent exit from Germany, and a delay could have cost him his
life, as it did so many others. Projecting the azimuth to New York, we
find that he traveled on his Neptune line. This is a very tricky as well as
mystical line. It has been mentioned that it has to do with new realities
and with refinement. These two words are especially descriptive in
Einstein's case, since he refined his formulas at Princeton, and changed
mankind's concepts by opening up new realities in physics. One other
point is that if he appeared to be what he really was (a Jew escaping the
country with secrets of the universe), he may never have been able to
leave Germany. In his case the illusionary quality of Neptune offered
him an advantage.
In Princeton, New Jersey, Einstein had the Moon square the First
(1.5° orb), a minor aspect which indicates that the public and publicity
(Moon) would be somewhat of a disturbance to his outlook. The
major influence is the Sun, which is conjunct the east (38' orb) and is
also one of the three planets that are close to the horizon. The brilliance
of his individuality really was able to shine forth, and of course, his
popularity was world-wide. The Sun in the east is in its natural place,
where it rises, and this placement gave Einstein great vitality and confidence. The Sun is Júpiter .7 degrees below the horizon, with Uranus at Júpiter .5
below, and Jupiter 6.1 above; this is a remarkably successful combination. Uranus represents his new ideas in physics; the Sun, his individual creativity; and Jupiter, the functioning of the abstract mind
and the overall success of everything he attempted.
Venus is conjunct the Summer Solstice, making his personal life
very sensitive and touchy, but at the same time productive. We could
say that he put his heart into his work and had many powerful social
encounters. Venus allowed him expression of feelings, and he came
across as warm, making him somewhat atypical of most scientists.
Mark Twain
Mark Twain was born in Florida, Missouri (November 30,1835,
at Júpiter :45 a m. LMT, according to Huggins in Astrology magazine, January
1970). He had only two weak aspects in that locality. The Moon trined
the Tenth House cusp, but was 1 degree 45' from exact (see Figure
45A, page 226). This aspect may have given him some intuitive
impression about his direction in life. Since Mercury was also in
aspect to the Tenth, making a square (1° 23'), this may have given him Fig. 45A—Mark Twain
From Mark Edmond Jones, Sabean Symbols, 1953 226 ^ 71° AZ 5 136* AZ Plutão 150°AZ ,
157° ,
AZ
26° AZ Júpiter 166°
A2 2
SA^AZ
O* 3 A4° AZ
G341 AZ J(I *
I— ? 333° AZ
324* AZ Fig. 45B
/I Local Space chart for Mark Twain's Hartford home.
227 228 / Planets in Locality
ideas about writing as a career, but did not necessarily provide a
chance for self-expression. He grew up in Hannibal on the Mississippi
River, which is about 35 miles northeast of Florida; this is also the
direction of Twain's Neptune azimuth line. Pure fiction comes straight
from an active imagination, so it was no wonder that he created the
fascinating stories about young boys like Huck Finn growing up on
the Mississippi.
Interestingly enough, Mark Twain did not find his real destiny in
that area. One of the reasons may be that Saturn was 8 degrees above
the horizon and in the east. Mercury was 7 degrees below the horizon,
also in the east. This combination can produce deep thinking, especially
since both planets were in the east, the place of Air. The real expression of his talent did not happen; they were not close enough to the
horizon. In addition, he experienced the delaying influence common
with Saturn. (Both Saturn and Mercury were in the Local Space
Twelfth House).
A helpful placement in that location was Jupiter in the Local
Space Seventh House in opposition to the Summer Solstice. This
showed that practical education and material wealth along with
spiritual growth would come through good relationships, and perhaps
by traveling west. Twain did go west; his major trip was to San Francisco after he spent some time in Nevada. The azimuth in that direction showed an unusually large combination of five lines: Sun, Venus,
Mercury, Mars and Pluto. Since he traveled on so many lines, it can be
safely said that he left for a variety of reasons. Among the planetary
lines. Mars was the closest to the azimuth direction from Hannibal to
San Francisco. Definite action had to be taken to cause a deeper
(Pluto), mental (Mercury), social and financial (Venus), and individualistic (Transpluto) reality to break forth .
His San Francisco locality chart is filled with activity. The most
powerful influence is the Moon; it is only 23' above the horizon and
also conjunct the west (3° orb). Involvement with others on deeper
levels is present, and strong emotions also play a big role. Many
women entered his life at this time; it could have been too much of a
good thing, which could have caused too much change and dependency.
Jupiter was 6.5 degrees from the South, not a close aspect, but
one that could moderately improve his professional life. Three other
positive factors entered into the picture: Jupiter square the Ascendant
(1° orb). Mercury sextile the Medium Coeli (1° orb). Mars sextile the Horoscope Examples / 229
First (2° orb) and lastly Mercury conjunct the east in a 5.2° orb. The
question arises with all this Jupiter influence (a Jupiter square is not
usually considered negative) and Mercury influence: Why didn't he
stay in San Francisco? The answer lies in the remaining two aspects.
Saturn is only 20' from an exact conjunction in the east, so it is more
powerful than Mercury, which is over five degrees from the east. As I
have indicated in Chapter 3, "There is very little that is sociable, warm
or friendly about this place." (Taken out of context, this may sound a
bit harsh, because Saturn does have a constructive influence in making us more practical, responsible and realistic.) The other spoiler
here is Pluto conjunct the Seventh (2° orb), a place where petty
tyrants can play on your weaknesses. Undoubtedly, Mark Twain
learned many important lessons there, but the close aspects of Saturn
and Pluto eventually outweighed the Moon, Mercury and Jupiter
aspects.
His next major move was to Buffalo, New York. He would have to
travel on his Jupiter line to get there. This is an indicator of success,
and a time in his life when things were on the increase.
In Buffalo, he had Mercury conjunct the First (1° orb), a good
place to start writing, which is exactly what he did. Buffalo was not
destined to be his home for long, and there are some definite reasons
why. Uranus was 3 degrees from the north, i.e. conjunct the Fourth
House cusp. This is a very disruptive and disturbing influence,
especially with career and home matters. Another uncomfortable
aspect was Saturn 1 degree from the Winter Solstice. This influence
can be great for control and concentration, but it is also depressing
and restricting—definitely not in the style of Mark Twain.
Hartford, Connecticut was the place where he had his most productive years of writing. To get there, he travelled a short distance on
an assortment of lines, making the move difficult to interpret.
In Hartford, Uranus is away from the Fourth House cusp and
Saturn is 3 degrees from the Winter Solstice, lessening its impact.
Mercury is away from the Ascendant, but is still the closest planet to
the horizon (as it was in Buffalo). Mercury this strong would certainly
cause a person with writing talent to express it. The mild Saturn
influence gave him just enough discipline to get the job done. An
added factor is that the Sun is square the Medium Coeli (10 orb) here;
this shows Twain's popularity, prominence and individual creativity.
Mark Twain made a number of trips to London. In so doing he
travelled on his Neptune line, the same line that triggered his imagi- 230 / Planets in Locality
nation when he travelled to Hannibal. No doubt his trips to England
gave him plenty of ideas for his book A Connecticut Yankee in King
Arthur's Court.
Benito Mussolini
A number of years ago I came across a statement in a book I was
reading which aroused my first interest in Local Space Astrology, and
locality astrology in general. It was the Wilhelm Wulff book The Zodiac
and the Swastika. Although I knew next to nothing about Local Space
Astrology at the time, he related a story that really stimulated my
curiosity.
Wulff was one of many German astrologers who was forced to
work for the Third Reich during World War Gêmeos . He was in Rome when
Mussolini was kidnapped under orders of certain German officers.
The German High Command in Italy wanted him back right away but
had no idea where he had been taken. They demanded that Wulff use
astrology to find Mussolini.
Wulff stated that he used the East Indian technique that locates
missing persons! I had never heard of any such astrological technique.
Wulff's calculations showed that Mussolini was 75 miles southeast of
Rome. There was only one possible location and that was the island of
Ponza, and it was here that Mussolini was found. Years later, when I
used my own calculations, I came up with 76.5 miles south-southeast
of Rome. I thought I had erred, because it put the point out in the
ocean, but when I looked at the map I found the small island of Ponza
(see Appendix G).
In Rome, Mussolini had Neptune opposition the Summer
Solstice point. (He was born July 29,1883, at Dovia la Pre, Italy, at 2:00
p.m. LMT, according to Gauquelin—see Figure 46A). This point tends
to sensitize, nurture and cause growth. Therefore his Neptune was
more active than normal in this location. Neptune in political affairs
has a lot to do with spies, propaganda, false pretenses, etc. Neptune
opposed his Ascendant at his birthplace north of Rome. He was
obviously quite proficient in deceiving the public, as well as projecting the country's problems on chosen scapegoats. The practice of
deception and projection have long been known to be sinister skills
of Neptune. Fig. 46A—Benito Mussolini
From M. Gauquelin # 1745, Vol. 5 231 s
1
^ 292° AZ. Fig. 46B
Mussolini's Rome Local Space chart. 232 Horoscope Examples / 233
Napoleon I of France
Napoleon's home and the seat of his power was in Paris. (Born
August 15,1769, Ajaccio, Corsica, at 11:52 a.m. LMT, corrected time,
see Figure 47A). It is here that he was most successful and influential,
and for good reason—the Sun was within Júpiter degrees of the south and it
may have been near magnetic north. This of course is a position of
prominence, power and leadership. Also Jupiter and Uranus were
both close to the horizon (Jupiter 6° below it, and Uranus Júpiter ° above it).
Uranus was in the Local Space First House and Jupiter in the Local
Space Twelfth; both planets therefore were in the east. Jupiter and
Uranus working together can bring about sudden success in the areas
of money, influence and technical knowledge. Most people would
agree that Napoleon acquired fame and wealth in a spontaneous manner, yet where did his technical abilities lay? Besides being open to
progressive thought, his chief technical talents were expressed in the
military. He was brilliant and innovative when it came to the use of
artillery. The types of cannons he used and the proper positioning of
them was often decisive in winning battles. In addition Pluto was conjunct the Summer Solstice degree, thus the power of death and
transformation was geared towards growth.
In Paris, he also had Mercury conjunct the locality Tenth House
cusp (less than 2° orb). So his communication skills tended to benefit
him. People were interested in what he had to say, and he had many
intelligent cohorts who helped him with his speeches, etc. His natal
Moon squared the Ascendant in Paris, within less than a half-degree
orb. Although this is not a powerful aspect, it does indicate that the
public (Moon) was periodically disturbing and fickle toward him and
his views (Ascendant). Paris, therefore, was a successful (Jupiter),
revolutionary (Uranus), intellectual (Mercury) and emotional (Moon)
place for him.
Two major events stand out in Napoleon's military and political
career: the disastrous Russian campaign and the defeat at Waterloo.
The planets closest to the azimuth connecting Paris and Moscow were
Saturn and the Moon. Saturn is the planet that is the closest (to the
azimuth degree) and therefore its influence should be considered
dominant. Had Napoleon known about this, he may have altered his
plans, because with Saturn you should expect delays and limitations.
The interesting fact is that Napoleon won all the battles, but lost
the war! Fig. 47A—Napoleon I of France
From Weytin's Astrology, June 1944, and from Plutão . J. Swift, English astrologer
publishing in 1812; rectification by Steve Cozzi. 234 53 29* AZ S) 5° AZ \ W ^ 253°AZ Mercúrio 202°kZ Saturno 226' AZ
? 245° AZ O* AZ
H7 28 AZ
O 5°A2 Fig. 47B
Napoleon's Paris Local Space chart. 235 236 / Planets in Locality
Local Space astrology reveals two important factors that contributed to the great loss of life and his subsequent defeat. First of all.
Napoleon and his generals made a fatal mistake in taking the same
route in retreat as they took while advancing in Russia. The food supplies from the locals had already been depleted in the summer and
fall. In other words, staying on his Saturn line created a disaster. The
Moon relates to basic requirements, like food and shelter, but when
connected with Saturn definite restrictions can, and in this case did,
develop. Thousands of his troops starved to death, and those who did
not starve died of the cold. Saturn is a cold planet and the Moon is a
Water planet; when you combine the two, you get frozen water or
snow. Marching into Russia in the late fall on your Saturn line is not
advantageous for health or success.
The main advance of Napoleon's army reached Smolensk, which
is about 190 miles west of Moscow. Napoleon himself entered Moscow for a few hours with some advance units, but the city was never
occupied by his army.
His locality information for Moscow shows a great deal of success. Pluto sextiles the First and trines the Tenth House cusps, onedegree and two-degree orbs respectively. Jupiter is conjunct the
Winter Solstice. Jupiter is also less than three degrees from the Ascendant First House. In the Local Space map. Mars is less than one degree
from conjunction with the South/Tenth House. This is an excellent
placement for military conquest, especially when you take into consideration Pluto's aspects. Jupiter and Uranus are closer to the horizon
than in Paris (Uranus is 5.5° below and Jupiter is 3° above).
Napoleon's case is an excellent example of how traveling on certain lines over a prolonged period of time can affect the outcome of
events. His army had been traveling on the Saturn/Moon lines for
over six months, so even though he won the majority of battles, he lost
the war. His army did not have the physical strength nor supplies to
make it through the Russian winter.
Historically the loss at Waterloo ranks about equal with the Russian defeats. Napoleon's last major battle was fought here about 10
miles southeast of Brussels, Belgium. At the beginning of the battle
(11:30 a.m. on June 18,1815) the Moon was in the northeast (azimuth
14). This placement may not have been very significant, except for the
fact that it was conjunct Napoleon's Moon opposing Saturn for that
locality. The Moon, in the case of a military battle, would show where
an army may be vulnerable to attack. History tells us that the turning Horoscope Examples / 237
point of the battle took place when the French front lines were pierced
in the northeast (Moon). The battle was over at around 8:00 p.m. At this
time the conjunction of Mars and Pluto was in the northeast, right on
top of Napoleon's Moon! He failed to realize how weak the northeast
part of his lines were, and for the second time his Moon/Saturn
opposition worked against him. Notes
All chart information in this chapter is taken from The American
Book of Charts, Lois Rodden, Astro-Computing Services, San Diego,
1980.
For references to Local Space material throughout his extensive
series of books, the following works by Carlos Castaneda should
prove helpful:
1. The Teachings of Don Juan. New York: Pocket Books, 1968.
Pages 29-34 (finding spot), 113, 154, 162, 165, 171, 193,
202, 228.
2. A Separate Reality. New York: Pocket Books, 1971. Pages 228231.
3. Journey to Ixtlan. New York: Pocket Books, 1972. Pages 48,106,
144,151,155,163,166,193, 201, 252. Júpiter . Tales of Power. New York: Pocket Books, 1974. Pages 59, 220,
232, 233.
5. Second Ring of Power. New York: Pocket Books, 1977. Pages 14,
26, 31, 32, 35, 36, 40, 62, 78, 252, 313.
6. The Eagle's Gift. New York: Pocket Books. Pages 67,104,174,
189,196, 242, 249.
7. The Fire Within. New York: Pocket Books, 1983. Indirect references throughout the text.
8. The Power of Silence. New York: Pocket Books, 1987. Indirect
references throughout the text. 238 APPENDICES APPENDIX A
Michael and Margaret Erlewine 1. The Celestial Sphere
From The Astrology of Local Space, published by
The Heart Center, 1977. T
A. he Celestial Sphere is an exact projection of the Geographic
Sphere, and this fact allows for some very interesting astrological considerations. Coordinates on the celestial equatorial sphere are measured in right ascension (similar to zodiac longitude) and declination,
a little later on. For now, we will investigate the relation between the
latitude factor (declination) in the equatorial system and geographic
latitude. Each place and city on this Earth is located at a specific
latitude somewhere between the equator and the poles. Ann Arbor,
Michigan (where we live) is located at 42° latitude, north of the
equator. There is a circle of 42° latitude that stretches across the USA
and on around the Earth. Thus there are other cities on the globe that
also are located at 42° north geographic latitude. You may want to
look and see what cities share your same latitude—either above or
below the equator.
Now the interesting fact about the relation between geographic
latitude and declination in the equatorial sphere is that there exists a
circle of stars on the celestial sphere, located at a declination that
matches the geographic latitude of your home. The stars on this circle
are the only ones that ever pass over your town, and each parallel of
geographic latitude on the Earth has a matching parallel of declination
on the celestial sphere. The diagram on the next page will illustrate
this fact. Ann Arbor is located at point a on the rotating Earth. Star a is
directly overhead at what is called the zenith. As the Earth turns,
241 NP Parallei
Lati tude S?' Northr\ South
Meridian Figure A
Cities located along the north/south meridian
and parallel of latitude.
it will carry Ann Arbor to point b and on around in a circle until point a
is reached once again. There is also another circle of stars that pass
exactly under Ann Arbor—at a declination circle of -42° (42 degrees
south declination). Every city on Earth could be described in terms of
the kinds of stars and other objects that make up the declination circles that equal the circle of geographic latitude at which they are
located. You may want to look up the degree of declination in this list
that is the same as your geographic latitude to see what kind of points
and stars circle over your head each year and each day.
242 NCR Parallel of
Declination 42° Ce es SP
Equator SCR Figure 6
What we have done for the declination factor on the celestial
sphere we could also do for the right ascension or longitude equivalent in this coordinate system. Right ascension is similar to zodiac longitude in that it is measured from 0 0 to 360°, but it is measured along
the equator and not along the ecliptic or zodiac. We shall return to the
difference between these two systems later on. Right now, we will
investigate the relationship between right ascension and the geographic meridian that runs from the NorthPole through your birthplace
and on to the South Pole.
243 244 / Planets in Locality
Figure B on the previous page shows the Earth on which we have
drawn both parallels of geographic latitude and north/south geographic meridians of longitude. Point a illustrates a city located somewhere in the Midwest. The finder lists inAstrophysical Directions (or in
an atlas), arranged by geographic longitude and latitude, will allow
you to look up other cities located along the parallel of latitude where
you are, and also cities located along the north/south geographic
meridian that passes through your location. We have illustrated this
with small circles in the diagram that represent other cities located
along these two directions on the globe. We have seen how there is a
circle of stars on the celestial sphere that equals the circle of geographic
latitude for any spot on Earth. We can do the same for the geographic
longitude factor. In fact we do this each time we cast a natal chart and
locate the Local Sidereal Time (LST) or right ascension of the MidHeaven (RAMC). We stop the Earth's motion and hold it still to see
what part of the heavens is overhead our birthplace; another way of
saying this is we determine in what direction of the heavenly sphere
the Earth was pointed or oriented.
Once we have found the LST or RAMC for a birth, we can look up
the equivalent Mid-Heaven (MC), Ascendant and House cusps in any
Table of Houses. We can also look up the direction of the heavens "out
there" or overhead on star maps. Your LST may be expressed in
Hours-Minutes-Seconds (H-M-S), which you will find along the edge
of these maps, or in Degrees-Minutes-Seconds (D-M-S) of arc (rather
than time), and these too are given on the maps. (H-M-S may be converted to D-M-S by simply multiplying by 15, and D-M-S maybe converted to H-M-S by dividing by 15). Look up your RAMC or LST on
the equatorial star maps and locate the right ascension meridian that
was overhead at your birth and the direction in space to which your
birth location was pointed or oriented. ALL stars and points along the
line of right ascension running from top to bottom on this map were in
line with the geographic meridian for your birth. The diagram (Figure
C on the facing page) will illustrate this: (1) Ann Arbor is located
along the 42nd parallel of latitude, (2) The north/south geographic
meridian (o, c, e, s) passes through Ann Arbor at o, (3) This meridian
equals point Z, C, E and S when projected on the celestial sphere, ( Júpiter )
All points located along this celestial meridian will be aligned and in
conjunction with the north/south geographic meridian for Ann Arbor,
(5) Only star Z is also conjunct by declination=latitude for Ann Arbor,
(6) The planet Mars (at C) would be overhead and to the south of Ann *
★
f
* ★ t * ★ Surface of
Celestial Sphere
WEST-EAST
Earth ★ J Co ★ ★ ★ ★ Figure C
Arbor and directly overhead a city at point c, (7) Points Z, C, E & S
would all be conjunct the Midheaven for this chart.
At this point, it is hoped the reader has some feel for how the
geographic sphere fits or matches the equatorial sphere. Perhaps it is
clear to you why the equatorial coordinates right ascension (RA) and
declination are so important in Mundane (politics, etc.) Astrology. For
one, any planetary position can be matched to a spot on the Earth by
both longitude and latitude and this is what is done when we trace
Eclipse Paths on the globe. There is not space to go into great detail
with this subject, but if the reader understands the simple relationship
between the geographic and mundane (equatorial) spheres, many
interesting ideas may occur.
245 11. The Astrology of Local Space The following article was first published in 1977 in the 6th number of the
COSMECOLOG Áries BULLETIN as published by Charles A. Jayne. Although
astrologers had worked with the Horizon System before, Erlewine was the first
to define the concept of Local Space as presented here. In particular, the combining of celestial positions (stars, planets, etc.) with directions on the globe
(cities, places, etc.) and the concept of relocating towards a planet first
appeared here. This was before the advent of the home computer, and Erlewine
had worked out the tedious mathematics of Local Space first on a scientific
calculator and later on one of the programmables. Today programs that calculate Local Space charts are available on many of the more popular computers.
There seem to be several distinct levels or dimensions to our life,
and depending upon the clarity of the day, our awareness maybe centered in a dimension ranging from the very mundane on up through
an occasional sharing in some sort of more transpersonal or Cosmic
form of Consciousness. It is becoming clear to many astrologers in
these times that this multi-dimensionality of our life perhaps may best
be represented and examined through a series of astrological charts;
and that an attempt to extract all levels of our life—the many quite different dimensions—from the geocentric ecliptic chart alone is bound
to be a frustrating experience. In a word it is unnecessary.
Astrologers make constant use of three very different systems of
coordinates (whether they are aware of it or not) each time they erect
a natal chart: namely (1) the Zodiac or ecliptic, (2) the Equatorial system (right ascension and declination) and (3) the Horizon system of
coordinates. The actual distinction between these different systems of
coordinates are lost to most of us, and they are jumbled together to
form some kind of Zodiac pie. It has become my realization that these
basic physical planes of reference—the horizon, equator, ecliptic, and
246 Appendix A / 247
even the galactic and supergalactic planes—correspond symbolically
to the various different dimensions or levels of our consciousness—as
they exist now, in mutual interpenetration. These levels can be sorted
out; and as astrologers we may learn to read these different levels as
separate, yet related and whole dimensions of our experience.
Let me rephrase all of this. Our Universe, and therefore our Life,
can be described or expressed in astrological terms using any one of
several fundamental planes of reference: ecliptic, horizon, etc. These
different planes and their respective coordinate systems are like different languages (or algebras), in that they each can express the same
moment in time, the same planets—in fact, each can express the entire
universe; and yet each orders these same objects and data in a different
way so as to bring out and raise a particular dimension of reality above
the general threshold of our life and awareness. Since our life and
consciousness appear to flow through at least several quite distinct
levels, it is our conviction that the most sensible method by which to
express or map these different levels is through such fundamental
orderings, or reference planes. Our almost exclusive concern for the
plane of the Earth's orbit—the ecliptic or zodiac and the relation of all
activity to this plane—results in a loss of contrast and dimensionality
that the use of these alternative coordinate systems provide.
There are at least two basic factors to consider when examining
these various coordinate systems; and they are summed up in the
familiar axiom: "As above, so below; yet after another manner." The
first factor is an indication that the various coordinate systems may be
ordered to form a hierarchy in terms of a progressive "inclusivity," or
greater comprehensiveness. In other words, the Galactic coordinate
system includes the Heliocentric, which includes the Geocentric, which
includes the Horizon, and so forth. This represents the "As above, so
below" portion of the phrase; and this "wheels within wheels within
wheels" concept is well understood, and a popular one through
which to express the various dimensions of consciousness. In other
words, a large frame of reference or coordinate system somehow
involves information of a larger or more meto-physical kind when
considered in relation to a more particular or less inclusive system.
The second factor to be illustrated in the phrase "As above, so
below: yet after another manner," while of equal importance, is less well
understood. The great reference places and their respective systems
of coordinates are not only inclusive of one another (that is, larger and
smaller in relation to each other), but they are also inclined at different 248 / Planets in Locality
angles or attitudes to one another. In other words, learning to use and
understand the nature of a more inclusive system, such as the Ecliptic
or Zodiac system, in relation to the Equatorial or "Right Sphere" system, is not only a matter of ordering the information along a different
plane (taking a larger view or picture); it a/so involves a fundamental
change in attitude, or inclination. This shift in attitude, or reorientation
of attitude, is an important concept for astrologers to consider and
to absorb.
Let me present an analogy which might relate to interpreting
these various planes in our everyday life. We are becoming ever more
aware on a social level of the Cosmic or transpersonal perspective as
being associated with the idea of Expansion, with a more WholeView; yet we have not understood on this same broad social level that
such a change in scale or scope may also involve a basic change in
attitude: a fundamental change in approach to life. We can no longer
be inclined in directions we once were; and this must amount to a
radical change—that is, change at "root" level—in our activity! Furthermore, a basic misunderstanding as to what is involved in spiritual
growth has resulted from an attempt to view such growth exclusively
as some kind of "enlargement;" one wistfully looks forward to growing beyond the particular terms of his everyday existence. This is a
result of ignorance of the change in attitude—the change in point of
view, or vantage point—that accompanies true spiritual development: a change very difficult to imagine or assess for one not aware
that such change is a natural and expected part of any deeper
initiation.
So much for metaphysics. Much of my own research here in Ann
Arbor has revolved around these various coordinate systems and the
dimensions of life they describe. In particular, I have been concerned
with the inclinations or attitudes of one system to another. I like to tell
myself that the reason for this interest may be due to the fact that I was
bom with such a "bad" attitude towards some facets of life in this
world, that vast changes in attitude on my part have been necessary
simply for my survival. Let me repeat: these different coordinate systems are great Languages or Orderings of our total reality, and each
one raises to our attention its characteristic gestalt of whole dimension of life.
To my knowledge, L. Edward Johndro was the first modern
astrologer to make a life-long concern the articulation of the difference between whole coordinate systems (Ecliptic and Equator). Appendix A / 249
And in my opinion, a final assessment of Johndro's work may not deal
so much in terms of his technical genius alone as with the scope and
comprehension of his vision; and in particular, that focus of it relating
to the essential differences between events as interpreted on the
ecliptic or on the equator. In recent years, this research has been carried on and developed further by Charles Jayne, Theodor Landscheidt
and others. Our research at the Heart Center School of Astrology has
centered on the difference and relationship between the Geocentric
and Heliocentric ecliptic systems and, in recent years, on questions of
cosmic structure; in particular on an attempt to assess the meaning of
the Galactic and Supergalactic planes as they stand in relation to one
another, and to the zodiac. With these ideas in mind, we are ready to
examine a most particular and fascinating system of coordinates: that
of the Horizon. There is no intention here to document or "prove" the
validity of this system in this very preliminary research. Our purpose
is to present the impression we have formed regarding the dimension
of our life we have found to be mapped in the chart of Local Space; and
to provide those interested with the means to calculate such charts.
We would very much appreciate feedback and comments from those
of you who investigate this very interesting dimension.
In simple terms the Local Space (LS) chart is a map of the 360° of
horizon surrounding an event such as a birth... much as we might
look around us toward the east, west, north and south. In this coordinate system, the fundamental plane to which all else is referred is
the horizon of the observer; and the position of the various planets as
they appear from this location are projected onto the horizon using the
coordinates "azimuth" and "altitude." Azimuth is the equivalent of
zodiac longitude in this system and is measured for our purposes,
from the east direction, through the North and on around in a counterclockwise direction, in the same way that we measure the traditional signs and houses. Altitude, analogous to ecliptic latitude, is
measured above and below the horizon to the poles from 0° to 90°. It
is worth the emphasis of repetition to stress that, from the standpoint
of the Local Space chart, the horizon is the whole azimuth circle as it
ranges around the wheel of the chart—not simply the line described
by House cusps I and VII, as our astrological habituations tempt us to
think. This, then, gives a sort of "flat earth" perspective, as it were, the
visible horizon being much like a "Magical Circle." And as tradition
teaches us regarding the nature of the Magical Circle: the Circle is
realized to be the equator of a sphere which extends above and below 250 / Planets in Locality
the plane of the local horizon (apparent or rational horizon cuts the
infinite sphere in coincident circles). Here is a map, in space, of an
event from a topocentric perspective, or local center; and this, an astrology of Local Space.
Before we dive into the techniques useful in this new dimension
of Local Space, here is our impression of "what it is all about": the
general feeling of what portion of life is captured through this coordinate system. The most remarkable factor, and the key concept you
may need in order to appreciate the particular quality of the Local
Space chart, is that every object in the universe—whether Celestial or
Mundane—has an equal and valid position in this chart. Not only the
planets and stars, but on an equal basis, cities, countries and even the
local water tower or the neighbor's house can be represented. All that
concerns us here is the direction of any object in space—not the distance. In other words, the Celestial Sphere and the Mundane or
Geographic Sphere exist side by side and are interchangeable! A star
is a city is a neighbor. We can walk towards, write letters to, or get up
and move into—for instance—our Seventh House. Even more startling, we can travel into our natal planets, since they also represent a
direction on the globe in the chart of Local Space. Here, in a hopeless
intermingling of various planes of reference and of objects, a strange
and, I must confess, somewhat magical view of our world begins to
emerge: one in which every city and friend becomes a radiating center
of influence. Here for the first time the long history of Magic, witchcraft
and sorcery take on a practical reality, where local deities and preferred directions become the rule, and we are thrust forever beyond
the threshold of the just "slightly remarkable." The psychedelic
character in Local Space charts is unmistakeable and appears to be
intrinsic to the system. The world seems to appear as a kind of grand
talisman and vast ritual ground through this perspective. The closest
popular image of a similar nature in the modern consciousness is the
remarkable world of Don Juan as generated by the author Carlos Castaneda. Here is no "subtle plane," but a personal landscape painted in
bold and clear strokes, a world where the modem man is learning to
move across the face of the Earth in an endless adjustment and tuning
of his radix—of his self. Individuals driven in particular directions on
a checkerboard world, unable to resist travelling to a goal that is no
particular place on Earth as much as it is a direction within them: the
direction of a force, or of a planet: "There! where Power hovers," to
use Don Juan's expression. In a word, here is perhaps the most vulgar Appendix A / 251
system, where the obvious is enthroned and the subtle unnecessary.
Here then are some specific approaches we have found to be most
useful in examining these charts.
Once you have mastered the mathematics involved in erecting
these charts (programs that calculate Local Space charts are available
from Matrix Software for most popular name computers) involved in
erecting these charts, and have laid them out on 360° wheels similar
to those pictured herein, a probable series of questions you want to
investigate may arise. Let us consider some of them.
Compare the planets in the Local Space chart with your geocentric natal chart. As you will soon note, the individual aspects between
two planets can be very different in the two kinds of charts; also, the
larger Whole Chart Patterns may indicate a different quality. A planet
may achieve great focus in the Local Space chart that is not brought
out in the Geo chart; and yet you may have intuited and sensed the
added importance of this planet or principle in the make-up of the
individual involved, and yet had no physical basis for your intuition.
The single most important use of Local Space in the astrologer/
client relationship in our experience has been in locality shifts. One of
the most frequent questions asked the astrologer during a reading is:
where would be a good place for me to live? I have made use of the
quite valid and useful traditional technique of adjusting the RAMC of
the radix to the new locality and coming up with a new Ascendant and
so forth. The radix positions then are read in terms of these new
angles. Local Space is by nature suited to express both celestial and
geographic positions on one map or chart. Its special nature introduces
several concepts not encountered in other techniques.
Radix Local Space Charts
Aside from the planetary aspects, there are two primary indicators
of strong or high focus in the radix Local Space chart: (1) a planet is on
or near the horizon (it has low altitude); and (2) a planet is conjunct to
one of the four angles of cardinal directions. It is worth noting which
of the planets is closest to the horizon, even if not conjunct. We use
standard orbs for azimuth—although we haven't arrived at any "final
rules" in this respect. It is also worth noting which planet is the most
elevated (has the greatest altitude). And parallels and contraparallels
need investigation. The nature of parallel/contraparallel, as far as 252 / Planets in Locality
interpretation is concerned, may be somewhat different here since
they do not describe coincident arcs (as time passes), as do parallels
in declination.
We are now ready to examine a technique that gets to the heart of
what these charts are all about. At this point we have in front of us our
radix Local Space chart, with the various planets plotted on it. As we
mentioned earlier, we can also plot the positions of cities and places
on the Earth on this map; so, our next project then will be to translate
all of the important cities in our lives into their equivalent positions on
our radix map of Local Space. We should be sure to include not only
the places we ourselves have lived in or visited, but also the cities that
we have always thought that we might like to visit—that bring a warm
feeling to mind, and so forth; the positions of cities where friends and
not-so-friendlies live, where there are business relationships, etc. We
then examine these places in terms of their position (or direction) on
the LS chart with these thoughts in mind: Are these cities in aspect? In
particular by conjunction or opposition? Are they in alignment with
planets in the chart? In what quadrants and houses do these cities fall?
and are any on the angles? We have found that individuals tend to
move towards cities that are also in the direction of planets that represents the particular kind of energy they may require at that time. An
individual, for instance, needing to invoke the key to success, often
obtained through Jupiter, may make one or several moves in that
direction. Although its concept is so simple as to be almost embarrassing, this technique has shown itself to be of great value. In any case,
its value seems to be substantial rather than hypothetical. Next to, for
example, some of the cumbersome and ultra-traditional place rulerships, proposed national birth charts, etc.—most of them very arbitrary, the complex and confusing juggling of all these factors seem a
rather specious approach to the locality problem, and their results
rather tentative. The LS chart, at least, can show a concrete, measurable reaction of the individual, even in the same locality, as much as
their LS charts vary from one another, and whatever may be the
intrinsic character of a place—and places undoubtedly have this, as a
selection of people could react very differently to it from the point of
view of each one's own make-up. Moreover, each one could react differently at times, under different astrological conditions. Although
the mathematics involved in this system may seem a bit complex, the
application of its technique is simple and direct; and this does much to
recommend it. Appendix A / 253
Locality Shifts in Local Space
After the basic information in the radix chart has been taken in,
we may want to construct secondary charts for the various localities
where the individual has lived or travelled. These charts are equivalent to ones cast for this locality at the time of birth, as if one were born
there. This involves a transformation of the radix planet's position, as
well as a shift around the angles of these positions. Aside from the initial direction from the radix of the locality shift, there are other factors
to note.
Through a shift in locality, a planet (or even a city) may be
brought into (or away from) the horizon. We have found that a planet
achieves high focus when on the horizon, in terms of its activity within
the individual. In other words, we can adjust and tune our radix—and
ourselves—through locality shifts, much as we might tune a musical
instrument. Another objective that might be accomplished by a locality
shift is to bring a yet farther away city to high focus—say, to an angle,
or in aspect to a planet—allowing a second locality shift to be made in
its direction. This alters or modifies the psychic interaction of person
and place by altering the direction of approach to it. The effect achieved
would be quite other than that invoked by approaching it directly.
Some of the magical quality of the dimension can be seen in the
checkerboard-like world concept that emerges, where individuals
not only move in relation to a planetary energy they require but are
ever adjusting and jockeying into position to achieve the most resonant move. Aside from the focus achieved through the angles and
planets, we may compare aspects and Whole Chart Patterns with the
radix LS chart, considering changes in altitude, and so forth. Another
point of interest which has proven very useful in our work is examining the aspects that the planetary positions in the Local Space locality
shift make to the radix LS chart; in particular by bringing one planet to
a conjunction with another. As Charles Jayne has pointed out to me,
this amounts to progression of the chart through space, rather than
time (a very elegant concept) —for those of us, perhaps, who find it
hard to wait! We have found that both the conjunction and oppositions
(the alignments), as formed by this progression in space, are most
significant.
There you have the fundamental ideas with which we have
worked thus far. The usefulness of these charts in the astrologer/
client relationship should be clear. We have used these charts in our 254 / Planets in Locality
practice with success, and have found that many people are concerned with where they might live in order to bring the Self into some
resonant and satisfying focus. Perhaps modern man is developing an
intuitive sense for self-adjustment and focus through locality shifts—
something that ancient man did very little of. It appears that one can
enrich and complement various qualities of the radix through location adjustment—bringing our needed energies to one place and
time, moving elsewhere for another life episode at another time. What
we will need before this technique could ever achieve widespread use
is a set of easy tables of azimuth and altitude to be designed and made
available to astrologers, thus doing away with the somewhat complicated trigonometry. I hope some of you will brave the necessary
calculations and take advantage of this opportunity to explore the astrology of Local Space. 111. Local Space
From the 1978 edition of the Circle Books Astrological Calendar l want to relate to you a powerful new way (new to me) of coming to know ourselves through astrology. It involves another kind of
map or chart of our birth moment: a map of the space surrounding the
birthplace; and this form of topo-centric astrology we call the astrology of Local Space (LS). First I should tell you how I happened on to
this fascinating approach.
I was involved in an attempt at understanding the many different
House systems that astrologers use, trying to "decide" which, of all of
them, might be the best for my purposes. For several years, I had not
used any house system at all, but only the four angles of the chart, in a
kind of protest or disgust at the lack of agreement among astrologers
concerning systems of house division. It seemed rather strange to me
that there were so many competing house systems. For many years of
my astrological practice, I lacked the necessary mathematical background to decide for myself which of the many house systems made
"sense" to me. I could only read about the merits of each house system
and take the word of "those who knew." I came to use the Campanus
system of houses because many of those astrologers that I respected
most used this system. In recent years, I had been learning enough
spherical trigonometry on my pocket calculator to make my first
attempt at solving the mystery of House division.
I have always been a slow learner; so I had to sit down with an
equatorial star-map of the constellations and attempt to draw out
graphically the various ways of dividing space and time—in hope of
being enlightened as to which house system had the most going for it.
Of course, I wanted to draw out the House systems using my own
natal chart. This was kind of complex, for I had to calculate, using
spherical trigonometry, the 360 degrees of my radix horizon and plot
this curving line on the star map (see illustration, page 256-7). All
house systems agree on the validity of the horizon, and so I felt this
was the place to start. This proved to be a most worthwhile exercise. I
soon became aware that regardless of which House system was used,
what was of interest to astrologers was not th e horizon in its own right,
255 Figure D
but just those few places where it crossed or intersected our beloved
Zodiac or ecliptic. In other words. House systems are concerned with
different ways of sending meaningful lines to intersect the zodiac; and
these intersecting points are then the cusps, or sensitive points, for
that individual—a kind of astrologers' acupuncture points.
Laying these House systems out on a map helped me—a great
deal—to understand what in fact the various House systems were. But
I yearned for some simpler way to deal with it all. I reached a point
where I took the problem into my own hands and said, "OK Michael,
let's suspend judgment on which of all these House systems is best
and do something very simple, although perhaps unsophisticated,
that will make sense to you." I started off by making the center of our
House system the place where one is born, and I put the pole of the
system overhead—the pole of the birthplace—and instead of using
more complex methods of division, I divided the surrounding space
into a simple pie of twelve divisions radiating out from the birthplace.
This was represented on the Earth (geographically) and through
space (astronomically). This, then, would be my very own House sys256 Starmap
tem! The points where the twelve radiating lines intersected the
Zodiac place would be the House cusps or sensitive points in this system. I was, at this point, as "bad" as the other astrologers who had
developed their own systems. I did find that, although this method of
House division was quite radical compared to the more familiar systems, the particular cusp degrees of the zodiac had already proved
significant and were already "favorite" and previously noted points
along the zodiac. My friend and fellow astrologer James Coats promptly termed this the Radiant House System, since the cusps radiated out
from a central place on Earth. I had, in my own way, stumbled upon
what I found out was already known as the Horizontal House System,
which, along with the Campanus System represents one of two
obvious and complementary ways to divide the space surrounding a
birth into equal parts. The astrologer L. Edward Johndro calls the
Campanus System "the Ferris wheel," and the Radiant or Horizontal
System "the merry-go-round." Astrologer Charles Jayne has been
pointing out the need to investigate this Horizontal System of Houses
for many years. 258 / Planets in Locality
I was still interested in those twelve little points where these
radiating lines intersected the old familiar zodiac. Then something
very important began to occur to me. I began to see that the Horizon
System was a complete system in itself, just as the zodiac is, stretching
a full 360 degrees around the heavens. Instead of considering the
horizon as a necessary means to get at and define these zodiacal pressure points, I began to follow on the star map the line of my radix
horizon through the heavens to the point where it intersected the
plane or line of the Zodiac on this map. This point was, of course, my
Ascendant and 7+ degrees of Sagittarius. But my eyes kept going past
the Ascendant, following my horizon until it intersected another line:
that of the plane of our galaxy; at which point the first shock rolled in.
My horizon intersected the galactic plane constellation Cygnus,
the Swan.
At this point, I must relate a more personal story to make clear
what was happening. Over the past years, I had been assembling a
book containing stellar points and planes: Astrophysical Directions, and
in the process I had to calculate and plot quite a few maps of the
heavens. In this way, I came to know and develop a sense of the major
constellations in a much more intimate way than ever before.
Throughout this work, I noted a "fixation" on a couple of constellations in particular. Above them all, I revered the constellation
Cygnus; and on repeated occasions, for no reason I could determine, I
felt such deep identification with this constellation and what it seemed to
signify that tears came to my eyes. Now I find that Cygnus was one of
the two constellations where my own particular horizon crossed the
great plane of our galaxy—a kind of galactic Descendant and Ascendant; the other being the constellation Vela, the Sails, another constellation to which I had always been very sensitive. Well, I had to
laugh at this point. What, I said to myself, if the entire 360 degrees of
the horizon of my birth is as sensitive as the Node where it crosses the
Zodiac, the Ascendant. What if there are other basic planes of importance to us, besides the Zodiac, to which we respond? Did I have a
galactic and supergalactic Ascendant and new sets of constellations or
"signs" to come to know?
At this point, I must shrink a long, and to me, beautiful story and
simply say that this discovery was the first of a great many such minienlightenments I was to have. I searched through my collection of
horoscopes to see how my friends and acquaintances were oriented. I
was discovering the strength and power of the local horizon. I had Appendix A / 259
accepted and used the Ascendant and Vertex and other sensitive
ecliptic points in my work, but always with the accent on the zodiac. I
had never stopped to think that in each case it took another plane to
bring these Nodes or points of intersection into existence—in this
case, it was the plane of the horizon. And yet I had, in a subconscious way,
used the horizon in all my work. I could now see that each individual had
a kind of unique orientation or attitude to the whole cosmos and that in
the horizon we had a plane capable of revealing much more about
oneself than just those sensitive points which relate to the Zodiac.
At any rate, I began to explore the whole of the heavens from my
point of view. For a time, I forgot the Zodiac and instead began to
inquire, and thus to learn a great deal about my own attitude and
orientation to my birth event, to my life. Somewhere during this time,
another idea occurred to me that proved to be most compelling: the
horizon also traced a path on maps of the Earth, as well as the heavens.
I had calculated by this time a complete chart of the planets' positions
in the Horizon System using the system's equivalent to Zodiac longitude and latitude called—azimuth and altitude. How, I wondered,
would the directions of the planets in my horizon chart relate to directions and cities on this Earth? I soon developed the trigonometry
needed to answer these questions—quite a prodigious undertaking
for me—and thus began a real "magical mystery tour" through my life
history. Although I have lived in several different places, the one
major move in my life has been from Lancaster, Pennsylvania (my
birthplace) to Ann Arbor, Michigan. Of course, what I wanted to
know was, what direction was Ann Arbor from Lancaster? That is,
what degree did Ann Arbor occupy on my radix or birth horizon?
And here rolled in the second great shock wave. Ann Arbor was
right in the direction of my natal Jupiter position on the Local Space
chart—within two degrees. In other words, a move to Ann Arbor was
a move in the direction of my natal Jupiter. Jupiter rules my Ascendant and its position above the Seventh House cusp had made it very
prominent in any analysis of my chart. At any rate, I wondered at such
a coincidence and set out to answer some of the other questions that
now began to pop up in my mind. What about the other places I had
lived, or to which I had travelled or thought of travelling to? The history of my travel came before my mind... some places of joy and
learning, others of sorrow and pain. I plotted the directions and
calculated the charts for all of these places, and what I found through
reading these charts was overwhelming; it marked my initial surren- 260 / Planets in Locality
der to what now appears to be—for me—a major discovery in my
astrological life; that of Local Space. I erected different Local Space
charts. These amounted to maps of the space surrounding each place
as if I had been born there, rather than at Lancaster. The story of my
life and self, interpreted and confirmed through my reading of these
Local Space charts, was moving—to say the least.
Let me cite an example of the sort of thing I found. I am well
known to my friends as being a homebody. It is very difficult for anything to induce me to leave Ann Arbor. At one point in my life,
however, I sold everything I owned. My wife and I moved north to go
into the green plant business, to manage our own greenhouses. I
actually left Ann Arbor and moved away! It so happened that we were
a couple of years ahead of our time in offering fine greenhouse plants
to people; the demand for these plants and the plant store craze did
not appear until later. We lost everything in this venture. On the
material or investment plane, it was a disaster. Now, in my Local
Space chart I have triple conjunction of the Moon, Uranus and Saturn
to the same degree; in anybody's astrology, this has accounted for
quite a strong focus. The move into the greenhouse business was a
move precisely—to the degree—into (or towards) this triple conjunction! I had actually moved into my Moon-Uranus-Saturn conjunction!
It was as if we had gone there to wrestle and come to terms with my
Saturn (or with Satan, you might say) —and come out the wiser for it.
For this experience, as hard as it was, ended many more superficial
fears on my part concerning loss. We lost what to us at the time was
everything, and still our life went on.
What had impressed me through this voyage of discovery was
the potency of the entire horizon, and of more than just a couple of its
points; and the fact that somehow the orientation of an individual to
the cosmos made a difference, or was reflected in behavior and
activity at the supramundane level. It took me quite a while to "develop
the faith," or to let myself believe that God was so thorough in his/her
influence as to be all-pervading down to the finest details. It was a
while later before I could entertain with grace the idea that this same
orientation or attitude was reflected as much upon the map of the Earth as
upon the map of the heavens. Another way of putting this (and this is,
to me, the beauty of Local Space astrology), is that Heaven and Earth
are interchangeable, or are in the last analysis one living entity—a
single whole. This is made ever so clear in the LS chart, where every
object in the universe, celestial and mundane, has an equal and valid Appendix A / 261
position. Not only the planets and the stars, but on an equal basis,
cities, countries, and even the local water tower or friends' houses can
be represented. All that concerns us is the direction in space: the
orientation, not the distance. In Local Space the Heavens and Earth,
the Celestial and Mundane (or Geographic) spheres exist side by side
and are interchangeable.
In drawing this year's article to a close, I would like to share a few
experiences and thoughts with you concerning some of the structure
in space beyond the Zodiac and how it can be of value in individual
development and growth. Let me relate a personal story as to how I
first got interested in the deeper regions of space. Our research, as
some of you will know, has centered on the difference and relationship
between the geocentric and heliocentric ecliptic systems. My interest
in the space surrounding our solar system was minimal. I was put off
by the billions of stellar objects out there and, on a more basic level, by
the ideas of Coldness and Blackness I had been programmed to
associate with outer space. Distant space somehow represented the
epitome of "otherness" and "foreignness" to me. I was embarrassed,
in terms of astrological usage, by all of the books I had read on the
fixed stars, with the exception of L.E. Johndro's book The Stars. How
was I to determine the significance of these billions of stars and use
them in my practice, when I had enough difficulty, as it was, using the
nine planets?
And then the unexpected happened. I had a dream. It was not an
ordinary dream but one of those dreams that are more real than waking consciousness—that take months to understand and absorb. In
my dream an "astrologer" appeared to me whose eyes were filled
with light. There were rays or stalks of light coming out of his eyes.
This strange being said but one word: "LOOK!" and with his arm
turned and pointed to the night sky. I looked. The sky was filled with
brilliant points of light. The stars and all of this starry material was
clustered together to form the great glowing arch of the Milky Way or
galactic plane. It was wondrous beyond description and in that instant
my heart went out from me and filled this bright space. Never again
have I had the feeling of being here on Earth, warm and trembling
before the Cold and Black of space. I became the space and light and
reversed my polarity or attitude. I was a living representative of this
mother galaxy. I was the spaceman!
From that night forward I began to venture beyond the zodiac in
an inquiry as to the nature and structure of this universe. Here, in brief 262 / Planets in Locality
form, is what I found for myself: We are nodes or information
aggregates. The Universe is in intimate contact with itself through us.
The manyfold nature of the cosmic events is represented through our
self and lives. There is not only a correlation between these seemingly
remote cosmic events and our person, but an identity as well. Information coming from the Galactic Center, carried by electromagnetic
and gravitational radiation from every last star and cosmic plane and
event passes through us at all times. We are, in some way, a node or
information complex caught in a matrix or web of manifestation.
The overpowering idea that occurs when we make some acquaintance with the universe and its structure is that there is no difference
between out there and in here. We are out there! Our world and our
self and relationships are a perfect reflection of what is and what is
happening out there. Not an analogy, but an identity. Black holes,
supernovae, quasars and the like are not remote cosmic events, but
this identical story is represented, reflected, lived and acted out each
day in our lives.
Information circulates through the universe and our identity or
sense of our self is this very process of circulation. Identity is not a substance, but a relationship, in fact, a circulation and a process of communion or communication. Not only is there a connection between
our life and that of our galaxy and universe, but we are the connection.
A study of the structure of the universe, at any level, is a study of ourselves. In summary, the idea that I am elaborating here is: Astrology is
not only a symbolic system of psychological discussion. The symbol is
also, in fact, real. If we say it is an analogy, then the analogy is complete
down to the limits of any specific example we might choose.
We are all time and space travellers. There are no better words
that I know of than these of Emerson: "All inquiry into antiquity is the
desire to do away with this wild, savage and preposterous There or
Then, and introduce in its place the Here and the Now. Belzoni [an
archaeologist] digs and measures in the mummy-pits and pyramids
of Thebes until he can see the end of the difference between the monstrous work and himself. When he has satisfied himself, in general
and in detail, that it was made by such a person as he, so armed and so
motivated, and to ends which he, himself, should also have worked,
the problem is solved; his thought lives along the whole line of temples and sphinxes and catacombs, passes through them all with satisfaction, and they live again to the mind, or are now."—Essay on
History. APPENDIX B
Jose Arguelles The Holonomic Model of Knowledge
from Earth Ascending, originally published by Shamhhala Publications r V hile the biological primacy of shamanic vision and geomantic knowledge remains constant, thus accounting for the AC
current and the ongoing capacity for renewed insight in human history, its prehistorical primacy gives birth to the process of history itself.
In this sense history is understood as the diversification of knowledge. Yet diversification into different fields does not necessarily
mean loss of unity. In fact, this is virtually impossible. A basic
holonomic axiom states: "If it works, it is related to everything else
that works." The notion that there are different fields of knowledge
that are unrelated to each other is fundamentally the result of a loss of
sacred view.
At the core of the "holonomic model of knowledge" (Figure A) is
shamanism, representing the primordial undifferentiated synthesis
of knowledge and experience. From shamanism arises the mother
science as well as the mother of the sciences: geomancy, the science
that investigates the relation between man, heaven above, and Earth
below. Given the three hieratic coordinates contained within this
definition of geomancy, knowledge can be understood as three
mutually evolving and intersecting fields: heavenly sciences. Earthly
sciences, and human or biophysic sciences. Seen as a whole, the three
fields of knowledge and their "celestial" and "terrestrial" subsets
comprise the science of unity or holonomy itself.
All knowledge is strung along the thread or plumbline of transcendant insight, which corresponds to the mystic column or axis of
263 il3 ^
>l5 Vênus >,^3^
m
- JS'n
>> . -- r V
\\-t
\0 s Netuno Lua r\ dEAVENLV BRANCHES OF KNOWLEDfiE
EARTHLY BRANCHES OF.Ktj.OWLEDGt" 1/ ij RfLAriON & /s/
>to
^ heaven
EARTH .''
-. Júpiter Netuno ^THove^^5 ^ Júpiter -4i < Júpiter ^
"CpV^
•/rv
V
m MUTUALLY INTERSECTING/
INTERACTING FIELDS
OF KNOWLEDGE =
1 HEAVENLY SCIENCES
ASTROLOGY
ASTRONOMY
PHYSICS ETC.
GEOMETRY
MATHEMATICS
LOGIC
LANGUAGES ETC.
2 HUMAN OR
BIOPSYCHIC SCIENCES
ARTS/C RAFTS/ARCHITECTURE
MUSIC
DANCE
HEALING
MEDICINE
BIOLOGY
GOVERNMENT
3 EARTHLY SCIENCES
ATMOSPHERIC
GEOLOGY STUDIES
SITING
AGRICULTURE
ENVIRONMENTAL PLANNING
ALL EMANATING IN TIME
FROM CEOMANTIC CORE
= HOLONOMY OR
SCIENCE OF UNITY Júpiter ^fe' '' Júpiter ^
AXIS OF ETERNAL PRESENT/
PLUMBLINE OF TRANSCENDENT INSIGHT Figure A—The Holonomic Model of Knowledge The Holonomic Model of Knowledge / 265
the eternal present. This plumbline provides the ground for the
development of contemplative spiritual practices: meditation, prayer,
vision-seeking, fasting, and ritual exercises. When there is a community recognizing the necessity to continue to develop such practices, usually within the context of a religious or spiritual belief system,
then the result is a unity of vision. Knowledge in all its diversity is then
viewed as so many facets of a single sacred prism. It is only when the
plumbline of transcendant insight is "cut" that the center no longer
holds, and knowledge is splintered into a Tower of Babel of specialized
fields. This occurs when there is a loss of sacred view, as exemplified
by the present stage of civilization.
Thus far we have seen how the natural flow of the seasons, in conjunction with the geomagnetic structure of the Earth and the electromagnetic fields of the heavens, describes both the psycho-cultural
field of civilization and the basic structure of the psi bank (Figure B).
We have also seen how the progression of civilization (history) through
the hieratic and posthieratic stages is an organic co-creation of the
basic matrix pattern of the psi bank.
In its essentials, the psi bank consists of four longitudinal holonomic memory plates, equatorially divided into eight seasonal
memory plates. This gives us the basic overall design. It should be
recalled that the psi bank warp (Figure B) consists of a fourfold longitudinal pattern as well, corresponding to the pattern/image at which
we have now arrived through following the course of history. We then
see that the geochronological flow of civilization, running laterally as
it does, provides the basic woof thread to the psi bank.
Further articulation is provided to the psi bank when we divide
each of the eight seasonal memory plates into three parts each, for a
total of twenty-four sections of psionic nimboid membranes. Nimboid
refers to precipitation-bearing phenomena, like clouds. The nimboid
membrane divisions, occurring at the thirty- and sixty-degree latitudes
north and south, correspond in atmospheric studies to the tropopauses.
The function of the tropopause is the generation of jet streams responsible for dramatic alterations in weather patterns. North and
south of the sixty-degree latitudes lie the arctic and antarctic zones,
just as the areas between the thirty-degree latitudes are the generally
tropical zones. Between the tropopauses lie the temperate zones. In
atmospheric studies these zones acquire the term "leaves."
The term "psionic nimboid membrane" has the following mean- ^¥i
IaC/
PIJLSEZ.
<,7 ME>OPl3TAMrAN
PULSE ;
T\ /
0 it Figure B ing: high saturation, psi information-bearing, biopsychic "weather"
patterns. Encoded in these membranes are the fundamental genetic
memory patterns of the total holonomic recollection process—those
patterns responsible, for instance, for the identical coding of I Ching
and DNA.
In our discussion of the atmospheric correspondance, we may
speak ofpsychopauses, and of hieratic and shamanic/aboriginal leaves.
Just as the jet streams cause dramatic shifts in the weather pattern of
the lower atmosphere, so the psychopauses may be viewed as the
zones where major psychoatmospheric weather fronts are generated.
These are of two kinds: the shamanic or aboriginal, and the hieratic,
i.e. either of the AC (shamanic) or CA (hieratic) currents. The leaves
or psionic membranes, in addition to possessing information storage
which can be biopsychically precipitated (hence the term "nimboid")
266 77ie Psi Bank showing the four quadrants, eight seasonal memory plates, and twentyfour psionic nimboid membranes. represent general characteristics that moderate and control psychocultural conditions.
There is not necessarily a one-to-one correspondence between
psionic membrane and geography. Rather, we can speak of directions
or tendencies of AC and CA currents. The AC tendency is to flow
from the direction of the magnetic pole toward the equator; the CA
tendency is to flow the opposite way. Thus it can be seen that in the
twenty-four-part structure of the psionic membranes, eight of the
leaves are polar or aboriginal/shamanic, eight are purely hieratic or
equatorial. The remaining eight, the extrahieratic leaves, signify the
temperate zones of psychocultural development, i.e. zones where the
essential crossover polarity of AC/CA currents operates.
The "geomatic flowchart" (Figure C) corresponds to the primary
geomantic perception, heaven above. Earth below, and man in be267 Figure C
Geomantic Flow Chart
tween. As we have seen, these three designations correspond respectively to the electromagnetic, gravitational, and biopsychic fields of the
primary resonant field model. The geomantic flowchart emphasizes this
three-part relationship as an organismic cycle revolving about the central
axis which divides the model into two halves: man and weather.
As the two volatile variables between heaven and Earth, man and
the weather comprise a unique binary relationship, the mutual interaction of which has long been a recognized foundation of all systems
of geomancy. More generally, the weather or left-hand side of the
geomantic flowchart represents the total spectrum of the phenomenal
world known to man, the so-called subjective world of mind. The
totality of these two halves, with all of their mutual correspondences,
comprises the binary structure of nature and the holonomic model
of knowing.
268 ✓ BOUNDLESS
all-encompassing
MIND UNIVERSAL SPACE
COSMIC RADIATION ' ABOVE ,
RAOI AT
" ^
. '*VfBELr'"
^ ^ 1 ^ \^ psi A SA/yfc" V—
ELECTROMAGNETIC
HEAVEN >■ FIELD
~- N " . THOUGHT BRAIN
5 CLOUDS",' ^ ^ ^
=.
; SNOW /£ WEATHER ~
SYSTEM
C
KA
9V Sr SENSE
' RAIN
^IRONMtNT
' fx FLUID
INTERACTION
MEDIATOR
OF
ORGANS
ELEMENTS
WIND lz OF ELEMENTS
HARMONIZE
R
OF
/0.|3
OF
IrC
W'Iq< CIRCULATION
C£©THERMAL
CURRENTS
i
CURRENTS,
ADIUSTEROF CYG.fS Vênus HEAT
'SEASONAL CYCLES
D currents^ extraplanetary
JOINEROF HEAVEN
|
\ RADHTlpN
RESPIRATORY
AUTUMN*
EARTH
/
SYSTEM
fw^EARTH
^8(OSPHERE_ ^ , - ' ' '
LANOCRUST
XT^HEART
MUSCLES & BONES
_WINTER
, EARTH
OCEANS ;
SPRING
circulatory
SYSTEM
RIVERS
V
;A
DIGESTIVE
UNDERGROUND .
TRACT
CURRENTS
s. V SEXUALITY
>
f
- Júpiter f'
•
v
■NIC PLATES yX ' /
i REPRODUCTIVE
I . ../ SYSTEM
SUBTERRANEAN
ROCK \
• V;/
/ DYNAMIC URGE
ELAN VITAL
BELOW
FIRE/MACMA
"/ !» ^
S Figure D
Model of Evolved Psi Rings
The model (Figure D) of a holonomic topocosm with evolved psi
bank rings depicts a consciously harmonized planetary field structure, the primal model of which is represented by the geomantic
flowchart. The horizontal rings represent the motions of the planet in
time—the gravitational field—while the vertical rings correspond to
the cumulative articulations of the different psychocultural stages in
the planet's evolution toward a consciously harmonized condition.
The lotus, from which emerges this "planet with noosphere," to use
de Chardin's phrase, is the age-old symbol of purity and awakened
intelligence. 269 APPENDIX C
Steve Cozzi Banishing Rituals r V hen you move into a new apartment or home, your first
impulse is to clean it. So you clean the carpet, walls, kitchen cabinets,
bathrooms, etc. Removing the dirt left by the former occupants is a
very important ritual; however, removal of the physical dirt completes only half of the cleaning.
The simple fact is that people pollute both physically and psychically, half of which we see, half of which we don't. The unseen pollution is often more harmful. People create a lot of discordant energy
when certain emotions are aroused. Hatred, jealousy, greed and other
violent feelings are able to literally make the air crackle with energy.
People also discharge sexual energy in all kinds of ways, and in different places. The energy contained in the sexual fluids has the most
powerful properties for good or ill. Not every place will have psychic
pollution. Also realize that you are banishing your own pollution
as well.
Getting rid of this emotional/psychic pollution is the real purpose of a banishing ritual. When you move into a new house, I would
suggest that to help with the general cleaning, you should also steam
some onion and garlic in an open pan. In the evening some good
quality incense can be burnt. Some people suggest a "bad vibe floor
wash," which is composed of 1 oz. creosote, 1/ Júpiter cup ammonia and a
tablespoon of sea salt.
Another old remedy is the use of eggs. Eggs have a thin upper
shell at the smaller end. Because the thin (membrane) shell top is
271 272 / Planets in Locality
semipermeable, it has the ability to suck bad energy into its protein
substance. You can put an egg wherever you suspect discordant
energy to be. Always put the egg with the small or hollow top up.
When you get rid of the egg, don't break it. (When it is eventually
broken it will be with other garbage, and away from you.)
Another use for the egg is in treating a psychic attack* by someone or something. In this case you should write your name on the side
of an egg with a pencil (not a pen). Put this egg as close to your head as
possible when you are asleep. Use a new egg every night.
Banishing Ritual # 1
This ritual should be more than adequate for removing negative
energy in most situations. On a clean sheet of white paper, draw a
pyramid-type triangle. The base should be larger than the sides. Place
this paper on the ground in the center of the home or in the place that
has the concentration of negative energy. The apex or top point of the
triangle should face due north. Place a new white candle just in front
of the apex of the triangle. Then place a stick of incense in front of the
candle. Be sure and light them both just before you begin.
Now stand at the base of the triangle (facing north) with your
arms extended outward. At this time if you feel it will be helpful, you
can chant a divine name or mantra, e. Vênus ., OM, Amen, etc. Then place
your awareness at the center of your forehead, and say with a loud and
commanding voice, "All imbalanced forces and entities DEPART
from this house and property NOW!" Turn clockwise to the east and
repeat the same, then to the south and west, ending with the north for
the final (fifth) time. Allow the incense to burn out. The candle can
stay lit until the incense is gone.
Banishing Ritual #2
This ritual is called "Circle of Fire." It is not a typical banishing
ritual because it prevents discordant energy from re-entering rather
than just banishing. It is a short-term solution when a person is under
severe psychic attack by human forces.
Face east. Use a divine name or mantra to help center yourself.
Place your awareness at the center of your forehead. Then imagine
* There are a number of symptoms and each person will react somewhat differently. The most
common are flu-like symptoms without having the flu; a dull pain in back of the head, unexplained irritability, intense butterflies in the stomach, unusual and disturbing dream symbols
and states. Appendix C / 2 73
a large cross-handled sword in your right hand. See yourself twice
your height and filled with great power. Picture a steady, pale-gold
flame jetting out from the point of the sword. Begin to draw a circle
around you on the floor moving in a clockwise direction. If you feel it
may be helpful, ask the Archangel of each direction to protect you (see
Table 13 on pages 120-121). Remember you start out facing east, then
you draw the circle to the south, then west, then north and back to east
again. This ritual, if performed at sunrise, will last till sundown. If performed at sundown, it will last till dawn.
Banishing Ritual #3
This ritual is designed to banish all elementals and non-human
entities. Begin by drawing the five-pointed star or pentagram. Face
whatever direction the imbalance force is emitting from. If you are
unsure, face north. Extending your right arm outward, use the middle
(Saturn) finger of your right hand to point. Extending the arm outward, start at your left hip level and draw a line of light up over your
head level. Then draw the line down at an angle to your right hip level,
now up to your left shoulder level, continue with the straight line over
to your right shoulder level. Then draw the final line down to the left
hip. You now have drawn the five-pointed star in front of you, and the
way it was drawn will banish.
There are other ways of protecting yourself with the public or in
the company of questionable people. Adding more garlic to your diet
or taking garlic pills will keep your psychic centers closed. Silk is a
great psychic insulator, i.e. thought forms can't penetrate it. Don't be
surprised if you gain weight when you are subjected to prolonged
psychic disturbances, as fat is a great protector/insulator.
Some people imagine that they are enclosed in glass, or better yet
in a mirror, so that things are reflected back to their source. Keeping
the body clean externally and internally through washing, meditation, fasting and wholesome living is a must. The medulla center at the
back of the head is a very sensitive area, sometimes referred to as the
psychic door or antenna. Putting the tongue to the roof of the mouth
will close off this center, also the right hand placed there will help. A
mild stomach and anal contraction is very helpful in uplifting your
spinal energy and keeping the centers closed. APPENDIX D
Bruce Cathie Geographical Harmonics from Bridge to Infinity
Quark Enterprises Ltd. initially I believed that the Great Pyramid in Egypt had a connection in some way with the mathematical puzzle, and my first
efforts at solving the problem were centered round this area. I carried
out my calculations using the pyramid as a geometric focal point and
found that I was able to establish a series of harmonics which were
compatible with those found in the main body of my work. One particular set of harmonics was associated with a scientific establishment
in Cairo which indicated to me that research was possibly being conducted in the same areas that I was interested in. The positioning of
this geometric pattern formed a direct relationship with the Greenwich longitude. This suggested to me that the line was not arbitrary,
but I felt that more evidence was required to prove the point beyond
doubt. In the end I decided to put the whole thing aside and let the
matter simmer for awhile. I had found in the past that a fresh look at a
problem often helped to find the required answers. A year went by
before I had another attempt at it.
The key to the geometric problem proved to be centered around
the city of Rome. I had spent several weeks feeding coordinates into
the computer relating to various religious centers, and places where
religious manifestations had occurred, in the hope of discovering a
connection with the natural laws of mathematics. The results I obtained
were quite startling.
It slowly became evident that the geometric placing of the Vatican
City could be of extreme importance. A careful analysis of the latitude
275 276 / Planets in Locality
and longitude values within this small area was required to discover
some rather interesting harmonics.
The geometric focal point of interest proved to be: latitude 41°
54' 22.68" north/longitude 12° 27' 08" east.
It took some time to solve the significance of the latitude position,
but eventually I discovered that the difference in displacement of
latitude, measured in minutes of arc, from the equator and the north
geographic pole created an easily recognized harmonic value, as
follows:
Latitude displacement
from the North Pole
Latitude displacement
from the equator
The difference = 2885.622 minutes of arc.
= 2514.378 minutes of arc.
= 371.244 minutes of arc. The resulting harmonic of 371244 is the reciprocal of the value
2693645 obtained from a unified harmonic equation.
The great circle displacement of the focal point from Greenwich
longitude, calculated at the Vatican latitude, was seen to be:
555.5555 minutes of arc.
which is equal to:
69.44444 x 8 (one harmonic octave).
The harmonic 694444 repeating being the reciprocal of the speed
of light, in free space; 144000 minutes of arc per grid second, relative
to the Earth's surface.
The direct great circle distance between the focal point and
Greenwich proved to be:
767.6 minutes of arc.
which is equal to:
12.7933 degrees.
If this value is subtracted from 360° in order to ascertain the great
circle distance between the two points measured the long way round,
then we have:
347.2066 degrees Appendix D 1277
which is half harmonic of:
694. Júpiter (again the reciprocal harmonic of the speed of light)
The area of the cross-sectional segment of the Earth bounded by
the focal point, the north geographic pole and the Earth's center, is
equal to:
1377.783014 square degrees, in relation to the Earth's surface.
The square root of the reciprocal of this figure presents a harmonic of:
2694
All of these mathematical relationships will be regarded as pure
chance, but I would like to add one more just to extend the laws of
probability a little further.
The great circle displacement of the focal point in Rome and the
longitude passing through the Great Pyramid complex at Cairo,
calculated at Vatican latitude, is equal to:
833.3333 minutes of arc.
The square of this number is equal to:
694444. Júpiter (the speed of light reciprocal)
Other interlocking harmonics were found to be associated with
several of these points but I believe that those demonstrated will be
sufficient to indicate the amazing coincidences which connect them
directly with my own research.
It appears that the longitudes passing through both Greenwich
and Rome have an important mathematical significance, but further
research will be necessary to substantiate the theory. Maybe the
required answers could be found within the ancient manuscripts held
in the Vatican libraries.
The latitude of Greenwich has been listed with slight variations:
In 1776 = 51° 28' 40"
In 1834 = 51° 28' 39"
In 1856 = 51° 28' 38.2" Longitude 00° 00' Latitude 51028'38"N Longitude 12o27'08"E Longitude31 o09'04.8"E Greenwich Vatican City
0 Latitude 41 54'22.68"N Great Pyramid
0 Latitude 29 58'51"N IS. Distance A—C = 767.6 minutes of arc = 12.7933 degrees
360 deg. minus 12.7933 deg. equals 347.2 deg.
This is equal to a half harmonic of 694. Júpiter Distance B—C = 555.555 minutes of arc.
This value divided by 8, or one octave, is equal to
69.4444.
Distance C—D = 833.333 minutes of arc.
The square of this number is equal to 694444.
Not to scale Fig. A
Showing the relationship of Greenwich with the
Vatican City in Rome and the Great Pyramid in Egypt.
278 C, D, E, F = Corner aerial positions of grid polar square. Similar to aerial discovered by the survey ship Eltanin.
]—K = Polar axis. G A = Geographic pole
B = Grid pole
Distance C—G—D = 3600 minutes of arc.
Distance C—H—D = 3418.6069.
Distance C—I—D = 3643.2 minutes of arc.
(3600 — 3418.6069) = 181.39308
(181.39308 x Júpiter ) = 725.57233
725.57233 = 26.93645 = 2693645 harmonic. Fig. B
Showing relationship of grid structure to the geographic poles. Each of the two
grids has a similar pattern, the interaction of which sets up a third resultant grid. The
poles of the three grids are positioned at three different latitudes and longitudes.
279 A = Geographic pole
B = Grid pole
C, D, E, F = Comer aerial positions of grid polar square
B—C, B—D, B—E, B—F = 2545.584412 minutes of arc
A—B Grid "A" = 1054. Júpiter minutes of arc
A—B Grid "B" = 694. Júpiter minutes of arc
A—B Grid "C" = 864 minutes of arc (resultant grid)
Fig- C
Showing the relationship of a grid polar square to the geographic pole. Each grid
has a similar pattern. The pole of each grid is set at a different latitude and
longitude.
280 M
E \ D Plutão B
C A
\ v1 / o N
K G R
S
A: Grid pole "A": 1054. Júpiter minutes of arc from geographic pole.
B: Grid pole "B": 694. Júpiter minutes of arc from geographic pole.
C; Grid pole "C": 864 minutes of arc from geographic pole.
D: North geographic pole
E, F, G, H: Polar square "A"
I, ], K, L: Polar square "C"
M, N, O, Plutão : Polar square "B" Sol : Longitude 105 degrees west
R: Longitude 97.5 degrees west
S: Longitude 90 degrees west
Fig. D
Showing the relationship of grid polar squares A, B, C. The polar squares are
orientated in reciprocal positions around both the north and south geographic poles.
281 APPENDIX E
Steve Cozzi Matrix Software and Local Space Charts Where can I get a Local Space and other locality calculations done?
If you have an IBM-type computer, I would suggest looking into
Matrix Software's M-95 AstroMap program. There are three versions:
a screen only, one which does printed reports and data, and the professional version. The professional version will do all of the above
plus it will print high resolution graphic maps with various continents
of the Earth in the background and the local space planetary lines in
the foreground. It gives all the aspects to the angles, and it will
generate a circular Local Space chart (planets in azimuth). There are
also plans to list the latitudes of all paran/crossings.
Instructions for producing a flat non-graphic Local Space chart
on the Matrix Software's M-65:
2. Enter chart data as usual, but put in the latitude and longitude
for the new location. Don't change the time zone from the birthplace location.
2. BEFORE you post the chart, select "#6 Houses," then select
"Aries," for Aries Houses.
3. Post the chart. Júpiter . Select "Same." This will keep you with the same chart.
5. Select "#8 Local spc."
6. Select "# Júpiter Local spc." This will give you a Local Space chart.
7. Select "Output," select "Printwheel," select #3 (usually).
283 284 / Planets in Locality
8. Turn the chart form upside down at the top (I.C.), write North
at bottom (M.C.), write South, to the left (Dsc.) write West, and to the
right (Asc.) write East. Mercúrio . The vertex should read 00 Libra; disregard the signs completely because now the planets are in azimuth, and your chart is like a
compass, 360 degrees around you.
10. You can also select "Prime Vert" or "Azimuth." In the Prime
Vertical chart, do steps 7 and 8 but remember the planets are now 180
above and 180 below you on the east/west Prime Vertical circle.
11. An Azimuth chart will start 00 at north and count clockwise,
i.e. east=90, etc.
For Blue Star, enter Astro-Maps Programs following Menu.
Instructions for producing a flat, non-graphic Local Space chart
on Astrolabe's NOVA (version Gêmeos ) for IBM:
1. Cast Natal Chart.
2. Select "Inmundo"—B.
3. Select "Local Space." Júpiter . Same as # 8, Matrix instructions.
5. Same as # Mercúrio , Matrix instructions.
6. Same as #10, Matrix instructions.
Also explore Nova's Paran Selections. Other sources:
Astro*Carto*Graphy® Plutão .O. Box 959, El Cerrito CA 94530
Astro Computing Services Plutão .O. Box 16430, San Diego, CA 92216-0430
Astrolabe
Box 28, Orleans, MA 02653 APPENDIX F
Peter Tompkins Secrets of the Pyramids [Professor Hugh] Harleston finds it significant that if you stand a
tetrahedron on its nose at the South Pole it will form three triangles
above the equator, splitting the world into four equilateral great-circle
triangles which will exactly divide into areas of 1/3 above and 2/3
below the equator (see Figure A, p. 286).
A Teotihuacan sphere whose diameter is 12 will give an area of
144 n, a quarter of which is an easily reckoned 36n, and so forth. Again
all the numbers run in a 3, 6, Mercúrio ,12, 24 series, unique with a sphere of
diameter 12.
The tetrahedron, simplest of the five Platonic solids, is a perfect
pyramid, a geometrical figure that represents the smallest number of
points that will form a solid in three-dimensional space. It is constructed by uniting four identical equilateral triangles at their edges to form
a body with four nodes, four faces, and six edges.
Harleston points out that the abstract properties of such a sixedged tetrahedron involve functions of 3, 6, thirds, square roots, and
the number 1.06, all emphasized by the Teotihuacan displays.
When he inserts the tetrahedron into a sphere of diameter 12
some extraordinary relationships develop. When the diameter of the
circle is 12 (and therefore its radius 6), the ratio of the area of the
sphere to the tetrahedron is 2 to 1. This is the only case in which this
significant correlation occurs.
285 286 / Planets in Locality
The four points at which the great circles meet form the nodes of a
tetrahedron inscribed in a sphere (see Figure A below). This apparently casual relation showed on closer inspection that an extraordinary and unique relation exists between a tetrahedron and a
sphere whose diameter is twelve, one from which cosmic data ensues.
Oddly, or coincidentally, the relation between a tetrahedron and
a sphere constitutes the thrust of the work of Buckminster Fuller, who,
in his book Synergetics, maintains that the tetrahedron gives the basic
mathematical blueprint for the universe.1
Noting that the lower portion of the fourth level was slightly convex and that it formed a triangle with an angle of almost 19.69 degrees
to the vertical, it struck Harleston that this was also the latitude of
Teotihuacan. This meant that when the sun crossed the pyramid at the
equinox its rays would fall onto the north face of the fourth body at the
same angle of 19.69 degrees to the vertical.2
To observe what would actually happen at the equinox, Harleston noted that the phenomenon in fact took place two days after the
equinox. As the shadow did not wipe on the actual day, it meant the
angle of the slope was 19.5 instead of 19.7, which could have been an
error in reconstruction, or the angle was intended to convey some
other meaning. However, observing the west face of the pyramid at
the equinox, Harleston was able to witness a unique effect. As the sun
crossed the zenith at 12:35' 30" (local noon at the longitude of
Teotihuacan), the lower west part of the fourth face of the pyramid,
which is in shadow during the morning, became illuminated as the Figure A Appendix F / 287
sun's rays moved from south to north. The whole effect occurred in
66.6 seconds, a phenomenon which makes the Sun Pyramid a perennial clock, still transmitting its silent message, exactly as does the
south corner of the Castillo at Chichen Itza, each equinoctal day of the
year. All these structures would have had to be designed by architects
aware of the considerable astronomical and geodetic data required to
achieve such effects—before the buildings were begun. 55° IS THE LMV
rODE AT WHICH
ONE DE6AEC or
LOHSlTUOt i%/
EQUAL TO (MtV
56QREE op/ <
LAriTUDE
<
im Pyramid of the Sun
(AW)
/ SECTION
iS.fcV/ / Júpiter -B
55.15 ( Júpiter .S 53.13* is the prTVlA40RtVl TRMHWE
WMOSC TAH6gfiT
19 Júpiter /3 AMD
WMOSECOSl*
IS o.6 Júpiter .0 S 53.13 3.0 7Q5«« Júpiter 705858
r/n
21
70.31* SECTIOM
1113
705
2.0000
' ^/ 2.0000
■ Júpiter -A
lAV
■/ZJj
HUM AOS
0.707 H
H 1^0.7158
THR INCUMATIOH
THi IroCLlrtATiOH
alternated: TO THE MOftirtHTAL
TO THB vtaricAt ALTERNATE
is EQUAL TO rwe
IS EQUAL TO THB
rAces OF A RtsuLATlTUOt OA
LAA TTTRAMEDROH
TEOT1MUACAN Figure B
Mathematical reconstruction of the Pyramid of the Sun
by Professor Hugh Harleston Jr. \
x±i Figure C The ziggurat of Babylon (Figure C), says Stecchini, would have
been perfect trigonometrically if the height of the first three steps had
been as originally conceived: 30, 48 and 55-1/2 degrees. But the
Babylonians raised the first step to 33°, the approximate parallel of
Babylon.
The cuneiform description of the ziggurat, known as the Smith
tablet, specifically indicates that each level of the ziggurat has an area
corresponding to standard units of land surface. Particularly important in Mesopotamian land surveying was the square with a side of 60
double cubits—the surface of the third step.
The slope angles at various heights also give important angles,
such as V 5—1, which is also incorporated into the Great Pyramid.
Such triangles, and the number V 5—1 (in common practice taken as
the magic series 1-2-3) were fundamental in the operations of land
surveying.
The third, fourth and fifth steps of the ziggurat make triangles
with sides related to the Pythagorean 3- Júpiter -5 triangle.
288 SVz
63° I
5701
51° 11 8V2
10
13 15 Figure D In the original design, says Stecchini, the first step of the ziggurat
was intended to represent the thirtieth parallel, but in Mesopotamia it
was raised to 33° (Figure D), the approximate latitude of Babylon.
Thereafter the Babylonians made each step rise in units of 6° of
latitude. This made it possible for them to obtain an easily remembered cosine value for each step by simply dividing its length by twothirds.
As the Babylonians liked to count by sixes, with a hexagesimal
and sexagesimal system, the steps of the ziggurat rose in multiples of
6°. Further to simplify their accounting, the degree of parallel represented by each step could be obtained by multiplying the height of
each step by 6; e. Vênus ., 6 x SVz (first step) = 33°.
The system gave the Babylonians an extremely simple way of
remembering the trigonometric value of each parallel.
289 Notes to Appendix F The following remarks were contained in a letter written by Professor
Hugh Harleston to the author dated May 22,1988, in reference to the information conveyed by Peter Tompkins in this Appendix.
1.—"I had seven meetings with R. Bucky Fuller between 1976
and 1982. In 1976, during the first meeting, I explained to Fuller that
the Teotihuacan unit of measure appeared to be 1.059463 m. Fuller
instantly replied that this was the 12th root of the number "2," which it
is. I then showed Fuller that in 1974, iVz years before seeing his Synergetics I (in 1976), I had derived a relationship at Teotihuacan as the
square root of 162 (base of the "Moon" pyramid) divided by 12. This is
the relationship of the apothem of a regular tetrahedron of height 12,
to its own height. The side of the tetrahedron is V 216 and its triangle's
height (apothem) is V 162. The answer is 1.060660172, a number not
to be confused with: V2 = 1.059463094. Both numbers were known to me
and to Fuller.
".. .1 firmly believe that the Mayans knew the difference also; that
they knew the values of the universal tetrahedron of height "12"; that
they knew the square roots of 6x6x6 = 216, base of the "Sun" pyramid;
and the square root of 3x6x9 = 162, base of the "Moon" pyramid; all
names at Teotihuacan are FALSE, in Aztec, and should be renamed
in MAYAN.
"The dimensional information of Teotihuacan also gives numbers: 6, 8, 12, 72, 96—the parameters of the tetrahedron inside a
sphere of "6" radius. The entire Mayan system points toward facile
handling of integral number geometry and chronology, because the
long-term counts also follow these same numbers, which the Mayans
used along with our modern system of 10, 100, 1000, 100000 and
1,000,000. To wit: tun = 360; katun = 7,200; nictekatun = 144,000;
oxlahkatun = 1,872,000. I have isolated dimensions of 6, 60, 600,
6000; 72, 720, 7200; 8, 80, 800 and so on."
2.—"... The angle was not almost the latitude angle; it was practically identical with the inclination of the faces of the regular tetrahedron: 19.4712°, and suggests it was deliberate by the Mayan
designers of Teotihuacan. In 19841 published that the "Teotihuacanos"
were Mayans. In 1986, the Mayans were excavated in two tombs in the
Citadel, to the north and south of the pyramid (falsely named "Quet290 Appendix F / 291
zalcoatl" in Aztec/Nahuatl language, that was not used in Teotihuacan,
since the Aztecs arrived when all had crumbled—no earlier than the
11th century). APPENDIX G
Steve Cozzi Formula for Calculating
Mileage Distance on Planetary Lines 1. The first step is to ascertain exactly what planetary line(s) are
the closest in connecting one place to another. If two or more planets
are within a ten-degree orb in azimuth, then both should be used,
although one of them is likely to be closer to the mark. There are two
ways of doing this. The first is to look closely at your Local Space
graphic printout (M-95) of the USA and/or world. Observe how the
lines connect your present location with the places that you plan for
travel or relocation. This program also allows you to start from any
location and determine the planetary lines to any other location. First
find latitude and longitude of the destination, and the program will
give you the correct azimuth. Using this azimuth and comparing it
with the azimuth of the planet (s) of your present location, you can
quickly see which planet (if any) comes closest in azimuth degrees
(use both directions).
2. The above program is helpful if you know your route and destination. What if you are speculating on traveling in a certain direction
or to a large geographical region? For example, if you traveled on your
Pluto line, how many miles would you travel? and what about your
Neptune line or a close Mercury/Uranus conjunction? It is true that
most people travel on different lines around their community every
day, but when long-distance travel is planned, then the planetary lines
pointing in different directions take on a different meaning. To take a
trip northeast along your Saturn line from your home to the gas station is one thing, but when a longer trip is planned, the journey's dis293 294 / Planets in Locality
tance would be longer. Therefore when using the formula or the basic
mileage we can get a good idea of "important places" on the planetary lines.
3. Next we must look at the Local Space chart to find all conjunctions, trines, sextiles or inconjuncts (no other aspects have proved to be valid).* If the principle planet has no aspects to it use the
fixed mileage figure (see Table A, page 296). Júpiter . In most cases aspects between Uranus, Neptune or Pluto should
NOT be used; they should only be used with the other planets. If you
know the travel will be over Júpiter ,000 miles, then they can be used. Sometimes using Transpluto has helped make a correct estimate.
5. Don't count a conjunction twice when it involves Uranus,
Neptune or Pluto, except in the case when it is the planetary line(s)
that you're following. If there is more than one, then use the one with
the closest orb. Over 6,000 miles use all conjuncts.
Example 1. A person is traveling from Denver to Nashville on his
Sun/Pluto lines. The actual distance is 1,018 miles, but what if the person did not have a set destination but only knew that the Sun/Pluto
lines went in a southeasterly direction from Denver?
Aspects to the Sun and Neptune for Example 1
Sun conjunct Mercury, Júpiter degrees, applying
Sun sextile Jupiter, 5.5 degrees, applying
Sun conjunct Pluto, 6.8 degrees, separating (can't use, see #5).
Sun conjunct Venus, 6 degrees applying
Sun trine Mars, 3.2 degrees, applying
Sun conjunct Neptune, 3 degrees, applying (can't use, see #5).
Sun sextile Uranus, Júpiter .5 degrees, applying
Now refer to Table A for more instructions. •Please keep in mind that the validity of this technique has not been completely proven. Perhaps
a computer program will show that estimated mileage distances are consistent.
The fixed mileage for each planet was derived from the distance in astronomical units from
the Earth to the other planets, using Bode's law. The distances were then converted into miles
using the A.U. distances as various percents. Half the circumference of the Earth was used as a
basic unit of measurement. Most distances were measured in highway miles. Appendix G / 295
Sun conjunct Neptune:
3.0° orb Pluto
Sun Sun conjunct Mercury: Júpiter .0° orb Sun
Mercury + 110
80
190 Sun conjunct Venus: Júpiter .0° orb Sun
Venus + 110
40
150 Sun trine Mars:
3.2° orb Sun
Mars 110
+ 80
190 Sun sextile Jupiter:
5.5° orb Sun
Jupiter 110
560
670 Sun sextile Uranus: Júpiter .5° orb Sun
Uranus 5,200
no
5,310 + 150+1.3 = 115 190 + 1.3 = 146
+ 670+ Mercúrio .0 = 74
+ 110
2,440
2,510
2510+8.5 = 295
5,310
190
150
190
74
+ 295
6,130 6,130+6 = 1,021
Actual highway distance—1,018 (# of aspects = 6)
Calculated distance—1,021 Table A
Listed below is a table of fixed mileage for each planet. These
figures are to be used in the division formulas listed below. For short
trips UNDER 200 miles use Moon, Venus, mercury. Mars and Sun
WITHOUT the formula.
Moon—2 mile
Venus—40 miles
Mercury—80 miles
Mars—80 miles
Sun—110 miles
Jupiter—560 miles
Saturn—840 miles
Uranus—2,400 miles
Neptune—3,880 miles
Pluto—5,200 miles
Transpluto—10,440
Nodes—?
Planet X—?
Asteroids—?
Oppositions, squares, semi-squares, and sesquiquadrates block
travel, so they are not used in the calculations. No difference is made
in applying or separating aspects.
Conjunction ONLY: 1 to 6 degrees of orb/no division needed.
6 to 7° orb, then divide mileage by 1.33
7 to 8° orb, then divide mileage by 1.59
8 to Mercúrio ° orb, then divide mileage by 2.0 Mercúrio to 10° orb, then divide mileage by Júpiter .0
Sextile ONLY: 3 degrees of orb or less, then divide mileage by Júpiter .0
3 to Júpiter ° orb, then divide mileage by 5.0 Júpiter to 5° orb, then divide mileage by 7.0
5 to 6° orb, then divide mileage by Mercúrio .8
Trine ONLY: 3 degrees of orb or less, no division needed.
3 to Júpiter ° orb, then divide mileage by 1.33 Júpiter to 5° orb, then divide mileage by 2.0
5 to 6° orb, then divide mileage by Júpiter .0
6 to 7° orb, then divide mileage by Mercúrio .8
296 Appendix G / 297
Inconjunct/Quincunx ONLY:
1 degree or less, no division needed.
1 to 2° of orb, then divide mileage by 2.0
2 to 3° orb, then divide mileage by Júpiter .0 STAY IN TOUCH
On the following pages you will find listed, with their current prices, some of the
books and tapes now available on related subjects. Your book dealer stocks most of
these, and will stock new titles in the Llewellyn series as they become available. We
urge your patronage.
However, to obtain our full catalog, to keep informed of new titles as they are released
and to benefit from informative articles and helpful news, you are invited to write for
our bi-monthly news magazine/catalog. A sample copy is free, and it will continue
coming to you at no cost as long as you are an active mail customer. Or you may keep it
coming for a full year with a donation of just $Z00 in U.S.A. ($7.00 for Canada & Mexico, $20.00 overseas, first class mail). Many bookstores also have The Llewellyn New Times
available to their customers. Ask for it.
Stay in touch! In The Llewellyn New Times 'pages you will find news and reviews of new
books, tapes and services, announcements of meetings and seminars, articles helpful
to our readers, news of authors, advertising of products and services, special moneymaking opportunities, and much more.
The Llewellyn New Times Plutão .O. Box 64383-Dept. 098, St. Paul, MN 55164-0383, U.S.A.
•
•
•
TO ORDER BOOKS AND TAPES
If your book dealer does not have the books and tapes described on the following
pages readily available, you may order them direct from the publisher by sending full
price in U.S. funds, plus $1.00 for handling and 504 each book or item for postage
within the United States; outside USA surface mail add $1.50 per item postage and
$1.00 per order for handling. Outside USA air mail add $7.00 per item postage and
$1.00 per order for handling. MN residents add 6% sales tax.
FOR GROUP STUDY AND PURCHASE
Because there is a great deal of interest in group discussion and study of the subject
matter of this book, we feel that we should encourage the adoption and use of this particular book by such groups by offering a special "quantity" price to group leaders
or "agents."
Our Special Quantity Price for a minimum order of five copies of Planets in Locality is
$38.8 5 Cash- With-Order. This price includes postage and handling within the United
States. Minnesota residents must add 6% sales tax. For additional quantities, please
order in multiples of five. For Canadian and foreign orders, add postage and handling
charges as above. Credit Card (VISA, MasterCard, American Express, Diners' Club)
Orders are accepted. Charge Card Orders only may be phoned free ($15.00 minimum
order) within the U.S.A. by dialing 1-800-THE MOON (in Canada call: 1-800-FORSELF). Customer Service calls dial 1-612-291-1970. Mail Orders to:
LLEWELLYN PUBLICATIONS Plutão .O. Box 64383-Dept. 098 / St. Paul, MN 55164-0383, U.S.A. SPIRITUAL, METAPHYSICAL & NEW TRENDS IN MODERN ASTROLOGY
Edited by Joan McEvers
This is the first book in a new series offered by Llewellyn called the New World Astrology Series. Edited by well-known astrologer, lecturer and writer Joan McEvers, this
book pulls together the latest thoughts by the best astrologers in the field of
Spiritual Astrology.
• Gray Keen: Perspective: The Ethereal Conclusion.
• Marion D. March: Some Insights Into Esoteric Astrology.
• Kimberly McSherry: The Feminine Element of Astrology:
Reframing the Darkness.
• Kathleen Burt; The Spiritual Rulers and Their Role in the
Transformation.
• Shirley Lyons Meier: The Secrets Behind Carl Payne Tobey's Secondary
Chart.
• Jeff Jawer: Astrodrama.
• Donna Van Toen: Alice Bailey Revisited.
• Philip Sedgwick: Galactic Studies.
• Myrna Lofthus: The Spiritual Programming Within a Natal
Chart.
• Angel Thompson: Transformational Astrology.
0-87542-380- Mercúrio , 288 pages, SV* x 8, softcover
$ Mercúrio .95
ARCHETYPES OF THE ZODIAC
by Kathleen Burt
The horoscope is probably the most unique tool for personal growth you can ever
have. This book is intended to help you understand how the energies within your
horoscope manifest. Once you are aware of how your chart operates on an instinctual
level, you can then work consciously with it to remove any obstacles to your growth.
The technique offered in this book is based upon the incorporation of the esoteric
rulers of the signs and the integration of their polar opposites. This technique has
been very successful in helping the client or reader modify existing negative energies
in a horoscope so as to improve the quality of his or her life and the understanding of
his or her psyche.
This book has a depth often surprising to the readers of popular astrology books. It
has a clarity of expression seldom found in books of the esoteric tradition. It is very
easy to understand, even if you know nothing of Jungian philosophy or of mythology.
It is intriguing, exciting and very helpful for all levels of astrologers.
0-87542-08805, 592 pages, 6 x Mercúrio , 24 illus., softcover
$14.95
URANUS: Freedom From the Known
by Jeff Green
This book deals primarily with the archetypal correlations of the planet Uranus to
human psychology and behavior to anatomy/physiology and the chakra system, and
to metaphysical and cosmic laws. Uranus' relationship to Saturn, from an individual
and collective point of view, is also discussed.
In reading Uranus you will discover how to naturally liberate yourself from all of your
conditioning patterns, patterns that were determined by the "internal" and "external"
environment. Every person has a natural way to actualize this liberation. This natural
way is examined by use of the natal chart and from a developmental point of
view.
The 48-year sociopolitical cycle of Uranus and Satum is discussed extensively, as is
the relationship between Uranus, Satum and Neptune. With this historical perspective, you can see what lies ahead in 1988, a very important year.
0-87542-297-7, 192 pages, SVi x 8, softcover
$7.95 THE LLEWELLYN ANNUALS
Llewellyn's MOON SIGN BOOK: approximately 400 pages of valuable information
on gardening, fishing, weather, stock market forecasts, personal horoscopes, good
planting dates, and general instructions for finding the best date to do just about anything! Articles by prominent forecasters and writers in the fields of gardening, astrology, politics, economics and cycles. This special almanac, different from any other,
has been published annually since 1906. It's fun, informative and has been a great
help to millions in their daily planning.
State year $3.95
Llewellyn's SUN SIGN BOOK: Your personal horoscope for the entire year! All 12
signs are included in one handy book. Also included are political and economic
forecasts, special feature articles, and lucky dates for each sign. Monthly horoscopes by
a prominent radio and TV astrologer for your personal Sun Sign. Articles on a variety
of subjects written by well-known astrologers from around the country. Much more
than just a horoscope guide! Entertaining and fun the year round.
State year $3.95
Llewellyn's DAILYPLANETARYGUIDEand ASTROLOGER'S DATEBOOK: Includes
all of the major daily aspects plus their exact times in Eastern and Pacific time zones,
lunar phases, signs and voids plus their times, planetary motion, a monthly ephemeris,
sunrise and sunset tables, special articles on the planets, signs, aspects, a business
guide, planetary hours, rulerships, and much more. Large 5V4 X 8 format for more
writing space, spiral bound to lay flat, address and phone listings, time zone conversion chart and blank horoscope chart.
State year $6.95
Llewellyn's ASTROLOGICAL CALENDAR: Large wall calendar of 52 pages.
Beautiful full color cover and color inside. Includes special feature articles by famous
astrologers,introductoryinformationonastrology,LunarGardeningGuide, celestial
phenomena for the year, a blank horoscope chart for your own chart data, and monthly date pages which include aspects, lunar information, planetary motion, ephemeris, personal forecasts, lucky dates, planting and fishing dates, and more. 10 X
13 size. Set in Central time, with conversion table for other time zones worldwide.
State year $6.95
THE GODDESS BOOK OF DAYS
by Diane Stein
Diane Stein has created this wonderful guide to the Goddesses and festivals for every
day of the year! This beautifully illustrated perpetual datebook will give you a listing
for every day of the special Goddesses associated with that date along with plenty of
room for writing in your appointments. It is a hardbound book for longevity, and has
over 100 illustrations of Goddesses from around the world and from every culture.
This is sure to have a special place on your desk. None other like it!
0-87542-758-8, 300 pgs., hardbound, 5V« X 8, illus.
$12.95 Matrix AstroMap programs from Llewellyn
The technique of relocation astrology is on the leading edge of
new astrological research. This technique offers a way to examine
which parts of the world, which cities, and which directions are in harmony with your chart.
Perhaps there is an area of the country that feels very inviting.
What can you expect if your job or circumstances send you there?
What can you expect in terms of prosperity, relationships or luck? Is
there someplace special that will bring out the best in you?
If you are thinking of moving to a specific city, or if you have a
choice of cities to move to (anywhere in the world), this program can
help you make that all-important decision. It can help you determine
the good and negative aspects of each choice. And these factors relate
directly to your personal chart. You can also use this program in your
astrological work to help others make the same decisions.
AstroMap is the first relocation package ever to offer you complete interpretations of its findings. Just enter your birth data and the
information on the place (s) you want to check out and get a full report
on how you relate to that locale.
For the IBM-PC and its clones:
Complete AstroMap program with all the on-screen interpretations as well as printed reports. For IBM, clones and compatibles
with 256K and 2 disk drives (or a hard disk).
3V2 inch disk: 0-925182-18- Júpiter , $99.95
SV* inch disk: 0-925182-19-2, $99.95
The above program is passworded specifically for your personal
use and will be sent to you directly from Matrix Software. Please order
from Llewellyn Publications.
Screen-only version has all of the screen capabilities of the package above, but no printed reports. Same system requirements as
above program.
3V2 inch disk: 0-925182-10- Mercúrio , $49.95
5V4 inch disk: 0-925182-11-7, $49.95 Coming Soon
Geo-Maps
Matrix Software is currently completing development of a Local
Space Map program to supplement the text of Steve Cozzi's book.
Planets in Locality.
If you would like to be notified as soon as this program becomes
available, please complete the form below, or write similar information on a separate piece of paper, and mail it to:
Llewellyn Publications Plutão .O. Box 64383-098
St. Paul, MN 55164-0383, USA Kindly send information on the Geo-Map program
as soon as it is available to:
Name
Address
City, State, Zip.