Published in 2008 by Ibis Press
An imprint of Nicolas-Hays, Inc. Plutão . O. Box 540206
Lake Worth, FL 33454-0206
www.ibispress.net
Distributed to the trade by
Red Wheel/Weiser, LLC
65 Parker St. • Ste. 7
Newburyport, MA 01950
www.redwheelweiser.com
Copyright © 2008 by Demetra George
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced or
transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic or mechanical,
including photocopying, recording, or by any information storage and
retrieval system, without permission in writing from Nicolas-Hays, Inc.
Reviewers may quote brief passages.
ISBN 978-089254-149-2
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
George, Demetra, 1946Astrology and the authentic self: integrating traditional and modern
astrology to uncover the essence of the birth chart / by Demetra George.
p. cm.
Includes bibliographical references.
ISBN 978-0-89254-149-2 (alk. paper)
1. Astrology. 2. Horoscopes. 3. Self-realization. I. Title.
BF1711.G46 2008
133.5–dc22
2008040217. Book design and production by Studio 31.
www.studio31.com
Printed in the United States of America
www.redwheelweiser.com
www.redwheelweiser.com/newsletter TABLE OF CONTENTS
Acknowledgments
Prologue: Essence of Heartdrops
Introduction: A Blueprint for the Essential Meaning of the Chart
Part I: Laying the Foundation
Chapter 1: The Grammar of Astrology
Chapter 2: Determining Planetary Condition
Part Gêmeos : Establishing the Framework
Chapter 3: An Overview of the Chart
Chapter Júpiter : The Ascendant, Its Ruler, and the Life Direction
Chapter 5: The Sun, the Moon, and the Life Purpose
Chapter 6: Timing by Transits and Progressions
Part III: Building the Structure
Chapter 7: The Lunation Phases
Chapter 8: Fortune, Lunar Nodes, and Eclipses
Chapter Mercúrio : Mythic Asteroid Archetypes
Chapter 10: Aspect Patterns
Chapter 11: Analyzing Relationship and Vocation
Chapter 12: Timing by Solar Returns and Annual Profections
Chapter 13: The Finished Structure
Part IV: The Person Who Lives in the Chart
Chapter 14: Encountering Your Clients
Chapter 15: The Healing Power of Myth to Address Suffering Epilogue:
The Astrologer as Counselor
Appendix A:
How to Determine Your Natal and Progressed Lunation Phases
Appendix B:
Resources for the Study of Asteroids
Endnotes
Bibliography
Glossary ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
For all my students, clients, and friends who have taught me astrology
through the telling of your life stories: Sunnyridge Mining Claim family;
ongoing classes on the Oregon Coast, Motherpeace School, Eugene and
Portland communities, Kepler College, Online College of Astrology,
Arizona Institute of Astrology, Astrosynthesis, Zoe Ministries, pilgrims to
Greece; and countless faces from astrological societies and schools on
three continents, in dozens of countries, and in many states. Special thanks
to Kenneth Johnson, Mark Marek, Scott Silverman, and Loren Sears who
have given me feedback and encouragement in the development of this
book, and to Bruce Schennum.
Appreciation to Donald Weiser, Yvonne Paglia, Laurel Trufant, and
James Wasserman for their support and assistance in helping bring this
book to publication.
And with gratitude for my teachers who have passed their knowledge on
to me: the Oceanside Rosicrucian Fellowship, Dane Rudhyar, Virginia
Dayan, Marc Robertson, Diana Stone, Joanne Wickenburg, Zipporah
Dobyns, Maritha Pottenger, Tony Joseph, Robert Zoller, Alan White,
Robert Schmidt, Lee Lehman, Brian Clark, David Calderwood, Malcolm
Wilson, Dennis Harness, Tsering Everest, Chagdud Tulku, and Douglas
Bloch who taught me how to write.
This book is dedicated to my grandson, Cedar Davis Frankfort. PROLOGUE: ESSENCE OF HEARTDROPS
Astrology and the Authentic Self is a guide to uncovering the essential
meaning of the birth chart. It is written for practicing astrologers who want
to give insights to clients about the kinds of activities their charts support
that will help them live meaningful and purposeful lives. Personal
worthiness arises from doing what we do well, and astrology provides a
means to discover and affirm that individual potential. This discussion
integrates the basic doctrines of traditional astrology, which provide a clear
and analytical assessment of what is possible for individuals to realize in
their lives, with the archetypal approach of modern astrology that aims for
a healing of the psyche.
This book is for my students—those I have already encountered in my
thirty-five years of teaching astrology and those I have yet to encounter
through this work. All of your faces are before me as I write, and it is to
you that I address these words. I hope to give you the essence of my
heartdrops—a distillation of my insights into the most basic and
fundamental principles involved in reading a chart for a client. My
ultimate motivation in writing is to benefit others by pointing the way to
understanding the essential meaning of their lives.
Astrology and the Authentic Self is not an exhaustive treatment of every
doctrine in astrology, nor is it meant to be a complete teaching on the
doctrines I discuss. Rather, it is a template for reaching directly into the
heart of a chart, extracting that which is most essential about the life, and
saying something meaningful within the context of a one-hour
consultation. Our work as consulting astrologers is to read a chart and then
convey, in the limited time allowed by the reading, the essence of the most
important things of all that can possibly be said about it. We have to make
every word count.
My intention is to suggest an utterly simple, clear, logical method for
discerning the purpose of a life as indicated in the astrological birth chart.
My model employs the methods and criteria of traditional astrology to provide a solid structural foundation for the insights of modern
psychological approaches, which aim at healing the psyche.
Throughout the book, the key question is how to synthesize what you
know as an astrologer with what you say as a counselor. As an astrologer,
it is imperative that you make sound judgments concerning the topics and
events that are likely to be realized in a client's life, as well as the motifs
that are unlikely to unfold based on the astrological indications. The
techniques of traditional astrology can help you in this analysis. But as a
counselor, it is not appropriate for you to communicate information that
may bring your clients to a state of despair and disappointment. Your job is
to steer clients skillfully away from the activities whose outcomes are
unlikely and instead guide them toward actions that can be realized as part
of their life purpose, supported by the chart indicators. As a counselor, you
don the mantle of healer.
The philosophical premise that underlies and informs all the practical
techniques described in this book is that we live in a conscious cosmos that
is permeated with a creative intelligence and an intrinsic order. Every life
has a purpose within the larger whole. Astrology is one means by which to
discern this purpose. The natal chart is constructed to facilitate the living
out of that purpose, which is often the most natural and instinctive
response of an individual and which brings a sense of meaning to everyday
life. The natal chart describes the conditions of the karma or fate into
which we are born, but it is our response to our fate that shapes our
destiny. And in exceptional circumstances, grace does exist. INTRODUCTION: A BLUEPRINT FOR THE ESSENTIAL MEANING OF THE
BIRTH CHART
Some people come to astrologers to obtain specific information about a
particular question or topic; others come out of casual curiosity. But many
come because they feel lost, confused, frightened, or alienated. They come
because they are searching for something that will give meaning to their
lives. They come with the hope that the astrologer can point them in the
right direction.
The questions implicit in this quest reach to the heart of the inquiry
concerning the nature of the cosmos and the place of human beings within
it. Does each fleeting individual life have a transcendent purpose that is
experienced as a personal calling? Is this calling part of a larger plan that
speaks to the organic unity of the cosmos? If this personal calling is
recognized, can it allow us to feel that our lives are authentic expressions
of our real inner selves? And can it shape and inform all the ordinary
activities in the progression of events from birth to death in a manner that
imparts a sense of unique destiny and purposeful intentionality?
This book operates from the premise that we each have a purpose to our
lives, that this purpose in some way enhances the well-being of others in
the world, and that it is of value to each of us to recognize and express this
purpose. Astrology can provide insights that illuminate this personal
meaning. Although astrology can clearly describe your character, fate, and
fortune, in its highest expression, it is a window into your soul that helps
you live a life that expresses your authentic self for the greater good.
In The Soul's Code, James Hillman talks about, “. . . calling, about fate,
about character, about innate image. Together they make up the ‘acorn
theory,’ which holds that each person bears a uniqueness that asks to be
lived and that is already present before it can be lived.” He argues that we
each have a pattern that leads us toward a certain purpose and destiny and that this pattern exists from the moment of birth.1 We will explore how
astrology is one way by which to reveal this destiny.
Over 2000 years ago, the Greek philosopher Plato wrote in his
cosmological treatise, the Timaeus, that the world was a living creature
endowed with soul and intelligence.2 It is only in such a world that
astrology as a tool for self-realization is feasible. In a universe that is
conscious and alive, everything emanates from the mind of the cosmos.
The celestial bodies, as points of light, are the visible manifestations of
that higher consciousness and, as such, act as intermediaries between the
heavens and the Earth. They move and are moved by resonance in
accordance with the emanations that pour forth from the divine mind. The
configurations of the celestial bodies at the moment of birth reflect the
pattern of thought that initiates the span of a human life and marks the goal
toward which that life moves. The end result is implicit in the beginning
moment, as the oak tree is in the acorn. To the extent that you recognize
and express this innate purpose, despite the mixture of happiness and
suffering that characterizes what it entails to be human, you acknowledge
and fulfill the reason for your existence.
A question that clients frequently ask is: Based on my chart, what
should I be doing with my life? The clarification of our innate authentic
nature is the primary inquiry of this book.
In a contemporary astrology—with ten planets, four major and 12,000
minor asteroids, countless fixed stars, numerous minor aspects and
patterns, hundreds of Arabic parts, a dizzying array of computerdriven
options for timing techniques, a dozen different house systems, three
competing zodiacs, and conflicting rulership systems— your challenge is
to cut straight through the complexity and multiplicity to the heart of the
matter and derive the essential meaning of the chart with simplicity and
elegance. Your goal is to establish the basic framework of the life with a
clear, lucid, well-defined structure, but one that allows for the creativity of
self-expression, and then incorporate the multitude of other astrological
factors that give texture, color, scent, sound, and taste to a personality born
into time and acting with intention.
It is important to distinguish between three different kinds of natal-chart
interpretation. A basic overview, which involves an assessment of the major themes
of the chart, the interpretations of each planet, the areas of
concentration of the natal energies, and the parts of the chart that are
being activated at a specific time.
A thorough delineation, which entails a synthesis of all the major and
minor details, as well as various timing factors.
A delineation given as an oral reading, within an hour or an hour and a
half, that covers the most important points, as well as questions asked
by the client. This is ultimately the work of a practicing astrologer.
A thorough understanding of a nativity can entail many pages of writing or
many hours of spoken words; but in your actual interaction with a client,
you can only convey a small fraction of what the chart indicates. Within
the context of a consultation, you have only a short time in which to make
a genuine connection between a chart and its owner. How do you reconcile
all that you perceive as the necessary informing background of the chart
with what you can actually communicate in a limited period of time?
This book sets forth a model of how to give one-hour consultations that
include an analysis of both the natal chart and the current timing
activations. What distinguishes this model from other teachings that
discuss synthesis and delineation is that it makes the main focus of the
reading more than simply a description of character or prognostications
about the future, although it will contain elements of both these
perspectives. The challenge for you as an astrologer is not to demonstrate
your skill at making accurate statements and predictions, but rather to
create a space in which clients can see clearly into their own authentic
natures. This is the essential meaning of the birth chart.
Before you can receive the divine spark of inspiration and the gifts of
illumination that astrology has to offer, you must have a solid structural
foundation, tightly constructed and well anchored in what the Greeks
called techne—the technical aspects of the craft. Without it, although you
may give accurate and helpful readings, you will not be an astrologer. The
Greek word thema(Θέμα) means “that which is placed or laid down.” One
of its cognates, themeliakos, translates as “a foundation or a building site.”
These words were used by Hellenistic astrologers to refer to a birth chart,
as when they spoke of the thema mundi, the birth chart of the world. In the
following pages, we will explore how to interpret the astrological code given at our birth as instructions for building a structure that can give
shape and meaning to our lives.
It helps to have a plan. You must learn how to distinguish between what
is significant and what is not, identify major themes quickly and easily,
synthesize the chart in all its complexity, distill the chart down to what is
essential, and finally communicate its meaning to your client in language
that is accessible and in a tone that is both truthful and empowering. The
model presented here will help you make order out of chaos and simplicity
out of complexity using a systematic approach to assembling the various
components of the birth chart. The question that directs our investigation is
what kinds of activities the chart supports for the living of a meaningful
life with purposeful intention.
Here is the blueprint for how we shall proceed. THE BLUEPRINT
In Part I, Laying the Foundation, we'll review the fundamentals of
astrological grammar. We will practice making simple one-sentence
statements that integrate the meaning of a planet occupying a sign and a
house, and ruling one or two other houses. Then I will introduce the
teachings of traditional astrology that evaluate the condition of a planet.
We will consider the perspective that, based on a planet's sign, house, and
aspects, not all planets are equal in their capacity to bring about the matters
they signify and to lead to positive outcomes for the individual. Thus,
some people will be able to bring about certain topics in their lives and not
have success with others. These kinds of situations call up a counselor's
greatest skills in holding a healing environment for the possibility of
unrealized hopes and dreams.
In Part Gêmeos , Establishing the Framework, we'll discuss the core of the
model. The ancient astrologers called the Sun, Moon, and Ascendant “the
places of life.” Traditionally, these three points were among the five
candidates (along with the Lot of Fortune and the pre-natal lunation) for
the determination of the length of life. As such, they can be said to
represent the places in the chart that contain the vital essence of the life
force whose outflow is directed toward the essential life purpose.
I propose that the positions and conditions of the Ascendant and its
ruler, the Sun, and the Moon establish the basic framework of the chart in which the essential meaning of the life purpose can be discerned. The
whole of the life's meaning is encapsulated in these four factors, in
conjunction with the web of interrelationships of other planets and
asteroids configured to these points. The procedure is very simple, as it
focuses on the evaluation of just four primary factors. However, the rules
for evaluating these factors are comprehensive and detailed.
In this model, the Sun signifies the intention of the soul and the content
of the life purpose; the Moon represents the body that gives the soul life,
the senses by which we perceive the world, and the practical means by
which we actualize our purpose; the Ascendant and its ruler point to what
motivates the soul to action and what topic steers the life on its course. By
the end of Part Gêmeos , you will be able to delineate and express the main theme
of a chart by considering only the positions of the Sun, the Moon, and the
Ascendant and its ruler.
In Part III, Building the Structure, you'll see how, once the main theme
of a chart is established, all the other factors provide added detail to this
central motif. The derivatives of the solar and lunar lights are the Lot of
Fortune, the lunation phases, the lunar nodes, and eclipses that provide the
secondary levels of meaning. Within this context, the other configurations
formed by the planets (classical and modern), asteroids, fixed stars, and
other sensitive points flesh out the structure by filling in the details and
showing how aspect patterns tie the motifs together. This enables
judgments about the topics of relationship, career, health, finances, etc.
This model gives you a hierarchy of timing techniques you can use to
time the unfolding and realization of the life potential. It does not relegate
discussion of timing to the end of the reading, but instead weaves it
throughout the session when applicable to each component being
examined. Part III concludes with a chapter that lays out the sequence and
timing of a one-hour consultation, and gives suggestions about when to
discuss and integrate the various factors that comprise the reading.
In Part IV, The Person Who Lives in the Chart, we'll discuss how to
interact with a real live client—complete with real live issues— who enters
your consulting room and is living out the meaning of his or her chart.
How do you treat clients with respect and sensitivity given that your
beliefs and values may differ from theirs? And how do you deal with the
specter of a client's personal suffering staring you in the face? We will
explore how to use myth to raise issues and draw parallels that otherwise might be too painful or humiliating to address, yet may fester within. We
will look at ways to frame the wounded-healer archetype as a model for
compassion and selfless service to others. The ancient astrologer was a
mediator between heaven and Earth who provided a sacred container
through which the wisdom of the divine realm was distributed to human
beings, helping them to move forward with their decisions and lives.
We'll close with a discussion of how to move from the role of astrologer
to the role of counselor. How do you bridge the gap between what you
know about the chart through a deep and careful study of the various
astrological factors, and what you actually say to a client who has come to
you for guidance, often in a state of crisis? You must have a solid objective
judgment of what a chart actually indicates before you begin to formulate
what will be most helpful to your client. How can you be truthful, yet
convey hope rather than despair? How do you acknowledge the truth of
karma or fate, yet give redemptive meaning to suffering? In short, how can
a vision of your clients' authentic selves inspire them to live out their life
purposes and, in the process, facilitate personal healing that radiates
outward to benefit others?
Now that you know the plan, let's take a look at the language you will
use as you carry it out. PART I LAYING THE FOUNDATION CHAPTER ONE THE GRAMMAR OF ASTROLOGY
THE MAJOR COMPONENTS of the astrological language are planets, signs,
houses, and aspects. To successfully delineate a chart, you must have a
solid understanding of the meanings of these symbols and the capacity to
combine and synthesize their significations. Because this knowledge is so
important, we'll look first at how to combine the individual meanings of a
planet occupying a sign and a house into a meaningful sentence. Then
we'll consider how the expression of that planet is modified by its
relationship to another planet.
If you already understand these principles, skim through this chapter
and go on to chapter 2. If this is altogether new material for you, first
familiarize yourself with the meanings of the basic symbols and the
process of synthesizing the keywords of the astrological alphabet. There
are many excellent books on this aspect of astrological interpretation.
Astrology for Yourself by Douglas Bloch and Demetra George will give
you hands-on practice creating these sentences and other delineations
using a programmed text format and your own chart.
Learning to read a chart is like learning to read. Your first step in
learning to read was to learn the letters of the alphabet; in astrology, you
must memorize the glyphs of the planets and signs. If you have not
mastered that, you won't make much progress when you look at a chart.
Take time to become familiar with writing and recognizing these glyphs
before going any further in this lesson. Make yourself a set of flash cards,
carry them around in your pocket, and get those images firmly imprinted in
your mind. In first grade, you probably had a composition book in which
you wrote out the letters of the alphabet—line after line of repetitions. Do the same for the astrological glyphs. Refine your penmanship—even
though we are in the computer age in which no one actually writes longhand anymore. You'll gain a certain level of understanding of the meanings
of the symbols by simply writing the glyphs repeatedly.
Once you learned to write the letters of alphabet, you began to associate
them with their sounds and began to recognize words. In astrology, this
corresponds to learning the individual significations of each planet, sign,
and house. If you look at a planet in a particular sign and house and have
no recollection of even one keyword for any one of the symbols, you
cannot go any further in your studies. On the back of your flashcards, write
out a few basic meanings for each planet, sign, and house. Go over them
until those meanings come instantaneously to mind. As an educator, I am
an advocate of a certain amount of rote learning and memorization. It is
the quickest way to develop proficiency in some contexts.
Each of the three major components of the astrological language—
signs, planets, and houses—has basic keywords associated with it. And
each is located in a specific place in the astrological chart. These keywords
combine to create astrological sentences that follow the conventions of
grammatical structure. And these sentences, which express the
significations of a planet in a sign and house, form meaningful statements
when combined in the proper sequence. THE STRUCTURE OF THE BIRTH CHART
We will be using a sample chart of a man named Bill throughout the
remainder of this book to illustrate the principles of interpretation set forth
(see pages 22–23). An astrological birth chart, called a nativity by ancient
astrologers, is a map of the positions of the planets as they surround a
person at the exact time and place of birth. The person stands symbolically
in the center of the circle. This astrological map is a representation of the
three-dimensional celestial sphere that has been flattened to a twodimensional plane, just as our geographical maps are flattened to depict a
round Earth.
The horizontal line connecting the Ascendant and the Descendant is
called the line of the horizon. It represents the place where the sky meets
Earth at the moment of birth. The planets that are above the horizon are the
planets that are visible in the sky when a person is born; the planets beneath the horizon are those that were on the other side of the Earth, and
therefore not visible at the time of birth. Zodiacal Signs
The first component of astrological interpretation is the zodiacal sign.
There are twelve signs in the zodiac: Most people are familiar with these signs as the various Sun signs, based
upon the date and month of birth. However, each person is more than just
his or her Sun sign. If you look at the outer wheel of the sample chart, you
can see the symbols for each of the other signs as well. Everyone has all
twelve signs somewhere in their chart.
From the perspective of modern astrology, the twelve signs represent the
twelve universal psychological needs:
Aries—the need to be independent and develop self-awareness
Taurus—the need to be resourceful and get productive results
Gemini—the need to communicate and make mental contact with
others
Cancer—the need to give and receive emotional warmth and
security FIGURE 1. Natal Chart for Bill (Whole Sign houses, ten planets, four
major asteroids, Chiron, true lunar nodes, Lot of Fortune). Leo—the need for creative expression and appreciation by others
Virgo—the need to analyze, discriminate, and function efficiently
Libra—the need to relate to others and create harmony and balance
Scorpio—the need for deep involvements and intense
transformations
Sagittarius—the need to explore and expand mental and actual
horizons
Capricorn—the need for structure, organization, and discipline
Aquarius—the need to innovate, be original, and create social
change
Pisces—the need to commit to a dream or ideal
Look at the sample chart, and you will see that all twelve signs are
depicted around the outer wheel. Since everyone has all twelve signs
somewhere in their chart, everyone also has all twelve of the needs
somewhere in their lives. The Wheel of Houses There are twelve houses, just as there are twelve signs. They are named by
their position (first house, second house, etc.) and are always in the same
location in every chart. The houses represent twelve divisions or sectors of
the zodiacal wheel, and they are usually, but not always, numbered in
sequence.
If you stand in the northern hemisphere and look south, east is on your
left. Stop reading for a moment and orient yourself in this manner. Now
look at the sample natal chart and see it as a clock face. The first house is
at nine o'clock. The Ascendant degree represents the place of sunrise on
the eastern horizon. The sign that was coming up over the eastern horizon
at the time of birth is called the rising sign of the chart and the exact
degree of that sign is called the Ascendant, often abbreviated as Asc. or
As. The Ascendant is determined by the exact time of birth, and is one of
the most sensitive and important points in the chart. No matter what your
Sun sign is, you can have any of the twelve signs as your rising sign
because of the Earth's twenty-four-hour rotation on its axis. Approximately
every two hours, a new sign rises over the horizon.
In the sample chart, the sign Sagittarius is the sign rising over the
eastern horizon at the birth moment and it corresponds to the first house.
The Ascendant (As.) is located at 16 degrees Sagittarius 24 minutes.
The Sun rises in the east and ascends toward the south. If you look at
the upper portion of the sample chart you will see the symbol “MC.”1 This
represents the Midheaven, the Sun's highest elevation in the sky around
noon, depending on the latitude and the season. Then the Sun begins to
descend and, when it reaches the western horizon, it sets. This point in the
chart is marked by the Descendant, often abbreviated as Desc. The
Descendant is not always depicted on the chart, depending upon the chart
software used. Finally, the Sun sinks below the horizon and, around
midnight, reaches what is called the IC (Imum Coelii). These four points—
the Ascendant, Midheaven, Descendant, and IC—are orientated to the four
directions and referred to as the four angles. They represent places of great
strength within the chart.
Bill has Sagittarius rising on the Ascendant, Libra culminating at
the Midheaven, Gemini setting on the Descendant, and Aries at the
IC. Most chart printouts will have symbols for the Ascendant and
Midheaven, but not the Descendant, which is always the same degree in the sign opposite the Ascendant (As.), or the IC, which is
always the same degree in the sign opposite the Midheaven (MC).
Find the symbol for Bill's Sun again. Do you see that the Sun in
the twelfth house has already risen above the horizon? Now look at
Bill's time of birth—8:30 a.m., around an hour or so after dawn in
the fall season of November.
Try this again with your own chart. Do you see how the placement
of the Sun corresponds to the time of day at which you were born?
The four quarters are subdivided to create the twelve houses of the chart.
There are various ways to divide this space, from which are derived
different house systems like those of Placidus, Porphyry, Koch, and others.
We will use the Whole Sign house system here. In the Whole Sign house
system, the entirety of your rising sign, regardless of its degree, occupies
the first house. Also note that, in the Whole Sign house system, the
degrees of the MC and IC are not necessarily the beginnings of the tenth
and fourth houses, as they are in quadrant house systems. We will discuss
this more in the next chapter.
In Bill's chart, his rising sign is Sagittarius, so all of the degrees of
Sagittarius occupy his whole first house. The sign that follows Sagittarius
is Capricorn, and all of the degrees of Capricorn occupy his whole second
house, all of the degrees of Aquarius occupy his third house, and so on.
The houses represent the various fields of life activities. As a whole,
they represent all the different experiences that we encounter from birth to
death. Each house has a number of different related significations, but the
basic keywords for each house are as follows:
First house—body, appearance, character
Second house—personal money, possessions, livelihood
Third house—siblings, relatives, short-distance travel,
communications
Fourth house—parents, home, land
Fifth house—children, romance and pleasurable pursuits, creative arts
Sixth house—health, injuries, job, daily routine and regimen, servants
Seventh house—marriage and business partnerships Eighth house—death and benefits gained from death (inheritances),
money received from others
Ninth house—long-distance travel, higher education, religion, belief
system
Tenth house—profession, reputation, actions
Eleventh house—friends, associates, group affiliations
Twelfth house—sorrows, afflictions, enemies, karma, what is hidden,
transcendence
Now you are ready to combine the meaning of a sign and a house.
Remember, the signs represent the basic universal psychological needs and
the houses represent the areas of life activities. A particular sign occupying
a particular house points to the specific area of life activities in which a
person experiences a particular need. We all have all twelve of the
signs/needs somewhere in our lives, and this is where we are all similar.
However, because of the time of day we were born—and therefore our
rising sign and the sequence of signs in our houses—those needs come out
in different areas of life activities for each of us. This is where we are all
different.
Bill has Gemini occupying his seventh house. Gemini is the need to
communicate, and the seventh house represents one-to-one
relationships—especially the “significant other.” Bill has the need to
talk, discuss, share information, and make mental connections with
his partners in order to feel fulfilled in the relationship.
Where do you have Gemini in your chart? What is the area of life
in which you have a particular need to communicate? Planets
The third factor in the astrological language is the planets. Look at the
glyphs that appear within the various houses. These are the symbols of the
planets, and each planet is notated with the exact degree and minute of the
sign that it occupies. In the sample chart, the Sun is depicted by a circle
with the dot in the center. It is placed in the twelfth house, and located at
24 degrees of Scorpio 23 minutes— or
24° 23′. From the perspective of modern astrology, the planets represent the
basic psychological functions or faculties common to all people. They can
also be said to correspond to all the different parts of our personalities,
each with its own persona and agenda telling us to do or be something
different. In the same way that the Sun is the center of the solar system and
all the planets revolve around it, the Sun in the chart is the center or heart
of our being and ultimately each of the other planetary functions must be
integrated with it before we can make a decision or take an action.
The psychological functions of the planets are:
Sun—basic identity, will, and conscious purpose
Moon—emotions, feelings, habitual responses
Mercury—capacity to think, speak, learn, and reason
Venus—capacity to attract what is loved and valued
Mars—capacity to act and be assertive based on desire
Jupiter—search for meaning, truth, and ethical values
Saturn—capacity to create order, form, and discipline
Uranus—unique individuality and urge for liberation
Neptune—capacity to transcend the finite self through union with a
larger whole
Pluto—capacity to transform and renew
In addition to the planets, there are many asteroids and other minor bodies
that we will discuss later. The most frequently used of these minor planets
are Ceres, Pallas, Juno, Vesta, and Chiron. Some of their symbols may
appear in your chart printout.
Ceres
Pallas
Juno
Vesta
Chiron
In the modern psychological model, the planets represent various functions
of the personality or various forces operating in the human psyche. Each
part of the personality operates in a certain manner that is described by the
sign in which it is placed, and it operates in a different field of activities that is designated by its house position. In a sense, the planet is the Who,
the sign is the How, and the house is the Where.
If the Sun is the symbol of your identity and purpose, and it is in the
sign of Aries, you will operate primarily in an independent manner; if it is
in Taurus, in a resourceful manner; in Gemini, in a communicative manner.
If that Aries Sun is in your second house, you will be geared toward
achieving financial independence; if it is located in your seventh house,
you will seek independence in relationships; if it is located in your tenth
house, you will seek independence in your profession. The simple sentence
that expresses the Sun in Aries in the second house might read: Your basic
purpose is to develop independence in generating the resources you need
to secure your livelihood.
You must take the interpretation of a planet one step further by
integrating the meaning of the house that it rules. Thus, in our example,
you must also look to the house that the Sun rules, which will be the house
that is occupied by Leo. (In chapter 2, we will discuss planetary rulership
of signs.) If Leo occupies your ninth house (higher education), it will be
through your educational endeavors that your financial independence is
realized. Or if Leo occupies your eleventh house, friends and group
affiliations will play a central role in how you earn your money. In this
example, with Aries in your second house, Leo occupies your sixth house,
and the topic of health and daily regimen may be an important factor in
your money-making activities.
Bill's Sun is in Scorpio in the twelfth house. Combining the
meanings for Scorpio and the twelfth house with the Sun, we can
say that part of Bill's basic Sun purpose is for intense involvements
and deep transformations in his quest for transcendence or
penetration of the mysteries of life. We can also posit that, through
experiences of suffering, alienation, and loss, he will be brought to
his higher purpose in life. Because Leo occupies the ninth house, his
explorations in higher education and spirituality play a central role
in the realization of his life purpose. Aspects The last major component of astrological interpretation is the aspects.
Aspects refer to the arc of separation or angular distance between the
planets. When planets are located at a certain distance from one another,
they are connected in some intrinsic manner that is either harmonious or
challenging. Different astrologers use different orbs (ranges of degrees
from exactitude) for measuring aspects. Aspects describe the ways in
which planets can influence one another and modify each other's
expression.
Sometimes you will see aspects depicted in the center of the chart wheel
as lines connecting the various planets, with the glyphs for the aspects
inserted upon the lines. At other times, you may see an aspect grid on one
of the bottom corners of the chart printout, listing the planets horizontally
and vertically, with the glyph of the aspect that connects them.
Planets, as the various functions of the psyche, can interact in
harmonious, neutral, or antagonistic ways with other planets, just as we get
along with some people, are neutral toward some, and have ongoing
conflict with others. This condition of sympathies and antipathies exists
within each of us as well. Traditional astrology recognizes five different
aspects—the conjunction, the sextile, the square, the trine, and the
opposition. These five aspects depict the ease or difficulty with which the
planets interact.
Conjunctions occur when planets occupy the same sign or are in
close proximity in adjacent signs. The conjunction represents an
intermingling of the natures of the two planets.
Sextiles occur when planets are approximately 60 degrees apart.
The sextile indicates that there is a mildly harmonious and sympathetic
relationship between the planets involved.
Squares occur when planets are approximately 90 degrees apart.
The square points to a tense or challenging interaction between the
planets involved.
Trines occur when planets are approximately 120 degrees apart. The
trine indicates that there is an extremely harmonious and sympathetic
relationship between the planets involved.
Oppositions occur when planets are approximately 180 degrees
apart. The opposition suggests that there is an adversarial and
antagonistic relationship between the planets involved. The modern semi-sextile (planets approximately 30 degrees apart) and
the modern quincunx/inconjunct
(planets approximately 150 degrees
apart), while used today, were not considered aspects by ancient
astrologers.
Different astrologers use different sets of orbs (ranges) in order to define
the exact distances at which planets may be connected in all of the above
relationships. The orbs most commonly used by modern astrologers are:
Conjunction—10 degrees on either side of exactitude at 0 degrees
Sextile—6 degrees on either side of exactitude at 60 degrees
Square—8 degrees on either side of exactitude at 90 degrees
Trine—8 degrees on either side of exactitude at 120 degrees
Opposition—10 degrees on either side of exactitude at 180 degrees
The interpretation of aspects on the simplest level requires a complex
sentence that is formed by two individual sentences linked by a verb. In
the language of astrology, this consists of one sentence for each planet in
its own sign and house, joined by a verb that describes the nature of the
relationship.
If your second-house Sun in Aries is also square to your Moon in
Cancer in your fifth house, the complex sentence might read: Your basic
purpose to develop independence in generating the resources you need to
secure your livelihood creates ongoing tension with your emotional need
to dedicate yourself to nurturing your children.2
The doctrine concerning aspects and orbs has gone through many
changes since its inception in the Hellenistic astrology of the first few
centuries C.E., and we will trace this progression in a later chapter.
A simple interpretation of the Sun in Scorpio in the twelfth house
square to Mars in Aquarius in the third house in Bill's chart might
read: Bill's basic purpose (Sun) for intense involvements and deep
transformations (Scorpio) in the quest for transcendence (twelfth
house) is at cross-purposes (square) with his desire to assertively
fight (Mars) for just and humanitarian motivations (Aquarius)
through the use of media, speech, and modes of communications
(third house). A planet often has more than one aspect to another planet, and the
development of its various interactions generates a paragraph. Paragraphs
are also created by the evaluation of a planet's condition and by taking into
account the house it rules and its dispositor, the planet that rules the sign in
which a planet is located. These additional factors modify its meaning and
expression in a particular chart in complex and subtle ways. And the
timing with which certain planetary patterns become activated during the
course of a life generates even more paragraphs.
However, just as you can write a whole collection of paragraphs, but
still not have a coherent paper, you can generate a whole collection of
astrological sentences without creating a synthesis of the chart as a whole.
What you need is a unifying theme that links all of the individual
statements into a coherent analysis. In Part Gêmeos , we'll look at simple methods
of astrological delineation that can help you discern the unity of a chart
from a multiplicity of factors and variations.
The art of astrology entails more than just the creation of these simple
and complex sentences describing how and where each planet expresses
itself in accordance with its sign, house, and aspects. It also entails a
realization that planets vary in their capacity to accomplish the matters
they represent, depending on their sign, house, and aspects. This is called
the determination of a planet's condition. While this was the fundamental
starting point for traditional astrology, it has not been widely discussed in
contemporary astrological literature. In the next chapter, you will learn
how to evaluate the relative strength and weakness of each planet. STUDY GUIDELINES
Obtain the birth data of someone you know well and set up a chart you
can use as a practice chart. Choose someone who is open to the idea
and willing to discuss his or her chart with you and give you feedback.
To test your readiness to continue, write out the following simple
sentences about the chart you have chosen.
Create twelve sentences that blend the meaning of each sign with the
house it occupies.
Create ten sentences, one for each planet, that synthesize the meaning
of the planet with the sign and house it occupies, as well as the house
or houses it rules. Determine three different aspects between different sets of planets.
Create three sentences, one for each aspect, that factor the sign and
house for each planet involved and the nature of the relationship
between them, as determined by the aspect that links them. For now,
use the orbs and manner of determining aspects with which you are
familiar. The purpose of this exercise is to assess your interpretive
skills.
If you are not thoroughly familiar with the basic meaning of the
individual components of the astrological alphabet and how to create
simple sentences using those terms, work through Astrology For
Yourself(Bloch and George) before going on to the next chapter. Or try
some of the other practical guides for beginning astrologers that are
given in the bibliography. CHAPTER TWO DETERMINING PLANETARY CONDITION
ONE OF THE CORNERSTONES of traditional astrology is the importance of
assessing the condition of a planet before making any kind of
interpretation of its meaning—either in the natal chart or by any timing
technique. The classical texts of Hellenistic, Medieval, Renaissance, and
Indian (Vedic) astrologers are filled with voluminous teachings on the
subject of planetary condition, with elaborate rules, formulas, and details
aimed at gaining a thorough understanding of both the effectiveness of
each planet to bring about the matters it signifies and its capacity to
provide the circumstances for positive outcomes in life.
For the first 2000 years of the Western astrological tradition, the
doctrines concerning planetary condition were an integral component of
chart analysis. It is only with the beginning of the 20th century that they
have fallen out of use. Now, in the first decade of the 21st, these first
principles of astrological analysis are being reintroduced into the
community as a result of the translation of ancient Greek and Latin
astrological texts into English. Here, we'll look at ways these fundamental
teachings can be utilized by modern practitioners. This simplified analysis
of planetary condition will become an integral part of how you delineate a
chart, and will prepare you for further studies in traditional astrology if you
want to pursue them.1
The preliminary analysis of each planet is based on an understanding
that not all planets are equal in their capacity to bring about positive
outcomes for the individual—good health, prosperity, happiness,
opportunities, success, and well-being, as opposed to poor health, poverty,
suffering, and failure. The notion that some planets are better than others in any particular chart due to their condition stands in stark contrast to the
modern psychological model in which every planet is equal in its capacity
to bring about the matters it represents—albeit in different ways.
In the following discussion concerning the determination of planetary
condition, we will set aside two accepted doctrines of modern astrology:
the twelve-letter alphabet and the modern rulership system. The twelveletter alphabet proposes that planets, signs, and houses are fundamentally
the same and interchangeable. This book assumes planets, signs, and
houses each have distinct meanings and cannot be interchanged. The
modern rulership system designates Uranus, Neptune, and Pluto as rulers
of the signs Aquarius, Pisces, and Scorpio, respectively. This book uses the
traditional assignments whereby Saturn, Jupiter, and Mars rule these signs.
The outer planets and the asteroids are not used as rulers of signs.
Modern astrology is ambivalent about addressing problematic
conditions indicated by chart factors. These factors are seen as lessons for
further growth—if they are acknowledged at all. In Part IV, we'll look at
the problem of suffering as it is depicted in the birth chart and consider
ways to help clients find redemptive value in the painful experiences of
their lives. However, it is important to recognize that bad things happen to
people and that certain astrological factors can and do indicate these
misfortunes.
In previous eras, astrologers realized that some charts or planets were
weak and difficult, and that the owners of these charts or planets were less
likely to manifest certain parts of their lives, and more likely to encounter
unhappiness, loss, and misfortune. This may seem like an overly fatalistic
view, negating the value of many self-help techniques like positive
thinking, creative visualization, and therapeutic processes that develop
greater self-awareness and the power of free will to co-shape our lives.
However, the reality is that, for many people, despite their best efforts and
excellent aspirations, life continues to be filled with loneliness, unrealized
potential, suffering, and failure. From an astrological perspective, the poor
condition of certain planets in the chart can indicate that these individuals
may have an extremely difficult time bringing about certain matters in
ways that will benefit them. A planet's condition does not predispose a
person to acting in good or bad ways—moral behavior remains in the
sphere of free will; what it indicates is the presentation of fortunate or
difficult life events and the likely outcomes of those situations. Vedic and Tibetan astrology offer remedial measures to offset these
difficulties—the healing power of gemstones, mantras, amulets, and good
actions. Prayer, meditation, and spiritual practice can also mitigate limiting
belief patterns or toxic emotional habits. Western magical tradition offers
ceremonial rituals and talismans that can avert negative energies and
attract positive ones. And modern psychotherapy reaches into the
subconscious to surface and release the memories of forgotten traumas that
hold us back from the realization of our full potential. However, before
you, as an astrological counselor, can guide clients into these and
alternative ways of consciously shaping their futures, you must be able to
recognize when something is a problem in the chart and if, in fact,
anything can be done about it.
This raises a philosophical issue. For, while each life may have a
purpose, not every person has the same ability or resources to fulfill that
purpose. Offering counseling around this disparity and the unlikelihood of
certain kinds of events such as marriage or children being supported by the
chart—whether through karma, fate, God's will, bad luck, or impersonal
chance—is an issue we'll address later in the book. For now, let's consider
two questions we can ask about each planet:
To what extent is a planet effective in bringing about the matters it
signifies?
To what extent will a planet's significations result in fortunate
outcomes in the life of the individual?
The ways in which each planet is modified based upon its sign, house,
aspects, and relationship to the Sun determine its capacity to be effective
and favorable in a chart. It may seem at times that you are being overly
harsh and dogmatic in assessing the condition of a planet. The reason for
this is that, as an astrologer, you want to be clear about just what you are
seeing and the actual strengths and weaknesses present. However, as a
counselor, it is advisable to temper your statements, unless you are sure
that your client wants the hard, cold truth, no matter what it is. In practice,
you will use the information gained from this preliminary analysis to
inform and steer clients into areas of life where their efforts are more likely
to produce successful and positive outcomes. For the sake of thoroughness, I will mention what I am omitting from this discussion as well as elaborate
upon what I have decided to include. PLANETS
In this analysis, we will distinguish between the seven visible planets (Sun,
Moon, Mercury, Venus, Mars, Jupiter, and Saturn), the outer planets
(Uranus, Neptune, and Pluto—the dwarf planet), and the major and minor
asteroids. We will use them all, but in different ways.
The seven visible planets are the rulers of signs and thus of the houses
occupied by those signs. The houses have topical meanings— finances,
health, marriage, children, profession—and these seven planets have the
responsibility for rendering judgment and bringing about the affairs
associated with each of the twelve houses. It is only to these seven visible
planets that we will apply all the rules of planetary condition. We will
apply some of the rules to the remaining planets where applicable.
Although we will incorporate the outer planets in our interpretation of
the meaning of the chart, we will not credit them with rendering judgment
or bringing about events associated with the topics designated by the
houses, because we are not using them as rulers of signs. However, to the
extent that they occupy a house, the outer planets influence the matters of
that house; and to the extent that they are configured (aspect) to planets,
they influence the actions of that planet. The outer planets also have
profound effects on the life, as evidenced by transits and progressions to
them and by them.
Neither the asteroids nor the other minor planets rule signs, but like the
outer planets, they influence the houses they occupy. Their strongest effect
is as a shaping influence over the planets that they conjoin or oppose. This
is where you will most often use the mythological motifs of the deities that
share the same names as the minor bodies (see chapter Mercúrio ). However, like
the outer planets, they are not subject to most of the rules of planetary
condition.
The seven visible planets can be classified into three categories: gender,
benefic or malefic nature, and sect. The gender conditions will not be
included in this discussion, nor will all the details of sect rejoicing
conditions, although these terms are defined in the Glossary. The planets can be classified according to their benefic or malefic
natures in recognition that there is both good and bad in the world and that
there exist both favorable and unfavorable conditions that influence the life
force.
The benefic planets, Venus and Jupiter, are said to produce good for the
individual according to both their general significations and the particular
topics they rule in any given chart in accordance with the house or houses
occupied by the sign they rule.2 The Sun and usually the Moon are also
generally considered to be of a beneficial nature.
The malefic planets, Mars and Saturn, produce difficulties in the life.
Mercury can be either malefic or benefic, depending on the preponderance
of malefic or benefic planets with which it is configured. This is not an
absolute determination, as certain factors can modify the basically
beneficial nature of Venus and Jupiter and the natural malefic tendencies of
Mars and Saturn. Thus the benefic and malefic planets can all get better or
worse, depending on their overall condition, and thus be more or less
helpful to the contribution of favorable outcomes for the topics they
signify and rule.
Claudius Ptolemy attempted to explain this difference in his assignment
of the qualities of hot and cold, and wet and dry, to each planet, following
the principles set forth in Aristotle's natural philosophy.3 He deemed the
benefic planets, Venus and Jupiter, as having a moist and warm nature,
qualities conducive to the growth of living things. He classified the malefic
planets, Mars and Saturn, as having a dry and cold nature—qualities that
are destructive to the life force. Think about planting a seed; warmth and
moisture will enable it to grow, while excessive cold and lack of water will
deter its growth. And consider how the Greeks viewed their gods. Ares
(Mars) had a lust for bloodshed and battle and was hated by everyone;
Aphrodite (Venus), embodiment of beauty, was loved and desired by all.
For our purposes, we will note if a planet is a natural benefic or malefic
as a baseline for whether it does good or bad, and then determine to what
extent that inherent good or bad is made better or worse by other factors.
We will also use this classification when we look at aspects to determine if
the outcome a particular planet's significations is facilitated or hindered by
its configuration with Venus, Jupiter, Mars, or Saturn. The third classification of planets, sect (literally, “faction” in Greek),
was one of the first and most important considerations of ancient
astrologers, although it has been lost to modern practice. Sect
considerations recognize the primacy of the Sun and Moon as the two
luminaries. A chart is said to be diurnal (day) if the Sun is above the
horizon (as defined by the degree of the Ascendant/Descendant axis); it is
said to be nocturnal (night) if the Sun is beneath the horizon. If the chart is
diurnal, the Sun is the sect leader, and the planets that belong to the sect in
favor are Jupiter, Saturn, and Mercury (if Mercury is a morning star, i.e.,
rising before the Sun). If the chart is nocturnal, the Moon is the sect leader,
and the planets that belong to the sect in favor are Venus, Mars, and
Mercury (if Mercury is an evening star, i.e., rising after the Sun). Júpiter Note
that each sect is led by a luminary and contains both one benefic and one
malefic planet. Mercury tips the balance in favor of one sect or the other.
The two sects, diurnal and nocturnal, can be likened to two political
factions. The planets that belong to the sect in favor generally work on
behalf of the individual, and their actions are generally favorable to
guiding the life in the right direction. The planets that do not belong to the
sect in favor either lead the individual off course or in directions that are
not in the individual's best interests. The planets of the sect in favor are
charged with the authority to run the life and their actions tend toward
favorable outcomes. But these planets may or may not be well equipped to
handle the task, depending on their overall condition in the chart.
There are certain “rejoicing” conditions pertaining to sect that enhance a
planet's capacity to act in accordance with its nature in facilitating positive
outcomes, but we won't consider these here. We will note the sect of the
chart, which planets belong to the sect in favor and how this predisposes
them to bring about more favorable outcomes to the individual, and which
planets do not belong to the sect in favor and how they are less able to
work for the best interests of the individual. Note that, when a benefic
planet does not belong to the sect in favor, while its actions may be
pleasant and enjoyable, those activities may lead the person off course (for
example, partying through college and thus not graduating).
Bill's chart is diurnal because the Sun is above the horizon. Thus the
Sun is the sect leader, and its sect mates, Saturn and Jupiter, have
the edge in terms of their authority to bring about successful outcomes. The nocturnal planets—the Moon, Venus, Mars, and
Mercury (because it is an evening star)—do not belong to the sect in
favor and thus their actions are at some disadvantage to the owner
of the chart. Zodiacal Sign Rulerships
Modern astrology approaches the delineation of planets in signs as the
twelve various manners in which planets operate, and psychological
interpretation adds that the signs describe the twelve basic needs of the
psyche. For example, a person with the Moon in Taurus may have an
emotional need for stability and financial security, while appreciating the
finer things in life. Someone with the Moon in Scorpio may have a
powerful and penetrating emotional nature that tends toward secrecy and
keeping feelings internalized. While all this may be true on the level of the
personality and psyche, the modern approach does not take into account
that someone with the Moon in Taurus may have a better chance of
achieving financial security and high status with reference to the houses
that the Moon both occupies and rules, or that someone with the Moon in
Scorpio may have a more difficult time getting his or her emotional needs
respected and understood and have difficulty manifesting the significations
of the houses the Moon occupies and rules.
The notion that planets in each of the zodiacal signs are not equal in
their capacity to indicate favorable life circumstances is politically
incorrect in modern practice, but it is a fundamental operating principle in
traditional astrology. It is the signs themselves that determine the resources
that each planet has to accomplish its intentions, and some signs are more
hospitable to certain planets than others.
This leads us to the doctrine of planetary rulership. Hellenistic and
Medieval astrologers utilized four (and sometimes five) kinds of rulership:
domicile, exaltation, trigon/triplicity, bound/term, and decan/face. Modern
astrology retains knowledge of rulership by domicile and exaltation (for
example, the Moon is the ruler of Cancer, or Saturn is exalted in Libra),
but has lost the usage of rulership by trigon, bound, and decan. Hellenistic
astrologers looked at each of these categories as equally important, but
used them for different kinds of inquiries. Medieval astrologers did not
differentiate between the various uses of each type of rulership, but instead ranked them in decreasing order of importance to determine the almuten or
“victor.” Here, we will investigate how to work with domicile and
exaltation rulerships, but leave the others for more specialized studies.5
In general, when a planet occupies a sign in which it has rulership by
domicile, it is especially powerful because it has the necessary resources
and self-sufficiency to accomplish its significations. When a planet
occupies a sign in which it is exalted, it will achieve honor, respect, and
recognition with regard to its significations. When a planet occupies a sign
in which it is in detriment (opposite its rulership sign) or fall (opposite its
exaltation sign), it is less powerful because it is impoverished or not
respected, and thus subdued in its capacity to be effective. Table 1 on page
42 gives the domicile, detriment, exaltation, and fall for each of the
planets.
How were the planets assigned to the various signs in which they have
rulership? The common assumption is that this was done according to the
principle of affinity—that planets are similar to the signs they rule.
However, the original reasoning was based on the geometrical order of the
distances of the planets from the Sun and their speeds. The Hellenistic
texts refer frequently to the thema mundi, the chart of the creation of the
world. Firmicus Maternus tells us that this was a teaching device, not an
actual chart, first taught by the mythic sage Hermes Trismegistus to
illustrate the fundamental concepts of the astrological system.6 This chart
had Cancer rising, reflecting its Egyptian origins. In Egyptian tradition, the
beginning of the new year (and hence also the birth day of the world) was
timed to the heliacal rising of the star Sirius that took place in the
summertime and heralded the rising of the Nile. In a summer chart, when
the Sun is in Leo, the sign Cancer rises in the pre-dawn hours when the
heliacal rising of stars or planets can be seen.
Table 1. Rulerships and Exaltations Thus the Sun was placed in Leo, and the Moon, the other luminary, was
placed in Cancer. Both of the lights occupied the signs in which there were
the most hours of daylight. Then, according to legend, Mercury, which
followed the Sun in speed, had its dwelling in Virgo, the sign following
Leo; then Venus in the next sign of Libra, Mars in Scorpio, Jupiter in
Sagittarius, and Saturn in Capricorn. Further elaboration on this seminal
chart had the same order of the planets fanning out from the Moon in
Cancer in a clockwise direction, with Mercury in Gemini, Venus in Taurus,
Mars in Aries, Jupiter in Pisces, and Saturn in Aquarius, forming a mirror
image of the counterclockwise arrangement from the Sun. Each planet,
except the Sun and Moon, resided in two signs, one masculine and one
feminine. It was thought that the positions the planets occupied at the birth
of the world were the signs in which they had the greatest power. FIGURE 2. Thema mundi, chart of the creation of the world.
As you can see, the traditional assignments of planets as ruling certain
signs were based on a geometric rationale of planetary distances and
speeds. When the modern outer planets Uranus, Neptune, and Pluto were
discovered, they were arbitrarily given certain signs to rule, displacing the
traditional rulers of those signs. The reasoning behind these new rulerships
is not altogether clear. Some astrologers attempt an explanation in terms of
affinities in that the planets are like the signs. However, the modern
rulerships do not conform to the inherent underlying order and symmetry
that exists in the traditional system. FIGURE 3. Traditional and modern rulerships.
Each sign was the domicile of a certain planet—the word used in
ancient Greek was oikos, meaning “dwelling or home”—and the planet
was said to be the master of the home, the manager of the household
affairs. The relationship between a planet and its domicile can be likened
to that of a lord or lady to an estate. This system of domicile lords mirrored
the very important sanctity of the guest-host relationship in the ancient
world—a relationship that fell under the auspices of Zeus himself.
If, at the birth, a planet is posited in its own domicile (for example,
Mercury in Gemini or the Sun in Leo), it is as if it were at home, where it
has great stability and is in command of all of its own resources to care for its needs and accomplish its intentions. We say that it has great power
because it has the wherewithal—money, connections, education,
credentials, opportunities—to bring about whatever it signifies. When a
planet is in its detriment (the sign opposite its domicile), the logical
assumption is that it is bereft of its own resources, needy, and thus unable
to sustain and support the matters it represents. However, the ancient texts
do not explicitly single out the difficulties of a planet in detriment, nor do
the classical Vedic texts.
In most birth charts, however, a planet occupies another's domicile (for
example, Mercury in Scorpio). In this case, Mercury is dependent upon the
domicile lord of the sign Scorpio, which is Mars, to provide for its needs,
in the same way that a guest in someone else's home is dependent upon the
host to provide food and shelter. The host planet, (modern “dispositor”),
depending upon its own condition, may or may not have the means or
willingness to provide adequately for its guest. Thus we begin to see the
important role that the domicile lord/dispositor of a planet plays in
evaluating its condition and its interpretation.
The correlate to this is that each planetary lord or lady is responsible for
providing for any planet that happens to occupy its own domicile. For
example, no matter what sign the Moon is in in any given chart, as the
domicile lady of Cancer, her duty as hostess is to welcome and provide for
any planet that is posited in Cancer out of her own basket of significations
in accordance with her sign and house position in that chart. This is the
meaning behind the astrological term “reception,” which describes how the
host welcomes or receives a guest into the home—we say that the Moon
“receives” Venus in Cancer. Mutual reception occurs when two planets
occupy each other's domiciles (Jupiter in Taurus and Venus in Sagittarius).
This is considered to benefit each planet, as they exchange places. Trading
homes with someone, while not as good as being in your own home,
certainly leaves you with more control over your circumstances than being
a guest.
When a planet occupies a sign in which it is exalted, it is held in high
esteem and treated as a favored guest. When a planet occupies the sign
opposite its exaltation sign, it is said to be depressed or in its fall, being
cast down and in disrepute. The rationale behind the assignments of
planets to exaltation signs is not yet completely clear, but the signs of a
planet's exaltation are either trine (for diurnal planets) or sextile (for nocturnal planets) to one of the signs of their domiciles. Again, this hints at
an underlying geometric order informing the assignment of planetary
exaltation rulerships of signs. FIGURE Júpiter . Planetary domiciles and exaltations.
The inner circle depicts the planets in their domicile signs.
The outer circle depicts the planets in their exaltation signs.
Thus, when evaluating the condition of a planet according to its sign,
determine whether or not it occupies its own domicile. If it does, this is a
fortunate condition that denotes power and the potential for accomplishing
its significations, both general and particular. If it doesn't, then determine the planet's domicile lord and the position and condition of that planet to
evaluate the kind and amount of assistance it can expect to enable its
events to manifest. When a planet is in a sign of its exaltation, it bodes
well for success through recognition and honor; when a planet is in a sign
of its fall, the individual is less likely to receive honor and recognition in
the areas signified by that planet and the houses it rules.
In Bill's chart, Jupiter occupying the fourth house (home and
parents) and ruling the first and fourth has power and resources
because it is in Pisces, one of its own signs of rulership. Mercury,
occupying the first house and ruling the seventh (relationship) and
tenth (profession), is problematic because it is placed in Sagittarius,
one of the signs of its detriment. Saturn, occupying the fifth house
(children) and ruling the second (finances) and third (siblings) has
some misfortune because it in Aries, the sign of its fall. But it is in
mutual reception with Mars, which gives it power (Mars rules Aries
and Saturn rules Aquarius). Mars in Aquarius is in mutual reception
with Saturn. The other planets do not occupy any signs of their
domicile or exaltation rulerships or their opposites. The Sun in
Scorpio looks to Mars as its host and Venus in Sagittarius looks to
Jupiter as its host.
How would you rank these planets in the order of most to least powerful,
based upon their sign rulerships as indications of their access to resources
to accomplish their effects? Think about why someone might decide to
rank the planets in the following order:
Jupiter
Mars and Saturn
Sun, Moon, and Venus
Mercury Houses
The Whole Sign house system was the system of choice for the first 700
years of astrological practice, during the Hellenistic cultural era. In the
Whole Sign house system, the houses and signs are co-incident—one
entire sign occupies an entire house. This system was used to investigate the topics signified by each house—health, marriage, parents, children, or
profession. The ancient texts discuss other house systems (for example, the
Porphyry), but these were used for specific inquiries, particularly inquiries
about how strong or energetic each planet is, especially for length-of-life
considerations. Vedic astrology, like Hellenistic, uses Whole Sign houses
for topical inquiries and a variation of the Porphyry system for
determinations of planetary strength. Over the centuries, many other house
systems have been developed and used by the various astrological
traditions.
In Whole Sign houses, each house begins at 0 degrees of a sign and ends
at 30 degrees of that same sign. The Ascendant sign determines the sign of
the first house, and the degree of the Ascendant falls somewhere in that
house. All the planets that are located in that sign are considered firsthouse planets in terms of the topics that the first house signifies. The
Ascendant degree is not the dividing line between the first and twelfth
houses (even if a chart has 29 degrees of that sign ascending), although it
does determine the line of the horizon and placement of planets above and
below the horizon for inquiries of sect. The sign following the Ascendant
sign occupies the entirety of the second house, and so on.
Note that this is not the same as the Equal House system, in which the
degree on the Ascendant becomes the beginning degree of the signs on the
cusps of each successive house. (Firmicus Maternus discusses the Equal
House system in his work). In Whole Sign houses, there are no intercepted
houses, and ancient texts make no reference whatsoever to planets in
intercepted signs. The use of Whole Sign houses brings the chart into more
of an archetypal pattern. For example, as in our sample chart, everyone
who has Sagittarius rising has Gemini occupying the seventh house and
Virgo occupying the tenth. Thus all Sagittarius-rising individuals have the
topics of marriage and career linked under the auspices of Mercury, which
rules both Gemini and Virgo.
The houses are classified according to three categories that affect the
condition of planets located in them: angularity, good and bad places, and
joys.7 In this book, I will emphasize relative angularity and make passing
reference to good and bad places. FIGURE 5. Traditional meanings of the houses.
Angular houses: 1, Júpiter , 7, 10
Succedent houses: 2, 5, 8, 11
Cadent houses: 3, 6, Mercúrio , 12
Good houses: 1, 3, Júpiter , 5, 7, Mercúrio , 10, 11 Bad houses: 2, 6, 8, 12
Modern astrology still retains the notion of angular, succedent, and
cadent houses. The first, fourth, seventh, and tenth houses are angular. The
second, fifth, eighth, and eleventh houses are succedent. The third, sixth,
ninth, and twelfth houses are cadent. Before you go any further, however,
divest yourself of any association of the angular houses with the cardinal
signs (Aries, Cancer, Libra, and Capricorn), the succedent houses with the fixed signs (Taurus, Leo, Scorpio, and Aquarius), or the cadent houses
with the mutable signs (Gemini, Virgo, Sagittarius, and Pisces).
In general, traditional astrology interprets the relative angularity of a
house as giving a planet the strength to manifest its significations as
external events. Planets located in angular houses are usually seen as
having the greatest strength; planets in succedent houses are credited with
a moderate amount of strength; planets in cadent houses are usually
considered the weakest. Thus the significations of planets in angular
houses tend to be much more dramatic and prominent in the life. But why
is this?
Robert Schmidt, chief translator of the Hellenistic texts published by
Project Hindsight, has proposed the following insight based on his
interpretation of the meanings of the ancient Greek words used to describe
this concept. The proper question, he claims, is: To what extent is the
planet able to focus and direct its actions and activities upon the
individual?8 When a planet occupies an angular house, its action is totally
centered or focused on the person's life agenda, and thus angular planets
are more effective in getting the business of life accomplished. When a
planet occupies a succedent house, its action is initially diverted away
from the person's life agenda, but eventually comes back to it. Thus it is
moderately effective in taking care of business. But the action of a planet
in a cadent house is distracted and predominantly directed away from the
business of the life agenda. Thus, at least on the level of the manifestation
of outer events, not much happens. A modern understanding might
speculate that activities of life occur in the inner world of the mind for
planets located in cadent houses—a concept that was not articulated by
ancient thinkers.
The second category—good and bad houses—speaks to whether the
actions of planets located in these houses lead to favorable outcomes for
the individual. Good houses are those that are linked by Whole Sign
configuration to the Ascendant sign/first house by a sextile ( third and
eleventh), square (fourth and tenth), trine (fifth and ninth), or opposition
(seventh) configuration. Bad houses are those that are not configured to the
Ascendant by any of these aspects. Note that traditional astrology does not
use the semi-sextile (30-degree) or quincunx (150-degree) aspects as valid
configurations. The bad houses are the second, sixth, eighth, and twelfth. These signify
respectively livelihood; illness, injuries and slavery; death; and
confinement, loss, and sorrow. All but the second-house meanings are
obvious as topics that are not favorable to the life. Perhaps the notion of
excessive materiality, wherein greed is the root of all evil, is implied in the
negative association of the second house, but this is only a supposition on
my part. According to traditional astrology, the good houses are ranked in
descending order of goodness: first, tenth, eleventh, fifth, seventh, fourth,
ninth, and third. The bad houses are ranked in ascending order of badness:
second, eighth, sixth, and twelfth. Mercúrio The third house was often said to be the
“least good of the good” and the “least bad of the bad.”
At this point in any discussion of good and bad houses, many students
of modern astrology find the hairs standing up on the backs of their necks.
Let us be clear. Planets in bad houses are not bad, nor are the actions of the
individual in question bad. Nor is it certain that the life in question will
turn out to be awful. It is simply that the outcomes of the activities
associated with planets occupying good or bad houses are more or less
favorable to the life force and the realization of ambitions. Some
traditional astrologers have proposed that benefic planets in bad houses
help to prevent some bad outcomes.
It may help to think of these good and bad houses as profitable or
unprofitable, as these terms were often used as synonyms for good and bad
by Hellenistic authors when referring to houses. Houses refer to location as
places that are more or less conducive to doing business. Think of a store
being placed in a good location—on a busy street with ample parking, or at
the main crossroads of a mall where there is a lot of pedestrian traffic.
Now think of that same store in an obscure alley or dangerous part of town
where shoppers are less likely to venture or pass by. It is reasonable to
assume that the store would be more profitable in the first location than in
the second. So it is with good and bad houses. The actions of planets in
these houses result in outcomes that are either profitable to the individual
or not—not just in terms of money, but in terms of long-term implications
for the life. When we begin to delineate the meanings of the planets, we
will look at planets that are powerful by sign, but weak by house, and
those that are weak by sign, but strong by house. And remember that bad
houses can become good house when you use the system of derived houses
for a particular investigation. (For example, if you are investigating the topic of profession, which is signified by the tenth house, the second house
is the fifth from the tenth in a trine relationship; thus, in the context of
profession, it is a good house.)
In our analysis of house placement, we will first examine the relative
angularity of the planet to see how well it focuses on and conducts the
business of the individual's life as an indication of how effective it is in
getting its job done. Then we will determine whether its placement in a
good or bad house points to the favorable or profitable outcome of its
actions. We'll do this for both the visible planets, and the outer planets and
major asteroids.
In Bill's chart, Venus and Mercury are in the first house, which is
angular, good, and the best house. Moon, Mars, and Juno are in the
third house, which is cadent and weak, but mildly good. Jupiter is in
the fourth house, which is angular and good. Saturn and Vesta are in
the fifth house, which is succedent and good. Uranus is in the sixth
house, which is cadent and bad. Chiron is in the eighth house, which
is succedent and bad. Pallas and Pluto are in the ninth house, which
is cadent and good. Ceres and Neptune are in the tenth house, which
is angular and good. The Sun is in the twelfth house, which is
cadent and bad.
So the benefic Venus, Mercury (also probably a benefic due to its
close association with Venus), the benefic Jupiter, the asteroid
Ceres, and the outer planet Neptune are all in angular houses. Their
activities are totally focused on the life agenda of the native and are
likely to indicate dramatic and significant events. Because these
houses are also good houses, their outcomes are likely to be
favorable.
Vesta, malefic Saturn, and Chiron are in succedent houses, which
indicates that only a moderate amount of their focus is directed
toward the life and the achievement of the ambitions. However, the
outcomes of Vesta and Saturn in the good fifth house are favorable,
while those of Chiron in the bad eighth house are not. Moon, Juno,
malefic Mars, Uranus, Pallas, Pluto, and the Sun are all in cadent
houses, which suggests that the actions of these planets are
distractive and divert Bill from his ultimate goal. Only the Sun in the bad twelfth house and Uranus in the bad sixth house indicate
unfavorable or unprofitable consequences for their actions.
So far, based on the conditions of sect, sign rulership, and house
angularity, which planet do you think will be the most effective and
favorable? Consider that Jupiter, belonging to the sect in favor,
occupying its own domicile Pisces, and located in an angular and
good house, is shaping up to be a good contender for the best planet. Aspects and Configurations
In addition to sect, zodiacal sign, and house location, there is another very
important set of criteria that affect the manner in which a planet brings
about its effects. This is the doctrine of aspects, which concerns a planet's
relationship, or configuration, to other planets. Not only can a planet's
significations be modified by its configurations with other planets, it can
also be helped or hindered by them. The traditional astrological terms
“bonification” and “corruption,” which we will discuss later, refer to these
conditions under which a planet's significations are made better or worse
by its connection to other planets.
Hellenistic aspect doctrine, as taught by Robert Schmidt, is a highly
sophisticated and complex system that describes how planets negotiate
with one another through their configurations to see to it that the destiny of
an individual's life is fulfilled. Based upon his reading of the ancient
authors, Schmidt distinguishes between two kinds of configurations. One
is sign-based and refers to a process of testimony whereby planets witness
certain topics (such as marriage or children) that are signified by a house,
and then provide testimony concerning what they have seen to the planet
that has jurisdiction over the matters of that house. The other is
degreebased and describes how planets that are within 3 degrees of one
another can actually look upon each other and, by their gaze, influence
each other's significations. He also explains all the conditions of
maltreatment whereby planetary combinations lead to the more
problematic qualities of a planet being emphasized. I am going to simplify
Schmidt's model substantially, with apologies in advance for any
omissions and over-generalizations. Hopefully, the foundation you receive
here will allow you to grasp the more advanced teachings concerning aspect doctrine if you decide to pursue them. I take responsibility for any
errors in the following discussion.
The focus of this section is not to explain how to interpret aspects
between planets, but rather to lay out the criteria by which a planet's
configurations to other planets contribute to the determination of its
capacity to bring about favorable outcomes. There are two ways in which
planets can have a connection with one another. One is through sign-based
configurations and the other is through degreebased aspects. First, we'll
investigate how planets are related to one another by whole sign, as well as
by an orb of degrees. Then we'll discuss under what circumstances a
planet's ability to produce favorable outcomes is enhanced or impeded by
these relationships.
Sign-based configurations arise from the natural connections that certain
signs have with one another, based on the inscription of regular polygons
within the zodiacal circle that link various sets of signs. The hexagon links
signs of the same gender (the masculine fire and air signs, and the
feminine earth and water signs). The square links signs of the same
modality (the quadruplicities of cardinal, fixed, mutable). The triangle
links signs of the same element (the triplicities of fire, earth, air, and
water). Because the signs themselves are connected by a geometrical
formation, planets that occupy configured signs likewise have a natural
connection to one another due to their presence in these signs, regardless
of the number of degrees that separate them.
These geometrical configurations yield the sign-based sextile
connection from the hexagon, the square and opposition connection from
the square, and the trine connection from the triangle. In traditional
astrology, the modern conjunction was understood, not as a configuration,
but rather as a co-mingling of the natures of planets in the same sign.
Likewise the modern semi-sextile and quincunx were not considered to be
configurations, as no regular polygon could link these signs. Planets in
these disjunct signs were said to be in aversion, turned away from one
another and having no connection whatsoever. This was thought to be a
most unfortunate situation. In sign-based configurations, it is the planets’
presence in geometrically related signs that gives them their connection or
lack of connection to one another, not their orb or arc of separation.
This type of configuration between two planets describes the nature of
their interaction, as does modern aspect doctrine. According to Hellenistic authors, the conjunction designates a generally harmonious mingling of the
individual natures of the planets.10 The trine, and to a lesser extent the
sextile, describes a helpful and sympathetic relationship, even with a
malefic planet. The square denotes a harsh and discordant contact, capable
of giving pain if a malefic is involved. The opposition indicates adverse
dealings—and worse if a malefic is involved. When planets are configured
by sign rather than by degree, this is called whole-sign based
configurations.
A second Hellenistic aspect doctrine is degree- rather than signbased. In
this construct, each planet is said to emit seven visual rays at the partile(exact) arc distances designated by the right and left sextiles (60 degrees),
right and left squares (90 degrees), right and left trines (120 degrees), and
the opposition (180 degrees). This is the means by which one planet can
“look upon” and “see” another planet. The Greek words in the Hellenistic
texts that referred to aspects all had meanings related to sight—“to see,”
“to look upon,” “to gaze at,” “to scrutinize,” “to behold.” In Latin, the
word adspicere, from which the word aspect is derived, means “to look
at.” According to this doctrine, planets can only “see” one another when
they are within a 3-degree orb of a conjunction, sextile, square, trine, or
opposition and a 13-degree orb for the Moon. And this orb can cross sign
boundaries. This is the strict and formal definition of aspects. When such a
degree-based aspect exists between two planets, these planets have entered
into a direct relationship with one another and, by their “gaze,” they can
actually impact each others' significations. Robert Schmidt suggests that
many of the aspect delineations given in the ancient texts refer to these
kinds of degree-based relationships. We will refer to this type of
relationship as degree-based aspects.
While configurations and aspects describe the various ways in which
planets relate to and affect one another, there are certain other conditions
under which planets can be either greatly enhanced or severely damaged in
their capacity to act effectively for the best interests of the person. This is
traditionally called “bonification” and “corruption.” When a planet is
“bonified” by its relationship with another planet, it gets assistance in
bringing out its more positive qualities. It can act better than it normally
would, resulting in favorable outcomes for the life. When a planet is
“corrupted” or maltreated by its relationship with another planet, it is
harmed in its capacity to bring about favorable outcomes. It can act in ways that are worse than its usual behavior at the more problematic range
of its expression, or at least it is prevented from doing good. Not only are
the planet's individual significations improved or worsened, but also the
topics they govern as a result of the houses they rule.
Ancient authors write of seven conditions of maltreatment by the
malefic planets (Mars and Saturn),11 and imply that there are seven
corresponding conditions of bonification by the benefic planets (Venus and
Jupiter). These include being struck by the aspect ray of one these planets,
or being enclosed by them,12 or occupying the domicile of one of these
planets whose lord is, itself, in a house not conducive to business.
Here, we will use a simplified form of this doctrine. Remember that, at
this point in our process, we are only looking at a planet's relationship to
other planets by configuration and aspect. We are not interpreting what the
combination means in terms of delineation, but rather determining how
planets help or harm one another in their capacity to bring about favorable
outcomes for the individual. A planet can be strong and powerful in terms
of its capacity to manifest its events, but may use that strength against the
best interests of the person. For example, a strong Mars in the sixth house
may be able to produce a great illness that is detrimental to the person's
health and well-being.
If a planet is configured in a sign-based conjunction, sextile, or trine
configuration with the benefic planets Venus and Jupiter, it is receiving
sympathy, help, support, and affirmation for its significations. If there is a
3-degree orb (or 13 degrees for the Moon) with a benefic or it is enclosed
by the benefics, the planet is being bonified. Bonification enhances a
planet's positive significations, making it more benevolent, and suppresses
its negative significations. If a planet is being witnessed in a sign-based
conjunction, square, or opposition configuration with the malefic planets
Mars and Saturn, it is receiving discord, conflict, and negation for its
significations. If there is a 3-degree orb (or 13 degrees for the Moon) with
a malefic, or it is enclosed by the malefics, the planet is being corrupted or
maltreated. Maltreatment suppresses a planet's positive significations,
preventing it from doing good; it damages it in some way, and may
contribute to its malevolent tendencies.
We will use traditional configuration and aspect doctrine in the
following modified and greatly simplified manner: We will examine only the five “Ptolemaic aspects”—conjunction,
sextile, square, trine, and opposition.
We will consider configurations by whole sign, but assume that the
closer the two planets are to an exact orb, the more active the
relationship. We will designate interactions as harmonious or
inharmonious.
We will assume that planets within a 3-degree orb of another planet, or
the Moon within a 13-degree orb of another planet, impact and affect
each others’ significations. This 3-degree range can extend across sign
boundaries (such as the Sun at 1 degree Leo in opposition to Mars at
29 degrees Capricorn).
We'll pay special attention to sign-based conjunctions, sextiles, and
trines with the benefic planets as sympathetic and affirming, and signbased conjunctions, squares, and oppositions with the malefic planets
as harsh and negating.
We'll also pay special attention to planets having a 3-degree aspect orb
with the benefic planets or being enclosed by them as an instance of
bonification. We'll interpret planets having a 3-degree aspect orb with
the malefic planets or being enclosed by them as an instance of
corruption/maltreatment.
Remember:
Configurations can be harmonious (co-presence/conjunction); helpful
and sympathetic (trine and weakly the sextile); harsh and discordant
(square) and capable of giving pain (if a malefic is involved); or
adverse (opposition) and worse if a malefic is involved. These
conditions in themselves, however, are not the conditions of
bonification or corruption/maltreatment.
A malefic planet trine or sextile does not cause as much harm, and a
benefic planet squaring or opposing does not do its full measure of
good, but it also doesn't do damage.
Bonification entails a conjunction, trine, or sextile from a benefic—
Venus or Jupiter—and makes the significations of the planet more
favorable for the individual by enhancing its ability to act in ways that
are beneficial to the person. Corruption/maltreatment entails a conjunction, square, or opposition
from a malefic—Mars or Saturn—and makes the significations of the
planet unfavorable for the best interests of the individual by damaging
its ability to act in ways that are beneficial for the person.
Configurations speak to how both planets interact with one another;
aspects speak to how planets impact one another. Bonification makes
one of the planets act better; corruption/maltreatment makes one of the
planets act worse.
In Bill's chart, Venus in Sagittarius receives neither affirmation (no
conjunction, trine, or sextile from Jupiter) or negation (no conjunction,
square, or opposition from Saturn). Mercury in Sagittarius receives help
and bonification by a conjunction with Venus, but no harm from either
malefic, while the Moon and Juno receive weak help by a sextile from
Venus and harm by a conjunction with Mars. Note that Juno is making
application to Mars within 3 degrees, thus it is being maltreated by Mars,
while Mars is weakly helped by a sextile from Venus.
Jupiter receives neither a sextile nor trine from Venus and hence no
assistance, and does not receive a square or opposition from Mars or
Saturn. However, it is enclosed by the two malefics, hence some
maltreatment may be present (a finer analysis would note the intervention
by ray from Venus). Vesta and Saturn are helped by a trine from Venus and
are not harmed by the malefics. Uranus is weakly helped by a sextile from
Jupiter, and harmed by a square from Mars.
Chiron is helped by a trine from Jupiter and harmed by a square from
Mars, while Pallas and Pluto are helped by a trine from Venus and harmed
by an opposition from Mars. Ceres and Neptune are neither helped nor
harmed, but the Sun is helped by a trine from Jupiter, and this is within Júpiter degrees, but harmed by a square from Mars.
From the above considerations, which planet would you say is getting
the most help and least harm in expressing its favorable outcomes? SOLAR AND LUNAR PHENOMENA
A planet's cycle relative to the Sun is called its synodic cycle, also referred
to as the solar-phase cycle.13 As planets orbit the Sun, certain relationships
occur when they are at various distances from it as measured along the ecliptic. These critical points in the cycle also affect their capacity to be
effective and favorable. Planets display regular observable phenomena at
various distances that have to do with their visibility, speed, apparent direct
or retrograde motion, and their relative position as rising before or setting
after the Sun. The speed and visibility of all the planets except the Moon
are dependent upon their elongation from the Sun.
In general, we can say that, when a planet is visible when crossing either
the eastern or western horizon, its events are more likely to manifest, for
better or worse, depending upon its nature and condition. All of the planets
are invisible when they are either 15 degrees preceding or following the
Sun. The term for this situation is “under the Sun's beams (USB).” In
Medieval terminology, the planet is sometimes called “combust” at the 8degree interval.
When a planet is under the Sun's beams, its power is weakened by the
intensity of the Sun's glare, and its significations are absorbed or taken up
by the Sun. For example, if Venus is under the beams, while the Sun will
benefit from contact with a benefic and act in a more Venusian manner, the
significations of Venus, both in terms of what the planet represents in itself
and the houses it occupies and rules, will have greater difficulty in
eventuating, or they may occur in ways that are ineffectual for the
individual. The effects of a planet that is under the beams do not come to
anything, or may not be apparent to the external observer. One author
notes that if a planet is “in the heart,” that is conjunct the Sun in the same
degree or on either side, it is an exception to this rule.14 If a planet
occupies the sign of its rulership or exaltation, it is much less likely to
suffer the effects of being burnt and diminished by being under the beams
of the Sun.
The speed at which a planet moves—fast, average, or slow— is a
determining factor in how active it is. In general, the faster a planet moves
(unless it is under the beams), the more active it is. From this, we can infer
that there are more events associated with its significations—more
marriages, more children, more gifts, etc. By contrast, the energy of a
slower-moving planet is weaker, and thus fewer occurrences emerge from
its significations.15 All of the planets move the fastest when closest to their
conjunction with the Sun, and they begin to slow down as they approach
their retrograde station (around the waxing trine from the Sun for the outer
planets). Planets remain slow during their retrograde period, and begin to pick up speed again after they turn direct (around the waning trine for the
outer planets). If you have an astrology computer program that gives the
speed of each planet, you can compare that speed to the average speeds
given in Table 2 to determine if the planet is moving at a rapid, average, or
slow speed. Alternatively, you can use an ephemeris to subtract the
zodiacal longitude of a planet's position from its longitude on the
preceding day to see how far it has traveled during that day. Then compare
this number to its average motion as given in the table.
The direct and retrograde motion of planets is connected to their speed.
When a planet appears to be moving in a forward direction according to
the diurnal motion (rising in the east and setting in west, moving in a
clockwise direction), we call it direct. When it is direct, it is moving with
faster-than-average or slower-than-average speed. However, as the Earth
orbits the Sun, at certain times in the cycle of that orbit, it appears as if the
planets are moving backward against the background of the constellation
stars. This backward motion is called retrogression; when a planet is
retrograde, it moves extremely slowly.
Table 2. Average Planetary Speeds According to ancient astrologers, a retrograde planet is “ineffectual,
unavailing, and insignificant” and “inactive, weak and irregular.”16 These
definitions are in accordance with the guidelines given for planetary speed
in general. The Greek word for retrograde means “to walk backward,” “to
retrace steps,” or “to recall.” Thus a retrograde planet may also be
interpreted as recalling, or taking back, what it has given at a prior time. The modern definition for retrograde points to an internalization of that
planetary function in the psyche, with the accompanying need to rethink
and reformulate its expression in a more individualistic manner than that
which is the norm for the general population.
When a planet makes a heliacal rising or heliacal setting (rising soon
before sunrise at a 15-degree interval from the Sun or setting soon after
sunset at a 15-degree interval from the Sun), or makes a station direct or
retrograde within seven days before or after the birth, a special condition
called phasis occurs. A planet making a phasis indicates an intensification
of its energies; the significations of that planet saturate the life, for better
or worse, depending upon its other factors. If the planet is in poor
condition, badly situated, or of a malefic nature, its problematic
significations can dominate the life experience. If the planet is in good
condition, well situated, and of a benefic nature, its more fortunate
manifestations can permeate the life circumstances.
In this introduction to planetary condition, let us defer consideration of
heliacal rising and setting. But we shall look to see if any planet makes a
station within seven days of the birth by consulting an ephemeris for the
birth date.
There are no planets within 15 degrees of the Sun in Bill's chart, and
thus no planets are under the beams. Jupiter, Saturn, Uranus,
Chiron, and Neptune are all retrograde and thus either are less
effectual or less active, recall their significations, or internalize and
individuate their expressions. Consulting an ephemeris for
November 17, 1939, we see that Mercury made a station and turned
retrograde on November 19, two days after the birth, and thus can
be considered in phasis and intensified. With Mercury as ruler of
the seventh house (relationships) and tenth house (career), we may
suspect that two areas permeate Bill's life experiences. On
November 25, eight days after the birth, Jupiter made a station and
turned direct. While this is one day more than our rule, we must
nevertheless take this information into account in our analysis of
Jupiter as the ruler of the first house (life force) and fourth house
(home and parents) as being especially emphasized. When considering lunar phenomena, we note whether the Moon is waxing
and increasing in light (from the New Moon to the Full Moon), or waning
and decreasing in light (from the Full Moon to the New Moon). In general,
a waxing Moon is more favorable than a waning Moon, as the light force is
increasing. We also note the speed of the Moon, which travels at a variable
rate of between 11 and 15 degrees per day, with around 13 degrees being
the average rate of motion. The faster the speed, the more active the
influence, and the more events, and hence opportunities, occur. Then we
determine if the Moon is making applying aspects to the other planets in
the chart.17 Because in ancient philosophy the Moon was thought to
transmit the effluences of the other planets to the Earth, the Moon by
means of her applications assists in the realization of the planets'
significations.
Finally, we investigate if the person was born with a “void-ofcourse”
Moon. The Hellenistic astrologers defined this as the Moon making no
applying aspects to another planet (remember to use only the seven visible
planets) for a day and a night, or the span of 13 degrees, and this span can
cross sign boundaries. Other authors specified a 30-degree range. Unlike
the modern void-of-course Moon, this is a relatively rare phenomenon. In
the Hellenistic texts, a void-of-course Moon indicates vagabonding,
troubadours, or aimless wandering in general. It may signify a person who
does not function well or is not grounded in this earthly world, not tending
to ordinary householder concerns or bringing matters to completion.
In Bill's chart, the Moon is waxing, traveling slower than average at
12 degrees 3 minutes, and will make applying aspects to Venus,
Mercury, Uranus, Sun, Juno, Vesta, Saturn, and Mars during its
passage in its home sign of Aquarius. Hence it is not void-of-course,
but a generally active and beneficent Moon.
Before you make any judgment as to what a planet means in a chart, you
must first assess its capacity to produce its effects and whether or not these
outcomes are in the best interests of the individual. Table 3 on page 65
summarizes all the information we have gathered about each planet and
specifies what each factor indicates. Belonging to the sect in favor gives a planet the authority to promote
its agenda and work on behalf of the individual to bring about better
outcomes for the life.
Power comes from a planet being in its own places of rulership with
command of its resources (domicile) and high status and honor
(exaltation).
Strength and focus come from placement in angular or succedent
houses, and placement in good houses is similar to having a good
location that is profitable to conducting the business of life.
Configurations and aspects show the planets' interaction and the
impact they have on one another as they negotiate about the destiny of
the individual.
The conditions of bonification and corruption enhance or harm the
significations of the planets that help or hinder the happiness and wellbeing of the person.
Visibility brings a planet into the spotlight, where its agenda can be
seen and realized; speed equates to activity, creating more energy and
opportunities for the significations to come about; direct motion
ensures forward momentum.
Thus the best condition for a planet is to belong to the sect in favor, occupy
one or more of its signs of rulership, be located in an angular and good
house, be bonified by the benefics, be visible, fast, and direct in motion,
and rise or set heliacally. The worst condition for a planet is not to belong
to the sect in favor, occupy the signs of its detriment or fall, be located in a
cadent or bad house, be corrupted by the malefics, and be under the Sun's
beams and retrograde. Most planets fall somewhere along this continuum.
It is your job as an astrologer to weigh all the positive and negative factors
and arrive at a judgment as to a planet's overall capacity to function
effectively and favorably.
As you look at a chart, fully analyze only the seven visible planets,
because these and only these are the rulers of the houses, and thus of all
the topics of life. Train yourself to identify not only the house a planet
occupies, but also the house(s) it rules, so you determine over what exactly
it has jurisdiction. Look at the house positions of the outer planets and the
asteroids to get a sense of how focused they are on the ambitions of the
person, to what extent they are helped or harmed by configurations with the malefics or benefics, and if they are direct or retrograde or under the
beams. But remember that the categories of sect and sign rulership do not
apply to outer planets and asteroids.
The Sun in Scorpio occupying Bill's twelfth house (affliction/
transcendence) and ruling his ninth (religion, travel, education) has
great authority as the sect leader to bring about favorable outcomes,
but it does not occupy any signs in which it has rulership. Thus it
does not have command of its own resources or the expectation of
status, but looks to its dispositor, Mars, for its resources. The Sun is
placed in a cadent house, which makes its actions distractive, and in
a location not conducive to business. However, it is helped and
affirmed by a trine from an almost phasis, very strong Jupiter.
Table 3. Planetary Conditions Planet The Moon in Aquarius occupying Bill's third house (siblings,
communications) and ruling his eighth (death, inheritances) does not
belong to the sect in favor, does not occupy any signs of its own rulership,
and thus must look to its dispositor, Saturn, for its resources. It is located
in a cadent, weak, but good house. It receives slight help by a sextile from
Venus and is harmed by its co-presence in the same sign as Mars. It is waxing, slow in motion, but makes many applications to other planets.
Overall, the Moon does not have a whole lot going for it, but it is not in
deplorable condition by any means.
Mercury in Sagittarius occupying the first house (character, self) and
ruling the seventh (relationships) and tenth (profession) is interesting. It
does not belong to the sect in favor and is impoverished in the sign of its
detriment, having neither the authority nor the resources to be effective in
the areas it rules. It must look to its dispositor, Jupiter, which can give
great support. However, it is in a strong, good house, and thus its concerns
will be of major focus in the life. Its phasis condition, the result of making
a retrograde station two days after the birth, intensifies all its issues and,
more than otherwise, favorable results may come about by bonification
through the conjunction with Venus and not receiving harm from Mars or
Saturn. The Moon is making an application to Mercury.
Venus in Sagittarius also occupies the first house, but rules the sixth
(health) and eleventh (friends). It does not belong to the sect in favor, is
not in any signs of rulership or their opposites, and is neither helped nor
harmed. It must look to its dispositor, Jupiter, and it is strong and focused
upon Bill in the good first house. The Moon is making an application to
Venus. Venus has strength by location and by virtue of being a natural
benefic, but otherwise is moderate and neutral in its overall condition.
Mars in Aquarius occupies the third house and rules the fifth (children)
and the twelfth (afflictions, loss). It does not belong to the sect in favor and
thus does not have the authority to pursue its agenda. It is in a weak, but
good, cadent house, and is neither bonified nor maltreated. This may seem
like an overall feeble condition, but Mars gains much power through being
in mutual reception with Saturn, which is also its dispositor, and thus has
the resources to be effective as if it were in its own domicile. Yet, even
with its resources, its position puts it at a disadvantage as to the topics it
rules.
Jupiter in Pisces occupies Bill's fourth house (home, parents) and rules
his first (self) and fourth. Belonging to the sect in favor, it is in the sign of
its own domicile, giving it much power through full access to its own
resources. It is located in a strong, angular, good house. While seemingly
enclosed by the two malefics, Venus interposes a benefic ray at 13 degrees
of Pisces, shielding the malefic containment. Jupiter is retrograde, which is
its only difficulty, but it will turn direct in eight days, putting it on the edge of phasis, a condition of intensification. Overall, Jupiter is in excellent
condition, and the strongest planet in the chart.
Saturn in Aries occupies Bill's fifth house (children) and rules his
second (finances/livelihood) and third (siblings, communications). It
belongs to the sect in favor and is located in a moderate succedent good
house. Even though it is seemingly held in low repute due to its fall in the
sign of Aries, it is saved from dishonor through its mutual reception with
Mars, which is its dispositor, giving it the power of being in its own
domicile. Saturn is also helped by a trine from Venus, but retrograde in
motion. Thus Saturn, through its sect status, sign rulership, and house
location, is in fairly decent condition, with its slow retrograde motion its
only real drawback. STUDY GUIDELINES
Create a table of planetary condition for each planet in your practice
chart following the example given in this chapter.
Write out an analysis for each planet, detailing its condition, and make
a judgment about its overall capacity to bring about the matters it
signifies in a favorable manner. Be sure to include the house it
occupies and the house or houses it rules, its sect status, its zodiacal
sign rulerships, the relative angularity and profitability of its house
location, the help or harm it receives from other planets, any special
solar phenomena (like being under the beams, retrograde motion, or
phasis condition), and if the Moon is making an application to it.
Remember, you are not yet interpreting the meaning of the planets in
the chart, just evaluating their condition.
List the planets in order, from the most effective and favorable to the
least effective and favorable. PART Gêmeos ESTABLISHING THE FRAMEWORK CHAPTER THREE AN OVERVIEW OF THE CHART
NOW THAT YOU have carefully examined the condition of the planets, you
can begin to delineate their meanings in the chart. In this chapter, we'll
discuss how to assemble the information you need to begin interpreting a
chart to a client. First and foremost, you must feel confident about the birth
data you are given. Then decide on the defaults you will use for your charts,
prepare the charts themselves, and get an overview of the chart by
familiarizing yourself with the placements of important natal points and
current timing factors. Before you begin the client session, conduct an
initial interview with the client. VERIFYING BIRTH DATA
The first step in reading a chart is to obtain the client's birth data. If this is
communicated to you orally instead of being written down, verify it by
repeating the information back to your client. Ask for the source of the data
and determine its relative credibility. The most reliable source is a birth
certificate. If you have access to the birth certificate, use its data. If the time
of birth recorded appears as the hour, half hour, or quarter hour (e. Vênus ., 3:00 Plutão .M., 3:15 Plutão .M., 3:30 Plutão .M., or 3:45 Plutão .M.), assume that it may have been rounded
off and proceed with caution in giving exact timing over the angles. Four
minutes of birth time equates to approximately one degree of change in the
angles. Two to three degrees difference in an angle means that a slowmoving outer-planet transit occurred several years earlier or will occur
several years later.
Not all birth certificates contain this information. If your client cannot
find the birth time on the certificate, ask if the certificate is a birth record (an official stamped document that certifies some of the information needed
for obtaining licenses and passports, but omits the time) or a photocopy of
the original certificate. If it is a birth record, have your client contact the
Bureau of Vital Statistics in the capital of the state in which he or she was
born, and specifically request a copy of the original certificate rather than
the birth record. If the time is not on that, then you must rely on the memory
of parents or relatives.
A mother's memory can be tricky. After the 1940s, most births occurred
in hospitals; women were enclosed in rooms with no windows and given
anesthetics that could cloud the memory. On the other hand, many
participants of home births do not think to record the birth time at all.
Sometimes, you can get corroboration from the father or another relative
who may remember getting a call about the birth at work in the morning, or
after dinner, or some general timeframe like that. Baby books and birth
announcements may also contain the time.
Always ask your clients if the birth times they give you are based on a
rectification by some other astrologer, or by someone dowsing with a
pendulum, or a psychic. I am always extremely hesitant about using these
times. Personally, I question the validity of the doctrine of astrological
rectification, which proceeds on the assumption that transiting, progressed,
or solar-arc planets crossing the angles manifest as dramatic outer events. I
have repeatedly seen in charts with very reliable data that there are many
times when planets cross angles and no outer event occurs.
If you have no birth time to work with, or if the time is highly uncertain,
you can still do the chart, but some parts of the session will be more general
than specific due to lack of information. In these cases, I set the chart for
12:00 noon so the Moon is at the midpoint of its possible range of degrees,
and I look at planets in signs, aspects between planets, and transits over
planets. I exclude any considerations that involve houses or angles. If you
have access to a time that is accurate to within an hour or less, and the
Ascendant does not change, then you only have to exclude transits over
angles from the delineation. Later, I will give you clues about how to
determine which Ascendant to use if the Ascendant changes within that
hour.
Some astrologers prefer to use a sunrise chart, in which the Sun is on the
Ascendant; in this case, the succeeding houses are called solar houses. They
interpret the meanings of these solar houses relative to the Sun in the usual way. There is indeed some value in this approach, but be careful not to use
planetary rulers of the houses when you interpret a solar chart. CHART DEFAULTS
Before you set up your charts, decide which house system (Whole Sign,
Equal House, Placidus, Porphyry, Koch, Regiomantanus, Alcabitius, etc.)
and zodiac (tropical, sidereal, heliocentric) you will use, whether or not you
will include the minor planets, and, if you are a traditionalist, whether you
will include the outer planets, Uranus, Neptune, and Pluto. Then decide
which formula (day/night) you will use for the calculation of the Lot
(Arabic, Part) of Fortune, whether you will use the mean or true node
positions, and which aspects you are going to consider and their orbs. In
addition, if you are preparing a Solar Return chart, decide if you are going
to use the birth location or the current location, as well as whether or not the
Sun is precessed.
My current defaults, and the ones I use in this book, are:
Whole Sign house system
Tropical zodiac
The four major asteroids (Ceres, Pallas, Juno, and Vesta)
Several dozen minor asteroids, including Chiron
The five Ptolemaic aspects (conjunction, sextile, square, trine, and
opposition)
Aspects considered primarily by sign rather than by degree of orb,
although the closer the degree, the more active the aspect
Out-of-sign aspects not considered unless the faster planet is within a 3degree range of application to the slower planet
Birth location and non-precessed Sun used for the Solar Return SETTING UP A CHART
Giving your client a printed copy of the natal chart is a good idea. If your
software has the option of displaying a legend for the symbols of the signs
and planets, that is even better. A wheel that contains lines drawn in for the
aspects or an aspect grid can be confusing, however, because of the various
opinions on aspects and orbs. So if you include aspects, be clear about your
preferences and make sure your printout accurately reflects those
preferences. Some programs display a tabulation of planets by elements and modalities, but these numbers can be deceiving, as we will discuss later.
Use your judgment about whether or not to include that.
The bi-wheel natal/secondary-progression chart in which the natal chart
occupies the inner wheel and the progressed chart occupies the outer wheel
is my main chart (see figure 6). To this, I add the following notations by
hand:
Using the list of minor asteroids that are arranged in a zodiacal sort, I
list the ones I use in every chart.
I note which asteroids are conjunct the four angles, especially the
Ascendant and the Midheaven as well as conjunct the Sun, Moon, and
Ascendant ruler.
If the client's personal-name asteroid is on the list, or that of their
partner, I add them.
If I see a theme developing, I add other asteroids associated with that
theme.
I will explain these notations in more detail later. Unless you already have
experience working with the asteroids, for the time being don't do anything
except locate and familiarize yourself with the glyphs for Ceres, Pallas,
Juno, Vesta, and Chiron. FIGURE 6A. Bi-wheel natal chart with secondary progressions and
annotations.
Now you are ready to scan the chart:
1. Determine the natal lunation phase, the progressed current lunation
phase and its beginning and ending dates, and the dates of the previous
progressed New Moon phase. We will cover this in more detail later.
2. Scan the progressed chart, comparing the positions of progressed
planets to natal planets.
3. If there is a conjunction or opposition of a progressed angle (Ascendant,
Midheaven, Descendant, IC) or inner planet (Sun, Mercury, Venus,
Mars, Ceres, Pallas, Juno, or Vesta) to a progressed or natal angle or
planet within a 1-degree orb, circle it. FIGURE 6B. The natal birth chart with minor asteroids. Júpiter . If there is conjunction of a progressed outer planet (Jupiter, Saturn,
Uranus, Neptune, or Pluto) to a progressed or natal planet, or an angle
within an orb of 15 minutes, circle it.
5. Note the sign and house of the progressed Moon.
6. Note if a progressed planet has just entered a new sign, or turned direct
or retrograde this year (for this, look in an ephemeris at the progressed
date).
While many other factors of the progressed chart may be important, these
are the only ones you need to consider now. It is not unusual for there to be limited activity in this kind of scan of the progressed chart.
While you may be tempted simply to print out a chart of the current
transits, or create a third wheel with the transits, I advise against this. One
of the drawbacks of astrology students using computer software instead an
ephemeris to determine the current transits is that they often do not have a
sense of the various speeds of the planets, their cycles or their retrograde
motions, and the range that the planets travel within a given period. Look in
an ephemeris and note how far each of the outer planets, Jupiter through
Pluto, travel in the course of the year around the time of the consultation,
and note if they make stations, turning direct or retrograde. Fix those
degrees for each planet in your mind. Then, on the outside of the progressed
chart, write in the symbol for each transiting planet in the appropriate sign,
noting if it is making an exact aspect to any natal planet during the course of
that year's travel. The hard aspects (conjunctions, squares, oppositions) are
often more dramatic in their effects, but the soft aspects (sextile and trine)
are not always insignificant. If the inner planets—Mercury, Venus, and
Mars—are making stations on natal planets or going retrograde in a
particular house, this is also important information to note. Do not factor in
transits to progressed planets.
Finally, familiarize yourself with what solar and lunar eclipses will occur
in the next year or have recently occurred, what natal house they activate,
and if they conjunct any particular planet within 3 degrees. If you are a
Hellenistic or Medieval astrologer, note the profected house of the year, and
the annual profected time lord and its position in the Solar Return chart.
If you are not familiar with some of these astrological terms, they will be
defined and discussed more fully in later chapters, or you can check them in
the Glossary. After completing the book, you can return to this section and
complete your checklist. GETTING AN OVERVIEW
Now you are ready to let your eye flow around the chart and obtain an
overview of it as a whole. Here, you must familiarize yourself with the
layout of the chart, and strike a fine balance between making some very
general observations and formulating specific judgments. With practice, you
will come to recognize what stands out and thus is most likely important.
First, note the sign of the Ascendant, any planets conjunct the Ascendant,
and the sign, house, and configurations of its ruler. Then note the sign and house placements of the Sun and the Moon, and determine if there are any
planets or asteroids in close conjunction with these luminaries. To the extent
that the Ascendant, Sun, and Moon are three principle significators of the
life, an analysis of these factors by element can give you clues to the basic
predisposition of the client.
The fire element is associated with freedom, the air element with change.
The earth element is associated with stability, the water element with
emotional safety. The fire and air elements are sympathetic with one
another, as are earth and water elements. Based on the elements of the Sun,
Moon, and Ascendant, is there a dominant theme and sub-theme that
emerges? This will affect the kind of advice you give your client.
For example, a woman who has Sun and Moon in earth elements and a
water sign ascending will have a strong disposition toward maintaining
safety and security in her life. If she finds herself in a problematic marriage,
but one that provides financial security, don't be too quick to urge her to
divorce under a difficult transit. Rather, advise her to seek alternative
solutions, especially if she has no skills or resources to provide for herself
and her children. However, if the dominant theme is one of freedom and
change, marked by fire and air elements for these three factors, she may be
more suited to strike out on her own. The point is to establish a general
baseline, a frame of reference that can and should influence how you slant
all subsequent specific delineations.
Another consideration that lets you get an overview of the chart is
whether any signs or houses are emphasized by the presence of
stelliums(three or more planets in the same sign or house). These will
designate areas of significant activity. In addition, any angular planets or
asteroids conjunct the four angles or located in the angular houses will play
a dominant role in the life. Note the natal lunation phase to assess how the
Sun/Moon energies operate together. As you become skillful in scanning
aspect patterns, note if there are any T-squares or grand trines. Remember
that configurations involving the outer planets are generational, rather than
specifically personal. Also check to see if any planets are retrograde, and fix
in your mind the placements of the lunar nodes and the Lot of Fortune.
I advise against resorting to any mechanical tabulation of planets in
elements and modalities using a gradated pointing system for the various
planets, angles, nodes, and lots to determine overall elemental emphasis. As
you start adding more minor planets and lots and choosing different house systems, these tallies will vary radically and the results can be deceiving. I
don't find the doctrines on hemispheric emphasis (above-extrovert/belowintrovert) useful. The doctrine of chart patterns (such as the bowl, where all
the planets are within an arc of 180 degrees, and the bucket, which is
similar to the bowl but with one planet opposite all the others and acting as
the handle) was developed by 20th-century astrologers. It can give some
insights when the 10-planet system is used; however, when you add
asteroids to the chart symbols, these patterns become meaningless because
of the number of bodies. So keep in mind that, if you use chart patterns, you
must remain within the 10-planet system.1
Finally, look to see what areas of the chart are receiving challenging
outer-planet transits. These areas are likely to be of concern to your client.
Again, transits (conjunct, square, opposition) to the four angles (the Sun, the
Moon, the Ascendant ruler, and Mercury, Venus, and Mars) are the ones to
take special notice of here. Note the houses through which the transiting
planets travel and if they have recently made an ingress into a new sign or
are about to do so.
At this point in your analysis, simply identify how the chart is assembled
and where the concentrations of energies exist, without trying to determine
specifically what they mean. Here is a checklist for getting an overview of a
chart that helps you determine the areas you potentially want to address:
List the element of the Ascendant, Sun, and Moon signs. Is there a
dominant theme involving fire/air or earth/water? Is there an equal
distribution? Which elements are missing? What does this indicate
about the basic orientation of the individual in terms of freedom,
change, security, and safety?
Note the Ascendant sign and any planets/asteroids in the first house or
fixed stars conjunct the Ascendant. Note the planet that rules the
Ascendant sign using traditional rulerships (Mars for Scorpio, Jupiter
for Pisces, Saturn for Aquarius) and the house and sign placement of its
ruler. Does it also rule another house? What planets/asteroids/fixed stars
are conjunct or opposite the ruler? Do not use oppositions for fixed
stars.
List the sign and house position of the Sun and the Moon, as well as the
houses that they rule. What planets and asteroids are conjunct or
opposite the luminaries? What fixed stars are conjunct the luminaries? Note if any planets occupy the signs of their domiciles or detriments, or
exaltations or falls.
List the natal and progressed lunation phases.
List the placement of the lunar nodes and the Lot of Fortune. Note if the
person was born during an eclipse. Make sure your computer software
is set to calculate Fortune differently for day and night births.
List any angular planets
List any stelliums or other aspect patterns.
List any retrograde planets or planets that are under the beams (within
15 degrees of the Sun).
List the significant progressed and transiting aspects, as well as the
degrees of the solar and lunar eclipses for the year.
Now refer to our sample chart and see how the above points are tabulated.
Male, November 17, 1939, 8:30 a.m., Seneca, Nebraska Whole Sign
houses
1. Elemental analysis of the three principle places of life: Ascendant in
fire, Sun in water, Moon in air. Distribution and balance of elements,
with earth missing. From an elemental analysis of the Sun, Moon, and
Ascendant, the Ascendant and Moon in fire and air have a compatible
interaction around the themes of freedom and change, while the Sun is
focused upon emotional safety and connection. Earth, as the propensity
for obtaining physical and financial security, is lacking.
2. Sign of Ascendant—Sagittarius with Venus and Mercury conjunct the
Ascendant, its ruler Jupiter retrograde in Pisces in the fourth house
(home, family) and ruling the fourth house of home opposite Neptune in
the tenth house of career.
3. The Sun in Scorpio in the twelfth house (suffering, transcendence)
ruling the ninth (higher wisdom) opposite retrograde Uranus in Taurus
in the sixth (injuries, ill heath, job). The Moon in Aquarius in the third
house (communication, siblings) ruling the eighth (death, inheritance),
widely conjunct Juno and Mars and opposite Pluto and Pallas. Júpiter . Jupiter is strong in its own domicile, Pisces; Mercury is weak in its
detriment, Sagittarius; Mars and Saturn are in mutual reception.
5. Crescent Moon lunation phase.
6. Nodes in Aries-Libra across the fifth-eleventh house (children/ friends)
axis; Fortune in Pisces in the fourth house (home, family). 7. Stellium in the third house (communication, siblings) with Moon, Juno,
and Mars in Aquarius.
8. Angular planets—Neptune in the tenth house, Jupiter in the fourth
house, Venus and Mercury in the first house (profession, home life,
self). MC/IC axis in the eleventh/fifth houses. Mercúrio . Major aspect patterns by whole sign aspects—mutable T-square
between Neptune, Jupiter Rx, and Venus/Mercury in angular houses;
fixed T-square between Sun, Uranus Rx, and Mars/Juno in cadent
houses; grand trine between Sun, Jupiter Rx, and Chiron Rx in water
signs. (Rx is often used as an abbreviation for retrograde.)
10. Jupiter, Saturn, Vesta, Uranus, Pluto, and Chiron retrograde.
11. As of Fall 2006, transiting Pluto square Jupiter (Asc. ruler and about to
enter the first house by sign); transiting Saturn opposing Juno and Mars;
transiting Jupiter conjunct the Sun; progressed MC/IC axis conjunct
natal Acs./Desc. axis; progressed lunation phase Gibbous October 2004
to March 2008 and progressed New Moon phase October 1992 at 19
Capricorn. THE INITIAL INTERVIEW
While you may use this same basic procedural structure with every session,
your manner and tone, and the level of complexity of your delineation will
differ for each individual client. Once you have set up and familiarized
yourself with your charts, but before you actually begin to interpret the data,
you should conduct an initial interview with your client. You must
determine your approach within the first three minutes of this session. There
are two important sets of questions to ask that will help you determine how
to proceed. Ask your client:
What is your previous astrological background? Is this the first time you
have had a reading or have you had other sessions? Are you a student or
practitioner of astrology? Are you familiar with the basic meanings of
the planets, signs, houses, and aspects? Do you know what transits are?
Do you have any particular questions or concerns that you want me to
address in this session?
If this is a first-time reading and your client has no knowledge of
astrological terms, keep everything simple and straightforward, with a minimum of technical jargon in your explanations. For clients with a lot of
astrological experience, a basic reading may be tedious and not worth their
time and money, so cover more material and use a variety of technical
terms. Practice both approaches with the same chart, and work on your oral
delivery of the information for each. It is not enough to know what a chart
means. You must be able to present the information at a level at which each
client can comprehend it.
The second determination you must make before beginning a session is
why the client has come to you. Ask clients to give you a brief (less than
three-minute) summary of who they are, the circumstances of their lives,
and their pertinent questions. Their responses will also inform you about
their expectations and the level on which they want you to approach the
consultation. If a client's stated concern is when to sell a home, then discuss
that and not an abusive relationship with a partner. If, on the other hand, a
client wants to know what the chart indicates about an intended path in life,
don't bother talking about whether it's a good time to buy a new car. While
you want to give an integrated summary of the client's chart, always leave
enough time in the session to focus on his or her stated concern.
We will discuss these and many more issues later, but for now, you want
to know how simple or complex to make your explanations and what the
specific focus of the session should be in the context of your general
synthesis of the chart. While your client is speaking, scan the charts you
have prepared and note the areas where your client's stated concerns reside.
What is going on in these areas of the chart? While the ultimate goal of the
model presented in this book is to discern your client's life purpose, you
must also know how to address specific concerns. STUDY GUIDELINES
Using your practice chart:
Obtain and verify the birth data, and state its source and reliability.
Prepare the necessary charts.
List the factors described in the chapter above.
Designate a topical concern (relationship, health, vocation, education,
etc.) to keep in mind and to investigate.
Determine where the energies are concentrated in the natal chart and
what areas are receiving the most current activation. CHAPTER FOUR THE ASCENDANT, ITS RULER, AND THE LIFE
DIRECTION
THE BIRTH CHART can be read, not merely as a description of the personality
or a prognostication of events that will take place, but also as a guide to
activities that can facilitate the living of a purposeful life. While the art of
interpreting a chart can be infinitely complex in the details, it can be quite
simple in the essentials. Ancient astrologers looked upon the Sun, the
Moon, and the Ascendant as the “places of life.” You can construct the
basic framework of the life purpose considering just these three factors.
Everything else adds detail to the essential theme that is established by
these places of life.
The Sun and Moon represent the soul and the body. The Sun represents
the intention of the soul as the divine part of the human mind and the
contents of the life purpose. The Moon symbolizes the body that gives the
soul life, the senses by which to perceive the world, and the vehicle
through which to actualize the purpose in the affairs of daily life and
worldly existence. The Ascendant indicates the basic motivation that
drives the soul, and the planet ruling the Ascendant guides the life to its
destination.
In this chapter, we will examine the roles that the Ascendant sign, any
planets occupying the first house, and the ruler of the Ascendant play in
the delineation of the life purpose. In the next chapter, we will look at what
the Sun and the Moon contribute to the articulation of the essential
meaning of the life.
A few words before we begin. There are two approaches to chart
delineation. One is descriptive, the other proscriptive. The descriptive approach simply describes a person's personality and behaviors. The
proscriptive approach provides information that can help clients use their
resources to live a meaningful, purposeful life. From this point on, our
inquiry will be proscriptive. We will focus on how to extract meaning from
the chart to describe a possible life purpose for the client. The point is not
just to tell clients they are communicative, rigid, analytical etc., but rather
advise them on how they can use these qualities to provide meaning in
their lives. THE ASCENDANT
The Ascendant is perhaps the most sensitive and personal factor in the
chart, as it designates the zodiacal sign and degree that rose above the
eastern horizon at the precise moment and place of a child's birth. The
Ascendant marks the spot where heaven meets the Earth at the location of
sunrise on the day of birth. It is what makes a child unique from any other
child born on that day. The ancients knew the Ascendant as the
horoskopos, the “hour-marker.” As a place of life, it designates when the
newborn takes its first breath as an independent entity at the moment the
life comes into physical incarnation.
Sometimes, the term Ascendant refers to the exact degree of the rising
sign—the 23rd degree of Taurus—and at other times, it refers to the entire
sign occupying the first house. The Ascendant degree establishes the line
of the horizon, marking both the sunrise and sunset points on the birth day,
and hence distinguishing the boundary between the location of the other
planetary bodies that are in the visible upper hemisphere of Earth and
those in its invisible lower hemisphere. The sign in which the Ascendant is
located occupies the first house. Hellenistic astrologers named this house
Breath, Spirit, Life, and Helm. The helm contains the steering mechanism
of a ship and, in this context, refers to a nautical metaphor used in ancient
texts that envisioned the life as a seafaring journey. With the Ascendant, a
soul with an intention and occupying a physical body with which to
accomplish it is born into time and space and begins its journey. This is
where life emerges into the world of becoming.
In Hellenistic astrology, the investigation of the planet ruling the
Ascendant was one of the universal techniques that spoke to the overall
success of the life. The domicile lord of the Ascendant was likened to the helmsman or steersman, whose commands guided the ship of life to its
destination. In Indian/Vedic astrology, the Ascendant, called the Lagna, is
also a major component of interpretation. The importance of this planet
has continued into the modern tradition, where it is sometimes called the
chart ruler.
Let's begin with a thorough examination of the Ascendant, and then
illustrate the teaching using our sample chart. Then we will discuss how to
interpret the Ascendant ruler in our sample delineation, so you can see how
to build the interpretation step by step. The Ascendant Sign as Character Description
On the outermost level, the Ascendant by sign describes the outer
character, appearance, and personality of an individual motivated by a
certain psychological need. It signifies the kind of image that the person
projects to the world at large. This outer image is often not the same as the
essential identity, but it is the personality that is displayed in initial and
everyday encounters with others. You could call it the individual's
“packaging.” To the extent that, in many of our casual and ordinary
interactions with others we do not reveal our inner selves, the persona
designated by the Ascendant sign governs a considerable portion of the
qualities that are displayed to others.
Each of the twelve zodiacal signs can be conceptualized as representing
one of the basic psychological needs that are common to all human beings.
The way in which we express our personalities also incorporates the
psychological features of the ascending sign. For example, if you have
Gemini rising, your personality is communicative, versatile, curious,
changeable, and seeks breadth rather than depth in your experiences. The
outer display of this persona is informed by a psychological need to make
mental contacts and communicate with others. Modifying the Expression of the Persona
Planets or asteroids conjunct the Ascendant, and planets occupying the
first house, will add their natures to the expression of the personality. They
represent the archetypal personalities that stand front and center, having a
strong influence in directing the course of the life. Thus, if you have Saturn
the Elder conjunct a Gemini Ascendant, you will tend to be more serious, taciturn, and conservative with your thoughts and words. If Mars the
Warrior is conjunct the Ascendant, your personality may be more
aggressive and you may use words as weapons. Note that you do not have
to delineate the planets conjunct the Ascendant by sign, or even discuss
their condition, at this point in the delineation. When you investigate the
topics that planets rule, then you can consider their condition.
In your delineation, begin by describing the personality in terms of the
qualities associated with the zodiacal sign rising, both as descriptive
characteristics and as a psychological need. Modify its expression due to
the presence of any planets or asteroids conjunct the Ascendant. These
planets will be in the same sign as the Ascendant (when using the Whole
Sign house system), so you have the option of whether or not to discuss
how they are modified by the sign. If they are in a sign of their rulership,
exaltation, detriment, or fall, this may be important to mention.
Bill has Sagittarius rising, with Mercury and Venus conjunct the
Ascendant. The asteroids Amicita and Fraternitas are conjunct
Venus and Mercury to the exact degree, and they are within a 3degree orb of the Ascendant.
Bill's outer personality is characterized by an expansive,
intellectually questing nature that has strong idealism and broadranging visions (skillful Sagittarius attributes). However, he can
sometimes be dogmatic in his views and overly blunt, bordering on
tactless (unskillful Sagittarius attributes). With Mercury conjoined
to the Ascendant, he projects the image of a good communicator
who is knowledgeable in a variety of topics, although he may
wander about verbally, more concerned with conveying the big
picture than the details (Mercury in its detriment). The placement of
Venus in the ascending sign lends charm, magnetism, and physical
attractiveness to his image. The asteroids Amicita and Fraternitas
speak for themselves—Bill's outer personality is characterized by
his concern for friendship and brotherhood, as an expression of the
kind of person he is. The Drive that Motivates the Soul On a deeper level, the element of the Ascendant sign also points to the
primary motivation of the soul. What core drive motivates the person to
action and sustains the continuity of that action?
People with a fire sign rising are motivated by the drive for freedom of
action, power over their own lives, and the influence or wherewithal to
bring their visions into manifestation.
People with an air sign rising are motivated by the drive to explore and
express their ideas without restriction, and to receive positive
acknowledgment for what they think and say.
People with an earth sign rising are motivated by the drive for physical
and material security in their lives—a roof over their heads, money in
the bank, and the knowledge that they will not become homeless and
destitute.
People with a water sign rising are motivated by the drive for
emotional support, security, bonding, and intimacy, with the continual
reassurance that things are as they seem and will turn out all right.
To the extent that life circumstances—relationships, jobs, belief systems,
or group affiliations—foster and permit the expression of these core drives,
the individual is functional. However, when circumstances deny or negate
these basic needs, sooner or later the situation becomes intolerable. The
person has to disengage him or herself, because the bottom line is not
being met. This information concerning what motivates the soul in
accordance with the element of the sign can help you determine the
Ascendant sign when the birth time is uncertain. Determine what motivates
Bill's soul according to the characteristics of the element of his Ascendant
sign.
Because Sagittarius is a fire sign, the core drives that motivate Bill's
soul to action are freedom and autonomy, the desire for power over
others (or, minimally, not wanting anyone else to have power over
him), and the capacity to have influence in his world. When he feels
restricted, dominated, or thwarted in his efforts, his fire-sign-rising
nature may induce him to push back and become overly aggressive.
Remaining in situations where he is disempowered is not an
acceptable option. Transits or Progressions to the Ascendant
At this point, you have to make a decision about what to discuss next. The
immediately obvious choice is to see the planet that rules the Ascendant as
providing the key to how that core need is met. However, this move will
take you away from the Ascendant, and there may be a few more things
that could happen first. In particular, if there are any transits or
progressions to the Ascendant degree, this is the time to integrate them.
Another possible time to bring this up is after you discuss the ruler of the
Ascendant. Then look at timing activations to both these points before
moving on to other factors.
In your delineation, discuss any timing activations to the Ascendant by
transit or progression, or eclipses that have recently occurred or will occur
within the coming year.
In looking at Bill's chart on the date of this writing, November
2006, we see that the progressed MC at 16 Sagittarius 09 is within a
partile (same-degree) orb of the natal Ascendant at 16 Sagittarius
24. Also, the transit of Jupiter will shortly enter the sign of
Sagittarius, activating his first house, and conjoin Venus, Mercury,
and Ascendant degrees by February 2007, retrograding back and
forth until November 2007. A quick glance tells you that the transit
of Pluto will also be squaring Jupiter, the Ascendant ruler, during
this same period, and the transit of Uranus will square the
Ascendant in 2007.
You may decide to wait and discuss all of these timing activations
at the same time later in the reading. In any case, you know that the
most sensitive point in Bill's chart is being triggered during the
coming year, and this is likely to precipitate significant change. We
will discuss the interpretation of transits and progressions more
fully in chapter 6. The Ascendant as Helm
Now we arrive at one of the most important planets in the chart—the ruler
of the Ascendant. Once you establish the fundamental motivation as
indicated by the element of the Ascendant sign, you can determine how the person instinctively goes about expressing that drive. The planet that rules
the Ascendant gives information about how and where the person is
motivated to act, and to what extent the actions will lead to realization of
the life purpose. In a broader sense, the condition of the planetary ruler of
the Ascendant and its relationship to the Ascendant itself speaks to the
issue of whether or not the individual has the resources and capacity to
direct the course of the life to a clearly defined goal. If not, the life may
emerge in a manner that drifts about aimlessly; the person may have
difficulty defining or accomplishing a clear purpose, or may seem to be
carried along by forces outside his or her control.
In Hellenistic astrology, Helm was one of the significations of the first
house where the rudder, the steering mechanism of a ship, is located. A
successful life can be likened to a successful seafaring voyage where a
ship reaches its destination with its cargo intact. Planets occupying the first
house stand close to the rudder, perhaps having their hands on it, and their
agendas are considered very influential in moving the ship of life forward.
But it is the steersman who issues the commands that guide the ship
toward its destination. Here, this role is attributed to the planet that is the
domicile lord, or ruler, of the Ascendant. The Ruler of the Ascendant as Steersman
The domicile lord, or ruler, of the Ascendant is an extremely important
planet because it guides the life to its destination. This planet indicates the
archetypal personality of the steersman. For example, if the ruler of the
Ascendant is Venus, the Lover guides the life journey; if Mars, the
Warrior; if the Moon, the Mother. Its house placement determines which
topic steers and directs the life. For example, if the ruler of the Ascendant
is located in the seventh house, relationship steers the life; if it is located in
the tenth house, profession moves the life toward its destination. The sign
of the Ascendant ruler tells the manner in which this is done. For example,
an Ascendant ruler in the sign of Aries signifies strong, autonomous,
decisive action; an Ascendant ruler in Capricorn signifies methodical,
strategic planning; a ruler in Pisces signifies emotional and artistic
sensitivity. The sign and house placements of the Ascendant ruler together
point to how and where individuals take action to move their lives forward
based on the core drive that motivates their souls. The condition of the Ascendant ruler, as gauged by its sect, zodiacal
sign rulership, house angularity, help and harm from benefic and malefic
planets, and relationship to the solar-phase cycle of the Sun, determines its
capacity to be effective in its job and regulates its ability to produce
favorable outcomes for the life and its competency to bring the life journey
to a successful conclusion. Planets and asteroids configured to the
Ascendant ruler give more detail about how this planet operates. Once you
have considered these chart elements, you can discuss the timing
activations to both the Ascendant and the ruler of the Ascendant. I listed
them for Bill's chart earlier in this lesson, but we will defer their
interpretation until chapter 6. INTERPRETING THE ASCENDANT IN THE CHART
There are two levels of interpretation for the ruler of the Ascendant. On the
first level, you describe the planet itself, and how its expression must
incorporate the significations of other planetary bodies to which it is
configured, especially the conjunctions. Then you must synthesize how
that planet's expression is filtered through the sign in which it is located
and how it impacts the houses it occupies and rules. This constitutes a
thorough analysis from a modern perspective. However, the traditional
approach adds a second level of interpretation—assessing the planet's
condition to gauge how effectively it can do the job of directing the life to
its intended destination. If you are a beginning student, you may want to
start with the first level. However, if you are an intermediate student or
feel ready to take on an additional challenge, try the second, which is
based upon a full analysis of a planets’ condition as understood by
traditional astrologers. LEVEL 1: WHO, HOW, WHERE?
1. Identify and describe the nature of the planet that rules the Ascendant.
2. If the planetary ruler is conjunct another planet or asteroid, a fixed star,
a lunar node, or the Lot of Fortune, factor in those influences.
3. Delineate the sign and house placement as they point to how and
where the personality seeks to secure the core need that motivates the
soul. Júpiter . What other house does that planet rule? The topical meanings of that
house will also play a part in identifying the dynamics involved. LEVEL 2: EFFECTIVE OR INEFFECTIVE; FAVORABLE OR
UNFAVORABLE?
1. Is the sign of the planet that rules the Ascendant configured to the sign
of the Ascendant itself? Use only the five Ptolemaic aspects
(conjunction, sextile, square, trine, opposition) for this consideration—
in other words, determine if the planet is located in the good houses
that are conducive to the business of life. If the sign is so configured,
there is a connection and line of communication between the agent
responsible for accomplishing the goal or fulfilling the core
motivational drive and the steering mechanism itself. If there is a clear
line of communication between the articulation of the order and the
execution of the action, conscious directive movement can occur. If
there is no configuration between the sign of the Ascendant ruler and
the sign of the Ascendant, there is not a clear line of communication;
the life can drift about with no clear sense of direction and can easily
be taken off course.
2. Is the planet in a sign in which it has rulership (domicile, exaltation)?
If so, it has ample resources to accomplish its aims or achieve high
status as to its significations. Is it in a sign of its detriment or fall? If
so, it may be bereft or needy of resources or not respected, and thus be
challenged in its capacity to produce the desired result.
3. If the planet does not have access to it own resources due to its sign,
can it expect assistance from its own domicile lord (also called the
dispositor) based upon its condition and configuration to the planet in
question? Júpiter . Is the planet in an angular, succedent, or cadent house? How much of
its focus is directed toward the destination of the individual?
5. Is the planet assisted in its quest by means of a conjunction, trine, or
sextile from Venus or Jupiter? Is the planet hindered in its quest by
means of a conjunction, square, or opposition from Mars or Saturn?
6. Is the planet retrograde? From the traditional point of view, a
retrograde planet is weakened, making it more difficult for the person
to actualize its significations in the life. The significations that it produces may later be taken back, or the outcomes may occur later in
life. From a modern point of view, the individual is challenged to
discover alternative ways of expressing the planet's function that speak
to inner rather than outer processes, and thus becomes a more
individualized expression of that planet's nature.
7. Is the planet under the Sun's beams? If so, its nature is absorbed by the
Sun, which then becomes more like that planet. But its own
significations and those of the houses that the USB planet occupies and
rules are diminished.
8. Does the planet receive an application from the Moon that assists in
the manifestation of its significations?
The ruler of Bill's Sagittarius Ascendant is Jupiter. Bill seeks to
secure these (fire-sign-rising) needs through the significations of the
planet Jupiter, seeking philosophical meaning and dissemination of
knowledge as it is applied to the area of home, family, parents, land,
and real estate (fourth house) in a Piscean manner marked by a
spiritual vision and artistic creativity. By holding to a moral
highroad (Jupiter) from a spiritual motivation (Pisces) in familyand home-related matters (fourth house), he gains in power and
influence (fire sign rising). Since Jupiter is in Pisces, one of the
signs of its own rulership, it is located in the house Pisces rules, so
there is no other house to consider. The asteroid Utopia at 2 Aries is
within a 3-degree across-sign boundary conjunction with Jupiter,
and Bill's philosophical inclinations superimpose visions of the
ideal state onto his personal domestic environment. Neptune, the
planet of illusion and imagination, in the tenth house of profession
placed in the technically proficient sign of Virgo, opposes Jupiter
and draws the life force into the arena of social recognition from
Bill's artistic or spiritual actions in the world. The Sun as sect leader
forms a favorable applying trine to its sect-mate, Jupiter,
illuminating the insights that arise from deep contemplation of
universal truths.
While Mercury and Venus in the first house may have their hands
on the rudder and thus exert a strong force in guiding the life
forward, putting their concerns for relationship and profession
(Mercury ruling the seventh and tenth) and health and group affiliations (Venus ruling the sixth and eleventh) as the leading
issues, it is the natural benefic Jupiter, as the ruler of Ascendant and
steersman of the ship, that has the authority to bring the life to its
destination.
In our previous analysis of each planet, we determined that Jupiter
was in the best condition of all. Because Jupiter in Pisces configures
by sign to Sagittarius on the Ascendant, there is a line of
communication, albeit stressful, between the ruler of the Ascendant
and the Ascendant itself. This indicates the issuance of commands
that can bring the life to a favorable completion of its purpose,
although there may be obstacles to overcome on the way. Jupiter
occupies Pisces, a sign of its own domicile rulership, and thus has
access to significant resources for the accomplishment of its
endeavors that may arise from the parents and real estate assets
(fourth house). Jupiter gains strength placed in a good angular house
that is conducive to business and all of its actions are focused upon
his purpose.
Jupiter is neither helped and assisted by the benefic Venus, nor
harmed and negated by either of the two malefics. (An advanced
analysis might consider Jupiter's possible containment by Mars and
Saturn, but that is nullified by the interposition of a ray from the
Sun). Jupiter is visible, so its significations can appear and
eventuate, but its retrograde motion suggests, from a traditional
perspective, that some of its benefic events will be recalled or occur
later in life. From a modern psychological perspective, the
retrograde motion suggests Bill will be in a continual process of rethinking his belief system and coming to an internal verification of
truth rather than relying automatically on external authority. Jupiter
is one day past a phasis condition, as it turns direct eight days after
the birth, and has residual intensity in its effects permeating the life.
Jupiter receives an application from the Moon by sextile aspect,
which assists in the manifestation of its significations.
Now you can make a statement about this chart that takes into account
your analysis of planetary condition, but reframes your understanding in
terms of life purpose. Bill projects an expansive, idealistic, philosophically questing nature (Sagittarius Ascendant) that seeks to have power and
influence (fire sign) in manifesting his Utopian ideals (Jupiter as ruler of
Ascendant) concerning land and home matters (Jupiter in fourth house) in
a manner that is compassionate and arises from spiritual insight (Jupiter in
Pisces). He has the necessary resources (Jupiter in its own domicile) and
focus (Jupiter angular) to accomplish this intention, and the capacity to
overcome obstacles along the way (Jupiter configured to Ascendant sign
by square). The final outcome may eventuate in the latter part of his life
(Jupiter retrograde). STUDY GUIDELINES
Examine all the factors involved for a delineation of the Ascendant sign
and its ruler for your practice chart. Prepare a written analysis, following
the example in Bill's chart.
Describe the persona by the qualities associated with the zodiacal sign
rising, and modify its expression due to the presence of any planets or
asteroids conjunct the Ascendant.
Describe the primary need that motivates the soul by the elemental
characteristics of the rising sign.
Delineate the ruler of the Ascendant in terms of how and where the
individual seeks to meet the core need that motivates the soul, its
condition, and how this factor influences the capacity to accomplish
the life goal.
Mention any important transits and/or progressions to the Ascendant or
to its ruler, but delay interpreting them until later.
In your summation, reframe the material into a concise statement that
addresses the life purpose. CHAPTER FIVE THE SUN, THE MOON, AND THE LIFE PURPOSE
NOW THAT YOU have delineated the Ascendant and its ruler, you have a
sense of what core drive motivates the soul to action, what planet and
house guide the person to his or her destination as the purpose of the life
incarnation, and to what extent this will be a successful journey. Next, we
will investigate just what this purpose is and how it can be expressed in the
daily life. For these answers, we turn to the Sun and the Moon.
Hellenistic astrologers called the Sun and the Moon “the rulers of one's
all,” and described them as having authority over the whole life.1 Of the
seven visible planets known to the ancients, the Sun is the largest body and
the Moon is the smallest. Yet, by some exquisite piece of geometry and
proportion, at the moment when the Full Moon rises in the east, just as the
Sun sets in the west, they appear to be the same size from the perspective
of Earth. Together, the Sun and Moon regulate the cycle of day and night,
wake and sleep, activity and rest—a tempo that moves us through the days
and months and years of our lives.
What distinguishes the Sun from the other planetary bodies in the
horoscope is that it is a star. The nature and composition of a star, an
enormous generator of fiery energy, is different from that of a planet. In
fact, since the ultimate energy source for most of the biological processes
on Earth is sunlight, the ancients were not mistaken in their worship of the
Sun as the fount of life. Plato thought the stars were a more divine order of
celestial entities than the planets, because they moved with a regularity
quite different from the erratic movements of the planets. Today we know
that the Sun is the center of our solar system; all the other planets revolve around it. As such, it can be said to be the center or heart of our being,
around which all other astrological factors constellate.
The Sun is the domicile lord of the zodiacal sign Leo, which is
associated with both the heart of the cosmic animal and the heart of the
human being. Many medical schools of antiquity held that the mind was
located in the heart. In the second century c.e., the Hellenistic astrologer
Vettius Valens wrote that the Sun signifies the king, the soul, and the
mind.2 In Mesopotamia, where astrology originated and was practiced for
2000 years before it was taken up by the Greeks, astrologers were the
priests who interpreted the movements of the planets as communications
from the gods. They conveyed this information to the kings so that they
might rule in accordance with divine intent. The ancient Greek
philosophers understood the soul as the divine part of the human mind. In
astrology, it is through the Sun that the human mind has a direct link to the
divine, and thus it is through the Sun that the divine intention for the
individual is most clearly indicated.
The Moon is neither a star nor a planet, but rather a satellite that orbits
the Earth. Its light is reflected light, and yet it is the most brilliant object
illuminating the night sky. Aristotle proposed a model of the cosmos
whereby everything in the celestial realm was composed of aither, a divine
substance, and everything beneath the sphere of the Moon consisted of a
mixture of the four qualities of fire, earth, air, and water. These elements
changed into one another through the qualities hot, cold, wet, and dry. It
was the Moon that transmitted the influences of the divine celestial bodies
via effluences to the elemental terrestrial realm, and thus aided in the
process of making their significations manifest and embodied in the
physical realm. The heating and cooling actions of the Sun and Moon
governed the process of what Aristotle called the “generation and
corruption” of the elements, or the periodic cycles of coming to be and
passing away. Because the Moon is nearest to Earth, it was considered to
have the closest connection to the human body and consequently to matters
of health.
Vettius Valens wrote that the Moon signifies the queen, conception, and
the body.3 As the Sun is the lord of the day, the Moon is the queen of the
night; together king and queen are the archetypal earthly representatives of
the god and goddess in the heavens. Buddhist philosophy speaks of the
“precious human birth,” because they hold that we can only achieve enlightenment while in a human body. The life and death of the body
demarcates the boundary between the life and death of a human being.
When a soul/mind can occupy a body that is alive, it has the potential to
actualize itself. What can be actualized, however, is often determined by
the nature, strength, and capacities of the body.
The Moon is the final link in the chain between celestial and terrestrial.
It receives the vital fiery energy of the Sun and, via reflection, focuses it
on the Earth in incremental phases. From an astrological perspective, the
Moon signifies how the divine intention represented by the Sun can find
physical actualization in a human body and then be applied to the affairs of
daily life and worldly existence so that our actions can benefit others.
We can say that the two lights, the Sun and the Moon, are the places that
contain the vital essences of the life force. The receptacles of the most
concentrated, vital, life-sustaining energy are the very places whose
outflow is directed toward the essential life purpose.
The Sun and Moon are the two primary symbols of human personality,
and each has a wide range of individual meanings. In fact, all the planets
have at least three distinct categories of significations. First, each planet
has a general signification that is common to all charts and corresponds to
some quality of a person's essential nature. The term that the Greeks gave
to this faculty was ousia, or “soul essence.” Each planet represents this
same faculty of the soul in every chart.
Each planet also signifies concrete objects, personality traits, and types
of people, and is associated with particular colors, metals, stones, plants,
smells, and tastes. These comprise its Hermetic correspondences. Robert
Schmidt points out that, in terms of the cosmological model underlying the
discipline of astrology, here we see the role of the planets as mediators
between some faculty of the soul on the divine level and the concrete
manifestations of that principle on the earthly level.
In addition to these general significations, each planet influences the
significations of the house it occupies and also governs one or two
particular topics, based upon the house(s) that it rules in a particular chart.
This category will vary from one chart to another, as the signs occupying
the houses are generated from the hour of the day a person is born.
As an astrologer, you must be familiar with all the significations that
each planet represents; in the course of your delineations, you will draw
upon this knowledge. However, for the purposes of this inquiry, we will consider that the Sun points to the content of the life purpose and the
Moon represents how this purpose is applied in our daily activities. The
Sun symbolizes the conceptual image, which then takes shape in an
embodied form as defined by the Moon. Our hypothesis is that the birth
chart contains this innate pattern that asks to be lived. If the individual can
express and live out this pattern, it will give a sense of purposeful meaning
to the life. In a detailed and comprehensive study of Hellenistic astrology,
other planets besides the Sun and Moon are involved in the determination
of the nature of a person's destiny. Here, we'll use the primacy of the solar
and lunar symbols as guideposts by which to uncover the essential
meaning of the life. THE SUN
The Sun signifies the radiant core of a person's essence—the soul, the
mind and consciousness, the life force and vitality, the basic sense of
selfhood, the purpose of the life, and the source of the will for
accomplishing that purpose. Keep in mind that the Sun describes both the
basic nature of the individual and the life purpose as an expression of that
nature. Thus, what we do in terms of living a meaningful life is simply
who we are on an essential level. The Ascendant ruler points to the
capacity of the personality to accomplish a life goal that is motivated by
the core drive. The Sun, by its sign and house positions, describes the
nature of the underlying purpose striving toward expression. House Considerations
As you become proficient in the art of delineation, you will develop the
ability to take in all the factors in a chart in one initial glance before saying
anything. If we had to rank those factors, however, perhaps the most
important is the house a planet occupies and the houses that it rules. The
Sun's house placement signifies the area of life activities in which the
purpose will be expressed and the house that the Sun rules points to the
topics of life that have a role in the expression of the purpose. A more
formal statement based upon the tenets of traditional astrology as to the
exact relationship between the house a planet rules and the house it
occupies can be stated thus: A planet has the responsibility to render judgment upon and bring
about the affairs of the house it rules, and it does so by means of the
activities of the house it occupies.
For example, if the Sun occupies the seventh house of relationship and
rules the tenth of profession (which contains the sign Leo), you know that
the ruler of the tenth house is located in the seventh house. Thus the
content of the life purpose as signified by the Sun has to do with bringing
about the affairs of the profession by participating in relationships and
partnerships. This may mean that building or participating in a career with
a marriage or business partner is the kind of activity that can support the
development of the professional life. Furthermore, participation in
relationships that are linked with professional goals is what this person is
here to do in this life.
Meanwhile, on a secondary level, you consider the kind of house the
Sun occupies. Its relative angularity will tell you how much strength stands
behind the Sun to focus on its task and the good/ bad nature of the house
tells you something about how favorable the outcomes will be. As a
counselor, you may not necessarily share this information, but, as an
astrologer, it informs you how to proceed with the discussion. Not
everyone has the same amount of energy or priority to put into the effort of
expressing life purpose, or it may be that the purpose is quite
straightforward. Some may see financial security or fulfilling familial
expectations or enjoyment of the moment as purposeful self-expression.
As a counseling astrologer, you must discern where your clients are and
what is most important to them, and extend respect for the choices they
make. Sign Considerations
From the perspective of descriptive delineation, the zodiacal sign in which
the Sun is placed describes the manner in which the soul purpose will be
expressed, the qualities that fuel the Sun's ability to shine and be important
in some way, and the source of the will that makes the purpose manifest. If
the Sun in the above example is in the seventh house and rules the tenth,
which is occupied by the sign Leo, in the Whole Sign house system, by
necessity, that Sun occupies the sign of Taurus (and Scorpio is ascending). The soul purpose will express itself in a stable and productive manner. Its
perception and sensory appreciation of the physical world fuels its ability
to shine, and its consistent and practical nature are the source of the will
that makes the purpose manifest. Furthermore, professional partnerships
that involve working with land, art, or financial resources (all Taurus-ruled
activities) may contribute to the content of the business.
To assess the condition of the Sun based on sign rulerships, you take
note of what kind of sign the Sun occupies. Mentally place a plus mark if it
is Leo (the sign of its domicile rulership) or Aries (its exaltation sign) to
indicate resources or honors. If the Sun is in its detriment in Aquarius or
fall in Libra, however, place a mental minus sign and be aware that there
may be a problem with a lack of resources or with disrespect. From a
psychological perspective, because Libra and Aquarius are both “otherdirected” signs, the unique individuality of the Sun is eclipsed or
overshadowed by its consideration of and connection to others, either oneto-one with Libra or in groups with Aquarius. By reframing the
interpretation, you can also propose that the individual purpose is to merge
one's self with others. If the Sun is in some other sign, then look to that
sign's domicile lord (its dispositor) for information about the nature,
amount, and availability of resources it is likely to receive from its host. In
the above example, the Taurus Sun is not in any signs of its own rulership,
so look to the placement and condition of its dispositor, Venus, in the chart. Aspect Considerations
Look to see if the Sun is in the same sign as another planet, asteroid, fixed
star, Lot of Fortune, or lunar node. The significations of these celestial
bodies or points will contribute their own natures to the expression of the
life purpose, and this is the time to bring their meanings into the
delineation. The closer they are to the degree of the Sun, the more active
their influence. For the minor asteroids, I generally do not go beyond a 3degree orb.
Here we encounter a major difference between modern and traditional
astrology—but not an irresolvable one. In modern astrology, a planet gains
in importance and influence if conjoined with the Sun; the two archetypes
merge and function as a team. The basic life purpose incorporates the
qualities of the planets and asteroids that conjoin the Sun. In traditional astrology, if a planet or Fortune is under the Sun's beams
within a 15-degree orb, it becomes burnt up by the Sun's glare and its own
significations and the topics of the houses it rules are weakened. What
actually happens is that the Sun takes up and absorbs the qualities of these
other planetary bodies and radiates them outward as part of its own
expression. Thus Mercury conjoined to the Sun results in a more mercurial
kind of Sun. While the power of the planet is weakened when absorbed by
the Sun, the Sun itself is strengthened. But if a planet is in its own sign of
rulership, it has more strength and resilience to withstand the ill effects of
the Sun's beams.
Any planets or asteroids that square or oppose the Sun produce a state of
dynamic tension, because their own agendas are often at cross-purposes
with, or going in an opposite direction from, the expression of the solar
purpose. When evaluating the condition of the Sun, be sure to determine if
it is being corrupted and harmed in its capacity to produce favorable
significations due to a conjunction, square, or opposition by Mars or
Saturn. Also check to see if it is bonified and enhanced due to a
conjunction, sextile, or trine from Venus and Jupiter.
The Sun is never retrograde. General Considerations
The rubric I have given you for delineating the Sun can be used, with
modifications, to interpret any other planet. If you are a beginner, focus on
the Sun as the basic life purpose and source of will with regard to the
zodiacal sign and house that it occupies, the house that it rules, and any
planets or asteroids that are conjunct with it. Then scan to see if any other
planets that square or oppose the Sun present obstacles or challenges to the
Sun's expression, and look for planets that trine or sextile the Sun that may
provide support. It is especially important here to think about how to
synthesize the meaning of the Sun as the basic life purpose with the
Ascendant ruler as the capacity of the personality to accomplish life goals
that are motivated by a core need.
If you are at an intermediate or advanced level and feel confident of
your process, begin to incorporate an analysis of the planet based on its
condition. This is the goal that you eventually want to reach. But
concentrate on first things first, until they become second nature to you. Otherwise, you will become confused and build your readings on a shaky
foundation.
And finally, our discussion of the Sun raises a challenging philosophical
issue that we will address more fully in our discussion on counseling. It is
our operating hypothesis here that everyone has a life purpose, which, if
expressed, brings a sense of meaning to the life. But how do you interpret
charts in which it is more difficult to express that purpose, or in which the
outcomes of the purpose result in unfavorable reactions from others? How,
as an astrological counselor, do you deal with a client whose chart reflects
the likelihood of a life containing obstacles, setbacks, lack of focus, or
unrealized potential? These are questions you have to consider when
interacting with clients.
Bill's core essence is shaped by the Sun in Scorpio in the twelfth
house. Behind the exuberant, extroverted, social persona designated
by the Sagittarian Ascendant is an individual who is intensely
private, with deep penetrating insights that pierce beneath the
surface of whatever he encounters—hidden agendas, strong
passions, and intense attachment to others. The twelfth-house Sun
can connote the suffering that arises from a sense of existential
alienation, the call for selfless service to others, and a quest to
illuminate what is hidden. A relentless investigation of the
subconscious psychological forces that drive him and others is a
source of both inner power and selftorture.
The Sun rules the ninth house (Leo occupying the ninth), which is
associated with religion, higher education, longdistance travel, and
multicultural perspectives. Arising out his own suffering from
feeling isolated and rejected by others (twelfth house), Bill's life
purpose can be imagined as the application of spiritual teachings
(Sun ruling the ninth house) for transformation of the self (Sun in
Scorpio) and for the benefit of others (Sun in the twelfth house).
The desire for solitude in order to contemplate the ineffable (Sun in
the twelfth) is polarized by Uranus in the sixth house, which adds a
rebellious and non-conformist dimension to the basic nature. Uranus
can precipitate ongoing disruption as well as innovation in its
attempt to be resourceful and consistent (Taurus) in the world of
jobs, daily routines, and health crises (sixth house). Because the Sun is in a cadent house, there is not a lot of vital
force available to pursue its agenda, at least in terms of outer
manifestation. From a psychological perspective, the real work of
the soul purpose may take place on the inner levels. The
problematic nature of the twelfth house to result in unfavorable
outcomes can be understood as an encounter with difficult
psychological material, making others, when confronted with it,
resentful of the person who has brought it to consciousness. The
Sun in the twelfth house can illuminate all that is hidden and
suppressed. The Sun is not in any sign of its own rulership, and thus
does not have access to its own resources. While the Sun receives
some assistance from the trine from Jupiter, the Ascendant ruler, it
is also hindered by the square from Mars, its dispositor. Thus, the
capacity to express the life purpose may operate at a low level, take
a back seat to other agendas, have difficulty manifesting, result in
problematic experiences, or be deferred until later in life. THE MOON
The Moon is a general symbol of the body, in counterpoint to the Sun,
which is a general symbol of the mind. In and of itself, the Moon signifies
the ways in which the impressions of our early childhood conditioning
have imprinted the patterning of our bodies, our instincts, and our
emotional responses to life—all pre-cognitive faculties. When we respond
to situations based on our instincts and feelings, when we “act without
thinking,” these behaviors often can be traced back to what we
experienced in early life when we were under our mother's influence. As
such, the Moon colors what makes us feel nurtured and secure, how we
express nurturing toward others, and how we cope with emotional stress in
our lives. Like the ocean tides that are regulated by the lunar phases, the
tides in our bodies, as the ebb and flow of our moods, are under the
domain of the Moon. While the Moon continues to symbolize all these
other qualities, when evaluating its role in terms of the life purpose, we
must see it as pointing to how an individual brings the conceptual vision of
the life intention, as depicted by the Sun, into the physical world by
grounding it in the daily actions of everyday life. House Considerations
The Moon's house placement signifies the area of life activities in which
the person attempts to establish emotional intimacy, connection, and
comfort, as well as the area where the purpose will be brought into daily
life. The topical meanings of houses ruled by the Moon (whichever house
is occupied by the sign of Cancer) also are factored into the kinds of
activities that bring the purpose into everyday life. The Moon attempts to
bring about the affairs of the house it rules by means of its activities in the
house it occupies. The relative angularity and good/bad nature of the house
that the Moon occupies address how much strength the Moon has to
produce its effects and how favorable those outcomes will be in the life. Sign Considerations
The zodiacal sign the Moon occupies describes the manner in which the
life purpose is actualized. It also symbolizes the qualities that nurture the
person's capacity to do so, as well as the qualities that the person needs in
order to feel emotionally nurtured, comfortable, and safe. The Moon
located in Cancer or Taurus points toward self-sufficiency and esteem in
connection with the Moon's significations, and in its capacity to actualize
the intentions designated by the Sun. A placement in Capricorn or Scorpio
indicates challenges with securing emotional needs and implementing the
purpose. The Moon's dispositor provides additional information about the
resources available to the Moon from its host planet. Aspect Considerations
First, look to see if the Moon is conjunct another planet, asteroid, fixed
star, Fortune, or lunar node. The significations of these planetary bodies
will contribute their own natures to the actualization of the life purpose in
the daily activities. Any planets or asteroids that square or oppose the
Moon produce a state of dynamic tension, because their own agendas are
often at cross-purposes with the individual's attempt to actualize the
purpose. Factor in help and hindrance from the benefic and malefic
planets. Solar and Lunar Considerations The Moon is never retrograde. It can suffer the effects of being under the
beams, which means that being born within a day before or after the New
Moon, when the Moon's light cannot be seen on Earth, carries some
diminishment of the Moon's effectiveness. However, this is ameliorated if
the Moon is in Cancer or Taurus. Check the Moon's speed, whether it is
waxing or waning, and whether it is making applications to other planets
(within 13 degrees across sign boundaries) or is void-of-course.
Then make a judgment. How and where and with whom does the Moon
apply the life intention symbolized by the Sun to the practicalities of the
everyday world? To what extent does the Moon have the capacity to be
effective in terms of its vital force, resources, and assistance received in
ways that produce favorable outcomes for the individual?
Bill's emotional nature is shaped by the Moon in Aquarius in the
third house. In juxtaposition to the passionate, intense, allconsuming
nature of the Scorpio Sun, the Aquarian Moon is marked by
emotional detachment, impersonality, and a desire to create social
change motivated by altruism and humanitarianism. In terms of
zodiacal signs, the Sun and Moon are configured by a square aspect,
suggesting tension between the thinking and feeling parts of Bill's
nature. He may experience conflict between what he feels and what
he thinks. The hidden emotional material of the Scorpio Sun needs
to surface into his conscious awareness so he can better understand
the deep currents that inform his communications.
The Moon is located in the third house of communication, where
there is an emotional need to talk about the feelings. The Moon
rules the eighth house (Cancer occupies the eighth) associated with
topics of death, benefits accrued from death, sexuality (in modern,
though not in traditional, astrology), and the psychological
unconsciousness. Bill establishes emotional intimacy through
conversing about these topics. The Moon attempts to bring about
the matters of the eighth house by means of its activities in the third.
There may also be some connection between inheritances (Moon
ruling the eighth) and siblings (Moon occupying the third), or close
involvement with siblings concerning joint financial resources. The
third house also signifies the local community, and the Moon in this place may nurture and be nurtured through involvement in
community interactions.
The Moon has a close opposition to Pluto and Pallas, pointing to
deep attachments with loved ones, the inner feminine (Moon)
imaged as a powerful (Pluto) intelligent (Pallas) woman, and the
attempt to nurture others (Moon) through the challenging
(opposition) of belief systems (ninth house). The Moon also is
conjoined by sign with Juno, one significator of marriage, and with
Mars, the principle of assertion and conflict. Bill has an emotional
need for freedom (Moon in Aquarius) within a committed
relationship (Moon conjunct Juno), and his marriages may be
fraught with struggles for power and control (Juno conjunct Mars),
battling over different belief systems (blending in the opposition
from Pluto in the ninth house) and styles of parenting (Mars rules
the fifth house of children). The Moon with Mars in the third house
may also signify conflict with siblings and partners.
The Moon is in a cadent, but good, house, and is not in any places
of its own rulerships, suggesting that there is not as much drive to
express its significations as outer events, although the ones that are
expressed are generally favorable. Again, from a modern
perspective, cadent planets can be interpreted as having an active
inner life, and, in this case, the Moon is busy in the sphere of
thinking, learning, reading, and conversing. The Moon receives
some help from Venus sextiling it, but also considerable hindrance
from the co-presence with Mars. The Moon's dispositor/domicile
lord is Saturn, which is located in the fifth house of children and is
ostensibly weak in the sign of its fall, retrograde, and conjunct the
south node. Because Saturn is in mutual reception with Mars, it has
a hidden strength in providing resources to the Moon, but
communication with a partner with regard to children may,
nevertheless, be tense and strained. The Moon has challenges in
meeting its emotional needs and may encounter some conflict and
resistance in any attempt to establish emotional intimacy.
The manner in which the intention of the Sun is anchored into the
world by the Moon is primarily through the dissemination of information (third house) in the local community that is innovative,
progressive, free-thinking, and humanitarian (Aquarius).
Now let's distill and summarize the main ideas from our analysis of the
Ascendant and its ruler, the Sun, and the Moon into a statement of what
Bill's basic life purpose might be:
The core need that motivates the soul is the quest for a more
expansive vision of family and home structures; the life purpose is
expressed through the incorporation of spiritual teachings that effect
personal transformation and liberation, which is actualized through
disseminating information about innovative developments within
community life. The cadent positions of the Sun and Moon suggest
that the essential work of the life purpose occurs in the inner realm
of thought and spiritual practice.
Let's see if our statement speaks to the themes of Bill's life. Early in life,
Bill gained a national reputation as a filmmaker documenting the New Age
communes that flourished along the West Coast between 1968 and 1972.
Thirty years later, he produced a publictelevision documentary recognizing
innovative community projects and interactions in communities throughout
the state. Currently, he has a business renovating and building co-operative
housing units. He has recently bought a large home for the purpose of
creating an intentional domestic community that values spiritual practice.
You can see just how far you can get in the delineation of a chart by
following the trail of these three primary places of life. They can provide a
basic framework for interpreting the natal chart. In the process of looking
at the web of relationships depicted in Bill's chart by the Ascendant, its
ruler, the Sun, and the Moon, you have also touched upon a number of
other planets that are configured to these principle significators of the life
force. You have elucidated the major themes that have shaped this person's
life experiences. The underlying message of the chart has begun to emerge
and should be relatively well defined. However, there may still be parts of
the chart that you deemed significant in your overview that have not been
addressed. You can expand upon these themes and fill in additional details
by considering other factors listed in your overview. Depending on the time remaining in your session and the focus questions indicated by your
client, you can move on to other significant factors in the chart. STUDY GUIDELINES
Examine all the factors involved for a delineation of the Sun and the
Moon in your practice chart.
Prepare a written analysis, following the example in Bill's chart. In
parentheses, indicate what astrological factor you are examining for
each statement you make. Mention any important transits and/or
progressions to the Sun and the Moon, but defer the interpretation of
these factors until the next chapter.
End with a statement in which you reframe the material into a concise
summary that addresses life purpose, integrating the main point of the
Ascendant and its ruler, and the Sun and Moon. This should be no
more than 100 words. CHAPTER SIX TIMING BY TRANSITS AND PROGRESSIONS
WE HAVE EXAMINED the natal chart, which depicts the positions of the
planets at the birth moment, and interpreted it as a description of a person's
character over the duration of his or her life. We've used it as an indicator
pointing to the kinds of activities that will lead a person toward a sense of
living a purposeful life. But the birth chart is also a map of a person's
destiny, indicating when the various events promised in the natal chart will
occur. From a modern perspective, timing factors can forecast
opportunities for personal growth, as well as the nature of obstacles to be
overcome in the process of self-improvement and development. Dane
Rudhyar spoke of timing in astrology as a schedule for the unfoldment of
the birth potential over time.
Generally, when people's lives are going well, they do not seek advice
or counseling. But when things start going badly—difficulty with or loss
of relationships, jobs, health, or belief systems—they become anxious,
fearful, and insecure. At these times, they are more likely to seek insight or
advice about what is happening and what the outcome is going to be. This
is when many people come to an astrologer's consulting room. The timing
of these critical periods of crisis and change can often be seen through the
timing factors in astrological prediction. It was astrology's claim to be able
to predict the future that contributed to it becoming the premiere system of
divination in the ancient world. In fact, historically, one of the main
questions posed to astrologers is: What is going to happen next?
From a traditional perspective, timing factors predict the rise and fall of
favorable and unfavorable periods in life. In addition, they indicate when
specific events like marriage, the birth of children, health crises, or professional promotions will occur. Some of these events can be fortunate,
others unfortunate. From a modern perspective, timing factors show
periods of transition and change in our lives, where opportunities exist for
growth by releasing and transforming the old so the new can emerge and
take shape.
It is precisely at these times of crisis that people are most likely to take a
hard look at their lives and question whether they are doing the right thing
for themselves. They often are pushed into wondering if there may be
other directions or paths that will give them greater happiness and
fulfillment. This is where the motifs of crisis indicated by timing factors in
the chart and concerns about meaningful life directions intersect. Clients
are vulnerable, open, and receptive, and often want to consider the
essential meaning of their lives when they come into the consulting room,
because of the eruption of situations that threaten to disrupt and shatter
their lives as they know them.
Modern astrology has a plethora of different timing mechanisms.
Transits, secondary and tertiary progressions, solar-arc and primary
directions, eclipses, and Solar Returns top the list of timing techniques in
the Western system. The revival of traditional astrology is bringing
forward many additional techniques—profections, planetary periods and
ascensional times, circumambulations, decennials, zodiacal releasing, and
firdaria—that are not generally part of the modern technical corpus. A
beginning student can be overwhelmed and confused about which timing
method to use, when to use it, and how to determine a hierarchy of
importance.
Hellenistic (time lords), Medieval/Arabic ( firdaria), or Vedic (dashas)
timing procedures make use of long-term planetary periods and subperiods to determine the broad divisions of time under whose auspices the
transits and progressions occur. The value of these general time periods is
the capacity to view the long-term patterns of the life that are more
inclusive than a snapshot of what is happening in just one year. However,
modern Western astrology, for the most part, lacks methods to signify
these general time periods.
Instead, modern astrology relies primarily on the outer-planet transits
through the signs to discuss long-term effects, but these often speak more
to generational and social influences than to individual events. It also looks
to the critical aspects each planet makes to itself by transiting aspect in the course of its own cycle—for instance, the Saturn return every twenty-eight
to thirty years, punctuated by the square and opposition to its natal position
every seven years—to convey the meanings of particular events within an
unfolding cycle. The secondary progressed lunation cycle can be used to
sketch out eight distinct three- to four-year periods as the successive stages
of a thirty-year cycle of development.
By and large, modern astrologers use primarily the transits of the outer
planets and secondary progressions to the natal chart to forecast the major
influences and events that are likely to occur in the year ahead. MAJOR TIMING PROCEDURES
Following is a description of the major timing procedures used by both
modern and traditional astrologers, and suggestions for how you can
prioritize the various timing mechanisms at your disposal. The second part
of this chapter focuses on what you can cover realistically in a one-hour
session through the use of transits and progressions. In later chapters, we
will discuss the progressed lunation cycle, annual profections, and the
Solar Return chart. The remainder of the traditional techniques will not be
covered in this book. Progressed Lunation Cycle
Unless you use the traditional methods of planetary time-lord periods to
gain a sense of long-term influences, begin with the progressed lunation
cycle. Every thirty years, the occurrence of a progressed New Moon (the
progressed Moon is conjunct the progressed Sun) initiates the emergence
of some kind of new vision or aspiration that grows to maturation twentyone years later, and is brought to conclusion and summation at the closure
of the cycle. A person's progressed lunation phase indicates the current
stage in this thirty-year process. Checking the degree of the progressed
New Moon relative to the natal chart, the house in which it occurs, and
conjunctions to natal planets gives important information about the
meaning of the entire cycle. Some astrologers also look to the Sabian
symbol of the progressed New Moon for a symbolic image that embodies
the new direction. This method will be discussed in more detail in chapter
8.1 Outer-planet Transits
You can assess the meanings of the outer-planet transits (Jupiter, Saturn,
Uranus, Neptune, Pluto) to personal planets and to the angles that are
sensitive points. You can gain insight by using the progressed lunation
cycle as a framework in which to evaluate individual transits. For example,
a Pluto transit to the Moon during a New Moon phase has a directive
completely different from when it occurs during the final Balsamic phase.
The period of intensity for the individual is the strongest when transiting
planets are approaching natal planets, gradually building up pressure that
becomes most concentrated at the conjunction, and then dropping off in
intensity as they separate. Their effect is especially strong when transiting
planets retrograde back and forth over the natal planet. The passage of a
transiting planet through a particular sign and house also has significance
for the length of time that the planet is in the sign. Outer-planet transits to
the outer planets have more of a generational than individual influence. If
an outer-planet transit is not making an aspect to a natal planet or point, we
won't dwell on it, aside from a quick mention of the house it is activating. Inner-planet Transits
The inner-planet transits (Moon, Sun, Mercury, Venus, Mars) move so
quickly that their effects are transitory, except when they make a station
and retrograde over natal planets, which lengthens their periods of
influence. Eclipses
Eclipses occur around twice each year, and you should keep in mind the
degrees of the solar eclipse. If a solar eclipse aspects a natal planet or
angle, and especially by conjunction, opposition, or square (3-degree orb
or less) in that order, it may have a strong impact on the significations of
that planet for up to six months or more after the eclipse. Secondary Progressions
When looking at secondary progressions, the inner planets generally have
more impact than the outer. The sign and house of the progressed Moon are especially important, as the progressed Moon moves through all twelve
signs around the chart every twenty-seven years. The progressed Moon has
a three-month period of influence on a natal planet or point—1 degree
approaching, 1 degree conjunct, 1 degree separating. When the progressed
angles or inner planets are within a 1-degree orb of a natal planet or angle
it may be significant. Also, when a progressed planet changes sign or the
year in which it makes an ingress (enters) into the next sign, it is likely to
precipitate a shift of emphasis in the person with regard to the
significations of that planet, now in a different sign and house. Solar-arc Directions
Some astrologers use solar-arc directions that entail moving each planet at
the same rate as the Sun's progressed movement, which is about 1 degree
per year, and note the conjunctions of solar-arc planets to natal planets and
angles as signaling the occurrence of events associated with the nature of
the planets involved. Solar Return
If you want to investigate a particular year, the Solar Return chart can be
useful (see chapter 12). To the extent that modern astrologers use both
precessed and non-precessed returns, as well as natal and relocated returns,
they end up with four possible Solar Return charts. This can be a confusing
morass to sort through. I have come to appreciate the simplicity of the
Hellenistic approach, in which the Solar Return chart is used primarily as a
transit chart on a person's birthday, where the positions of the planets on
the birthday relative to the natal chart have an influence for the entire year
that runs from birthday to birthday. I no longer look at Solar Returns as
independent charts (hardly ever, anyway). Annual Lord of the Year
An adjunct to the Solar Return is the annual lord of the year by profections
from the Ascendant. The condition of this planet, both in the natal chart
and in the Solar Return chart, and its placement relative to the natal chart
points to the general tone of the year. Transits by the annual profected time
lord to other planets in the natal chart or transits to the annual profected time lord in the natal chart by other planets are especially activated and
“hot.” In addition, any planets occupying the house of the annual
profection are likewise triggered in the natal chart and by transit (see
chapter 12). Lunar Return
If you want to investigate a particular month, use the Lunar Return in the
same way outlined for the Solar Return above. You can also look to see if
the progressed Moon is making any 1-degree aspects to the natal planets,
and you can look at the monthly profected house and its lord. This is also
the context in which to evaluate the innerplanet transits to the natal
positions or to the topical house being investigated. TRANSITS
Now let's look more closely at the use of transits and progressions for a
one-hour consultation session.2 Here you will learn to identify the most
important timing activations, ones that are the easiest to recognize. In
chapter 12, we will discuss the use of annual profections and the Solar
Return chart.
Simply defined, transits are the current positions of the planets in the
sky. The doctrine of transits proposes that, as the planets move through the
various signs, they activate the qualities of those signs in accordance with
their own natures. This is the basis of the predictions of mundane astrology
as applied to world affairs—for example, Pluto in Sagittarius between
1982 and 2008 will precipitate upheavals and transformations (Pluto) in
the area of religion and belief systems (Sagittarius), while Pluto's entrance
into Capricorn in 2008 will signal similar upheavals and exposures in
political institutions and business corporations.
At the level of individual birth charts, as transiting planets pass through
the various zodiacal signs in the years after a birth, whatever house is
occupied by that sign is activated by the transit of a planet moving through
that sign. Thus, if Sagittarius occupies your seventh house of relationship,
during the time when Pluto is in Sagittarius, you may expect upheaval and
transformations in your marriage. If you have Sagittarius occupying your
tenth house, the catharsis may occur in your career. If there are planets or
any of the four angles of the Ascendant, Descendant, Midheaven, or IC in that sign, the closer the transiting planet approaches the natal planet or
angle, the more intense the experience becomes. The significations of that
planet itself, as well as the topics of the houses it rules, are activated by the
force and nature of the transiting planet. This is why certain parts of our
selves come to the forefront during certain times in our lives, and not at
other times.
As you progress in your studies of astrology, you will naturally begin to
keep track of which zodiacal sign each planet is passing through during the
coming year, as well as the range of the specific degrees of the sign it will
transverse. It is a good idea to pick up your ephemeris periodically or
generate one on your computer program. Then browse a year or two ahead
to get a sense of each planet's movement, its retrograde periods and
stations, and its ingresses into different signs.
You must know how long each planet spends in a sign, which is a factor
of its speed based upon its distance from the Sun. The inner planets,
Mercury and Venus, which are closer to the Sun, make complete
revolutions every year and thus, unless they turn retrograde, spend about
one month in each sign. Mars has a two-year orbit, which gives it about
two months in each sign, and the asteroids have approximately four-year
orbits, giving them around four months in each sign. The outer planets are
farther away. Jupiter's twelve-year orbit around the Sun gives it about one
year in each sign; Saturn spends about two and a half years in each sign,
Uranus seven years, Neptune fourteen years, and Pluto, due to the
eccentricity of its orbit, between twelve and twenty-four years.
Thus you can see that the influence of inner planets through a sign is of
short duration—here today, gone tomorrow. So unless a client wants
information about a particular day or month, examining the transits of
Mercury, Venus, the asteroids, and even Mars has a lower priority in
assessing the major influences in the year ahead. By contrast, the slowermoving outer planets have a longer, and thus more concentrated, effect,
and so those are the transits on which you should focus. The only
exception to this is that, if Mercury, Venus, Mars, or a major asteroid is
making a station due to its retrograde motion on the degree of a natal
planet or angle, it deserves mention. However, from the perspective of
traditional astrology, if one of these inner planets happens to be a time lord
by any one of the various time-lord procedures, it will have a greater
influence by transit during the period when it is a time lord. Beginners often ask how close to a natal planet or angle a transiting
planet has to be before the person begins to feel the effects of the transit.
On the most general level, as soon as a transiting planet enters a sign, the
entire sign is stimulated by its presence, and every planet occupying any
degree of that sign becomes charged, because the sign itself is charged.
Thus, when analyzing a birth chart for current timing influences, note
which house is activated by each of the outer transiting planets, regardless
of whether or not any planets occupy that sign. If Saturn is transiting the
second house, you may predict a tightening and limiting of the finances. If
Uranus is transiting the fourth house, a destabilization and change in a
domestic situation may result. However, these comments need to be placed
within the context of how long the transiting planet will be there. If
transiting Pluto is at the beginning degrees of a sign, its activation of that
house may be for twelve to twenty years, and thus your comment pertains
to only the most general level of influence. If Pluto is at the 27th degree of
a sign, it may still activate that house for several more years, but if Jupiter
is at the 27th degree of a sign, it will probably be out within a month.
In addition to transits activating the signs through which they pass,
which in each person's chart may affect a different house, the transiting
planets also have increasing impact on any natal planets in that sign the
closer they approach them. Your next priority is to note if a transiting
planet will conjunct a natal planet or angle, and then see if the transiting
planet will make an opposition or square to some other natal planet, node,
or angle. The so-called “hard aspects” of the conjunction, square, and
opposition are usually more dramatic and external in their effects than the
“soft aspects” of the sextile and trine. And transits by the outer planets to
the luminaries (Sun and Moon), the inner planets (Mercury, Venus, Mars,
major asteroids), and even Jupiter and Saturn are more personal and
intense than to Uranus, Neptune, and Pluto, which, in turn, are more
diffuse and generational in their impact on the life.
When the transiting planets are within 5 degrees of exact to the
conjunction or aspect with a natal planet or angle, it is time to wake up and
take notice. For the slower-moving planets such as Pluto, the exact hit may
still be up to five years away, so use a smaller orb. But for the fastermoving planets such as Jupiter or Saturn, it may be a matter of weeks or
months and a larger orb of approach is appropriate. If the aspect is or will
become exact sometime in the coming year, be sure to mention it and then go into some detail. If it will become exact in the following year, mention
it in passing, but don't necessarily go into a lengthy discussion and
explanation unless your client has asked for a long-term overview of
forthcoming trends.
Outer planets regularly have periods of retrograde motion each year.
Tracking their movement in the sky, they seem to move backward for a
period of time before resuming their forward motion. In the ephemeris,
their zodiacal degree decreases when they are retrograde, and then begins
to increase when the planet turns direct. They may, in fact, make three
passes over a natal planet during that period of the time, which, in some
cases, may last for several years. The first pass by direct motion can bring
the situation into focus. When the transiting planet turns retrograde and
makes a second pass, it often becomes impossible for the person to ignore
the situation that has arisen and he or she may be forced to make some
kind of readjustment. The third pass after the transiting planet has turned
direct will often coincide with the completion of the change and the
resolution.
Table Júpiter , on the next page, shows the average duration of each of the
outer-planet transits to a particular planet or angle, as well as the kind of
energy that each transiting planet precipitates.
As a counselor, you can use variations of the above key phrases to
explain to your client the kinds of influences that the various planets bring
with them as they impact houses and natal planets in the natal chart. You
want to give your clients the sense that there can be positive eventual
outcomes to difficult periods of crisis and transition in their lives. But as
an astrologer, you should be aware of the nature of the problems that each
client is likely to encounter in the process, before you begin to spin. And
be careful not to find yourself in the position of making predictions about a
specific day when using transits, because, for a variety of reasons, events
do not usually occur “on schedule” or at an exact time. Instead, discuss the
event in a general time period.
From the traditional perspective, the transits of Mars and Saturn are
problematic, bringing experiences of conflict and separations for Mars, and
endings, failure, hardship, and denial for Saturn. The transit of Jupiter is
generally seen in a very positive light, bringing success and honors and
fortunate circumstances. The ancients did not know about Uranus, Neptune, or Pluto, but the raw
interpretation of these is that Uranus brings unexpected disruption of the
status quo, instability, anxiety, restlessness, rebelliousness, and desire for
escape from confinement—everything that urges liberation from any
situation that has become too confining and prevents new growth. Neptune
brings confusion, fear, deception, illusion, desire for escapism,
vulnerability to substance addictions, lack of clarity, and gullibility—
everything that makes you want to transcend the harshness and
materialism of the finite corporeal world and connect with some kind of
ideal, romantic, compassionate world. Pluto brings upheavals, catharsis,
rage, eruption of toxicity, destruction, obsession, confrontation with the
abusive use of power over you by others, death, and the revelation of
hidden secrets—everything that forces you to release old unconscious,
self-destructive patterns that have kept you locked in unhappy ways of
being.
Table Júpiter . The Transiting Planets3 Ancient astrologers sought to determine the kinds of events that were
likely to occur for an individual and, using timing techniques, to predict
when those events would occur, as well as the longer periods of fortunate
and unfortunate times in the life. Psychological astrologers look at general
trends. This approach tends to see everything as potentially favorable. It
explores the meaning of what happens and the response to changing situations rather than the events themselves. More scientifically oriented
astrologers try to ascertain exact days when specific events will occur. As a
counseling astrologer, you must locate your own position on this spectrum.
But more important, you must gauge the kind of approach your clients
want and how comfortable they are with it, and then adjust the lens
through which you filter the information accordingly.
At the most basic level, be aware that the only constant in life is the
process of change. To change is to grow and live, and to cease changing is
to stagnate and die. Thus, to the extent that transits symbolize the ongoing
transitions and dynamic transformations of our lives, ultimately their
purpose is to facilitate the continuous growth of the individual. But, in fact,
sometimes bad things happen that don't contribute to our positive growth.
This can make it difficult to find the silver lining in the cloud. In the end,
you must be honest with yourself about what is going on with your client
and what is or isn't likely to turn out well in the final accounting. INTERPRETING TRANSITS
There are a few basic guidelines that can help you correctly interpret
transits. The first two are correlates of one another, based on the principle
that a planet's capacity for either triggering or manifesting events by any
timing procedure is directly related to its condition in the natal chart.
Transits, or for that matter any timing procedure, cannot produce any
event that is not already promised as a possibility in the natal chart. You
must first determine if a planet that is the significator of a certain topic is
supported in the birth chart to produce an event, and if so, if that event is
likely to be favorable or unfavorable for the individual. Thus, if all the
significations for the topic of marriage are weak (see chapter 11), a Jupiter
transit, progression, or time lord will not result in any kind of long-lasting
marital union. This is a mistake that many astrologers make in their
interpretations. A client asks: When am I going to meet that special
someone to marry? And the astrologer responds: Oh, you are going to have
a Jupiter transit entering the seventh house or conjunct Venus next year,
and that looks like a very promising time for relationships. But you must
first evaluate whether marriage is a topic that is even indicated in the natal
chart before making any kind of prediction about when it will happen. The correlate to this is that what a transiting or time-lord planet yields in
any particular chart is directly related, not only to its own inherent nature
(like change for Uranus or limitation for Saturn), but also to its condition
in the natal chart. Thus a strong and favorable natal Jupiter will generally
produce beneficial events by transit in accordance with the relative
angularity of the house it is passing through; but a weak and maltreated
natal Jupiter cannot give the full measure of its beneficence by transit.
A third guideline is that not every transit produces an event. As an
astrologer, you will encounter situations in which, at one time, the transit
of a planet over the Ascendant had dramatic effects, and yet, the next time
the very same transit occurred, nothing happened. Or perhaps a Saturn
transit over one person's Moon resulted in a terrible experience, but in
another chart, the same transit went by almost unnoticed.
These guidelines for using a planet's natal condition as an indicator of
what it has the capacity to produce only partially explain discrepancies
between various times and various charts. Preliminary studies in
Hellenistic astrology indicate that ancient astrologers held that, when a
planet becomes a time lord, it is “turned on” for a certain period of time.
During that period, it is more active in terms of the transits it makes to
other planets, as well as in terms of transits made to it by other planets.
This may be one explanation of why transits over angles and planets do not
always manifest as outer events. This can be a particular problem when
rectifying charts of an unknown birth time by working backward from the
assumption that transits or directions over angles indicate significant life
events. Experience shows that, even with a very secure birth time, this is
simply not the case in every instance.
Here is a summary of simple guidelines for using transits in a onehour
consultation.
Use only the transits of the outer planets, unless the inner planets are
making stations.
If you are a traditional astrologer, you may use inner-planet transits if
they happen to be a time lord during the period being investigated and
interpret them within the context of the inquiry specified by the
particular time-lord procedure.
Note what house each transiting planet is activating. Note if the transiting planet is making a conjunction, opposition, or
square to a natal planet or angle.
Know the speed of each planet, as this will tell you when the effects
begin and how long they will be operative.
Aspects by transiting planets to the inner natal planets and angles are
more powerful and personal. Aspects by transiting planets to outer
natal planets are part of a generational influence.
Look to general trends, not specific dates.
The power of a transiting planet and the nature of the events
represented by a natal planet that is activated by a transit are dependent
on what topics and significations those planets govern in the natal
chart and on their condition.
Not all transits produce outer events.
Let's imagine that Bill comes in for a reading near his birthday in
November 2006. Look at the transits for the year ahead through the end of
December 2007 (see figure 6 on page 75). Don't simply print out the
transits from your computer program. Pick up an ephemeris and look
through the pages as you read along. First get a sense of the timing of the
transits; then interpret them.
Transiting Jupiter enters Bill's first house on November 23, 2006
and stays until December 2007. At the end of January, it will
conjoin Venus and Mercury and then the Ascendant by the middle
of February. Jupiter stations at 19 Sagittarius in April, then turns
retrograde and makes a second pass over these points in May-June.
It directs in August and makes the final pass in September-October,
squaring its own natal position in December, right before leaving
the sign. For all practical purposes, the Jupiter transit over the
Ascendant and first-house planets is operative for most of 2007.
The transit of Pluto has been in the first house since its entry into
Sagittarius in 1982. What is significant is that it will square natal
Jupiter to the exact degree by February 2007 and continue to
stimulate that point until November 2008. Because Jupiter is the
ruler of the Ascendant and the strongest planet in the chart, this is
significant. The fact that Pluto has been squaring Neptune in the tenth house is
not as important, as everybody in Bill's age group has had the same
thing going on. However, because Neptune is connected to Jupiter,
when Jupiter is activated, the tenth-house professional significations
of Neptune are more likely to come into play at that time.
The transit of Neptune in Aquarius has been in the third house
since 1998 and will remain there until 2012. During 2007, it
activates 17 to 22 degrees of the sign. Bill does not have any planets
at those degrees of Aquarius, Leo, or Scorpio; but Uranus is at 19
Taurus receiving the square. However, Uranus is generational, so
don't pay too much attention to the Neptune transit, except to note
that, in 2008, it will square the Sun. That is an important influence
on the horizon.
Uranus in Pisces has been activating Bill's fourth house since April
2003 and will continue to do so until 2011. During 2007, it moves
from 10 to 18 degrees of Pisces, and so will square Venus, Mercury,
and the Ascendant/Descendant axis during the entire year, with the
peak periods to the Ascendant in April, September, and January
2008.
In September 2007, Saturn finishes up its two-and-a-halfyear
sojourn through Leo, which occupies the ninth house in Bill's chart.
At present, it is squaring his Sun at 24 Scorpio, making a station in
December 2006 at 25 Leo, which then opposes his Juno at 25
Aquarius. Saturn goes retrograde and squares Uranus during the
spring, and re-contacts the Sun, Juno, and Mars in July-August,
right before it enters Virgo.
Also note that the transit of Chiron will make a conjunction to the
Moon in January 2007.
Now, let's try to get a sense of what is happening as a whole before
beginning to delineate the individual transits and prioritize which ones are
most important. First, are any of the four most important points in Bill's
chart involved—the Sun, Moon, Ascendant, or Ascendant ruler? Yes, three
of the four, so you know it is a big year. Saturn, the principle of limitation,
is urging the Sun to focus on its priorities in Bill's life goals so he can reap recognition for his endeavors. In a larger sense, any transit of Saturn to the
Sun activates the awareness of unrealized potential. It brings up the
question: What do I want to be when I grow up? At Bill's age, the question
may be: Have I accomplished my life goal?
Meanwhile, transiting Uranus, the principle of liberation, is stimulating
the Ascendant for radical change and transiting Jupiter for personal growth
and the dissemination of knowledge. Transiting Pluto is intensifying and
transforming the significations of Jupiter, which rules both the first-house
Ascendant (self) and the fourth house (parents, home). All this suggests an
image of a coil that is being pressed down by Saturn, increasing the
Uranian force with which it will spring forth and free itself. Your main
discussion of the timing as signified by the transits, therefore, will focus on
what is happening to the Ascendant and its ruler, Jupiter, as well as to the
Sun. Jupiter moving through its own sign of Sagittarius generally heralds a
period of reward.
Transiting Saturn in the ninth house and squaring the Sun, which is the
ruler of the ninth, is pressuring Bill for deep thought and realistic appraisal
of his broader intellectual ideas, spiritual beliefs, and perhaps interests in
foreign matters—and calling for him to manifest the expression of his
purpose that encompasses these far-ranging visions.
Transiting Jupiter in the first house provides opportunities for success in
his personal ventures, and urges expanded travel, education, and the
putting forth of his own knowledge. It will activate Mercury, which points
to growth in communication skills, and Venus, which bodes well for
monetary, artistic, and romantic endeavors.
Transiting Uranus in the fourth house is creating restlessness in Bill's
domestic situation, destabilizing the situations that have served as anchors.
With its square of the Ascendant/Descendant axis, it urges his inner
individuality to break through his socially conditioned persona and
promote radical change in his outlook and interactions with others.
Transiting Pluto is in its last stretch of a long-term regeneration of his
personality and physical body, which, in the most positive manifestation,
builds a sense of personal power. Its last act will be the square of Jupiter,
the Ascendant ruler and ruler of the fourth house of home and parents. He
may expect that certain familial structures in his life will be destroyed and
replaced by others. In the process, the strongest and best planet in his chart
will be catalyzed to lead his philosophical visions to their destination. PROGRESSIONS
Progressions are the second major timing procedure used by modern
astrologers. While transits depict the actual changing positions of the
planets in the sky, progressions operate on a more symbolic level. They
measure the movements of the planets in the days after birth, and
symbolically relate them to a larger period of time. Although there are
several different kinds of progressions (primary, secondary, tertiary), we
will discuss only secondary progressions here. We'll examine the positions
of the progressed planets relative only to the natal chart, and we won't look
at the progressed chart as an independent chart.
The fundamental premise of secondary progressions is a simple
formula: One day of time equates to the passage of one year of time. If, for
example, you are interested in the timing influences for the tenth year of a
person's life, open your ephemeris to the month of a person's birth and
count down ten days after birth. (The precise calculation is more involved
than this, but this is the general principle). The positions of the planets on
the tenth day after birth relative to the positions of the planets on the day of
the birth give information about how the birth potential signified by each
planet develops over time by incorporating the qualities of the signs it
passes through and the planets it encounters along the way. The
implications of this procedure are thought-provoking. It suggests that we
live through the entirety of our lives in the days after birth. Each day is a
miniencapsulation of a corresponding year of life. The experiences of that
day are a preview of that year, slowly unraveling the details of a twentyfour-hour microcosm into a 365-day year of actualization.
In essence, secondary progressions are the transits that we experience in
the first few months of life that will have a progressive effect over the
course of our lives. As such, they evoke experiences that have already
been imprinted in our infantile pre-cognitive memories. According to
astrologer Brian Clark, the movements of the progressed planets around
the chart depict the maturation and psychological growth of various
aspects of the psyche. Júpiter The timetable and plan for development is an
outgrowth of the initial movements and contacts made by the planets to
one another in the days immediately following birth.
Entire books have been written detailing the subtleties and intricacies of
secondary and other types of progressions. We will stay focused on what you need to look for in a one-hour consultation that combines natal and
current timing information. There are four main movements to watch for
when investigating a particular year by this timing method:
Progressed planets or angles making exact aspects to natal planets
Progressed planets or angles changing signs
Planets that are retrograde at birth turning direct by progression, or
natal planets that are direct at birth turning retrograde by progression
The sign, house, and aspects of the progressed Moon (in chapter 7,
we'll look at the progressed Sun/Moon lunation phase)
Your ephemeris will show you that the faster-moving inner planets (Sun,
Mercury, Venus, and Mars) will move through several complete signs in a
three-month period, covering up to an entire quadrant of the chart, which
equates to around ninety years of life. The Moon passes through an entire
sign every month and, thus, through all the houses of the natal chart every
twenty-eight to twenty-nine years. These inner planets will not only
change signs, they are likely to conjoin and aspect a number of other
planets. By contrast, the slower-moving outer planets may only move
several degrees over the course of a progressed lifetime, and may not have
much direct contact with other planets.
Thus, in contrast to transits, where you look primarily at the movements
of the outer planets, in progressions, you focus on the movements of the
inner planets. The outer-planet progressions are generally insignificant,
with a few exceptions. The degree of the Midheaven progresses at the
same rate as the Sun, about 1 degree per year, and the progressed positions
of the other three angles change in accordance with that of the Midheaven.
The progressed angles are important.
The Sun's daily movement provides the base measurement for this
procedure. For the progressed Sun, Mercury, Venus, and the four angles,
take note only when one of these planets is within 1 degree of a natal
planet. One degree approaching represents the year before; an exact
conjunction represents the year in question; 1 degree separating represents
the year following. Use the same 1-degree rule for the progressed Moon,
only in this case, 1 degree approaching is the month before, an exact
conjunction is the month in question, and 1 degree separating is the month
following. With progressed Mars, ½ degree (thirty minutes) approaching is the year before and ½ degree separating is the year after. For the major
asteroids, use a ¼-degree (twenty-five minute) rule for determining
significance for the year in question. The progressed position of the outer
planets must be within a few minutes of exactness to a natal planet or
angle to have any bearing that differs from the natal lifelong influence. Be
aware, however, that if Mercury, Venus, Mars, or the major asteroids are
near their station points, either direct or retrograde, they are moving
extremely slowly, so that 1-degree orb may represent much more than one
year. This is not applicable to the Sun and Moon, because neither of them
is ever retrograde.
Look primarily for conjunctions, take note of oppositions, and only
perhaps glance at the other aspects. When a progressed planet contacts a
natal planet, both planets are impacted. The progressed planet incorporates
the qualities of the natal planet into its own ongoing development, and the
natal planet is stimulated to receive and respond to the promptings of the
progressed planet. Also watch to see if a planet changes signs. If you are
using the Whole Sign house system, the sign change will also correspond
to a house change. A sign change often points to an entirely new, and
perhaps unfamiliar, way of expressing the significations of that planet, as
well as the environment in which those energies actualize in the daily
experiences of life. The culture shock, so to speak, is apparent in the first
year or two of the transition to a new sign and house. Then there is a
gradual assimilation of the new way of being in the world, as it pertains to
that planet.
The third factor to track in your scan of noteworthy timing is whether
any planet makes a station by progression, turning retrograde or direct
during the time period under investigation. In modern astrology, the
primary meaning of retrograde planets is that the planet's function is
reversed, repressed, or inhibited in some way. Psychologically, this can
point to some kind of trauma that has frozen the expression of that planet's
function. Alternatively, it can indicate that its sphere of influence is
occurring in the inner life and world. In traditional astrology, a retrograde
planet is understood both in terms of its extremely slow motion, making it
less active, and in terms of its apparent backward motion, which points to
its significations being recalled or taken back.
When planets change direction, they mark major times of reorientation
and different approaches to the expression of their significations. In general, if a planet is retrograde at birth, when it turns direct, it indicates an
externalization and speeding up of its processes. On the other hand, if a
planet is direct at birth and turns retrograde at some point by progression,
this indicates an internalizing and slowing down of its processes.
Mercury has about a three-week period of retrograde motion; so if
someone is born with Mercury retrograde, at some point before he or she is
twenty-four years old, Mercury will turn direct. Venus spends about six
weeks in retrograde motion. If someone is born with Venus retrograde, it
will turn direct sometime before they reach the age of forty-three.
When looking at the progressed positions of Mercury, Venus, and Mars,
take note if they have reversed direction by progression from that of their
natal position. Verify if your computer program indicates that this is the
specific year in which a reversal of direction took place. If not, go back to
your ephemeris. If these planets are receiving major activations by other
timing methods, or if they are rulers of topics about which the client has
expressed concern, it is advisable to determine at which age the reversal
occurred.
The final factor to evaluate when using progressions is the movement of
the progressed Moon. Because the Moon moves so quickly in relation to
the other planets, passing through each sign and house every two and a
half years, it is a barometer of the ongoing fluctuation of the feelings in the
inner life. The progressed Moon indicates the best way to meet changing
emotional needs and establish emotional security at various stages in the
life. Again, the months when it changes sign and house are important to
note. The alternation from a masculine fire or air sign to a feminine earth
or water sign sets the tempo for the alternation between feeling more
extroverted or introverted and more active or receptive in accordance with
the nature of the sign itself. The house position of the progressed Moon
shows in what area of life activities a person is particularly sensitive
emotionally, and where he or she is being urged to develop new ways of
responding.
The progressed Moon's rapid motion will cause it to make aspects to
many planets in the course of its movement. While all the aspects have
meaning, look primarily for the conjunctions. The contact of the
progressed Moon with a natal planet will bring a person's emotional
sensitivity to bear on the significations of that planet, and can often trigger
underlying issues. But remember, while this contact may be intense and perhaps have long-lasting after-effects, it is of relatively short duration—
for a period of several months only.
During the period November 2006 to December 2007 (see figure 6
on page 75), besides a mention of the progressed Moon, there are
only two other progressions that are noteworthy for Bill.
The Midheaven, by progression, is conjunct the natal Ascendant at
16 Sagittarius. The MC angle that represents Bill's status in the
larger society based on his professional contributions is now in
exact alignment with his personality, symbolized by the Ascendant
leading his life to its destiny. Note that the Ascendant is under major
activation this year, being conjoined by the transit of Jupiter and
squared by the transit of Uranus. Thus you can surmise that this will
be a very important year for Bill in moving his life toward his goals.
The progressed Sun at 2 Aquarius is opposing natal Pallas and
Pluto at 2 Leo. The progressed Sun entered into Aquarius and the
third house about two and a half years ago, indicating a major shift
from second-house financial affairs to third-house mental interests.
This year, the Sun opposes Pallas Athena, the asteroid associated
with creative wisdom, and Pluto, the planet of depth transformation,
both in the ninth house of broad ideas and foreign travel. The
ongoing development of the content of the basic purpose as
depicted by the Sun concerning higher wisdom teachings about
spiritual transcendence is now being communicated in third-house
networking endeavors in the local community.
The progressed Moon in Cancer passing through the eighth house
over the next six months will move into a conjunction with
progressed Chiron and then natal Chiron. Also note that transiting
Chiron is passing over the natal Moon, duplicating the same theme,
and this is very significant. Chiron is wounding and healing; the
Moon is a general significator of Bill's emotions and mother. It rules
the eighth house of death, inheritances, and psychotherapy through
which the progressed Moon is passing. Remember that Pluto, by
transit, is squaring natal Jupiter—the Ascendant ruler and that of the
parents. You may cautiously inquire about the health of Bill's
parents, the management of his financial affairs, and perhaps be sensitive to the psychotherapeutic surfacing and healing of
emotional wounds. STUDY GUIDELINES
Examine the major timing activations of the transits and progressions
for your practice chart. Think about which are most important and
why. Which ones will you target in your consultation? Do you see
repetition of any themes?
Prepare a written analysis for your practice chart. As an astrologer, you
are asked to make predictions. Write down what you think may occur.
Ethical considerations demand, however, that you not make definitive
statements of impending death, divorce, or other catastrophic events,
because neither you nor the system is infallible. Begin to differentiate
between what you suspect may be the case and what it is appropriate to
convey to your client. Then determine how you will do that.
End with a statement in which you summarize the most important
timing, and decide what you are actually going to tell your client (as
opposed to what you actually think may happen). This should be no
more than 100 words. PART III BUILDING THE STRUCTURE CHAPTER SEVEN THE LUNATION PHASES
YOUR FRAMEWORK NOW includes three of the five places of life: the
Ascendant (and its ruler), and the two lights—the Sun and Moon. You
have also factored into your delineation the major timing activations of the
natal potential as indicated by transits and secondary progressions. Now
you are ready to investigate the derivative factors of the two lights as they
interact with one another—the lunation phases, the Lot of Fortune, prenatal lunation, the lunar nodes, and the eclipses. The visual phenomena
and the points of intersection that occur between the motions of the Sun
and the Moon during their various cycles lend depth, shading, and nuance
to the basic themes concerning life purpose that you have already
uncovered. They form the second tier of factors to integrate into your
interpretation, fleshing out the structure of the chart. We'll begin with the
lunation cycle, which depicts the changing relationship between the Sun
and the Moon for each night of the lunar month. THE LUNATION CYCLE
The Moon circles the Earth each month and, from the point of view of the
Earth, it reflects different amounts of the Sun's light at various points in its
cycle. The cycle of the Moon's waxing and waning phases is called the
lunation cycle, and the various lunation phases depict the changing
distances between these two luminaries. In the lunation cycle, the Moon
gradually increases in light as it separates from union with the Sun at its
closest approach at the New Moon. It reaches its maximum elongation
from the Sun and greatest illumination at the Full Moon, and then gradually decreases in light as it returns to the Sun, disappearing from
sight altogether shortly before their conjunction.
The Moon, with its repeating cycles of waxing and waning light, was an
ancient symbol for the birth, growth, death, and renewal of all life forms.
The lunar rhythm presented a creation (the New Moon), followed by
growth (to Full Moon), and a diminution and death (the three moonless
nights). The lunation cycle can be viewed as a prototype for the successive
stages of the organic growth of all living things, illuminating the
alternating forces of life and death as they flow through cyclical process.
Various cultures have subdivided this cycle into two hemispheres, three
phases, four quarters, eight cross-quarters, eleven figures, and twenty-eight
mansions. The twofold division yields the waxing hemisphere where the
life-force energy symbolized by the Moon is increasing and the waning
hemisphere where the life-force energy is decreasing. The threefold
division consists of the New, Full, and Dark phases of the Moon embodied
as the Triple Goddess in her aspects as Virgin, Mother, and Crone. The
fourfold division as New, First Quarter, Full, and Last Quarter Moons
mirrors the symbolic meanings of the four seasons, directions, cardinal
points, and elements.
We will explore the eightfold division of phases—New, Crescent, First
Quarter, Gibbous, Full, Disseminating, Last Quarter, and Balsamic—in
greater depth in the remainder of this chapter. These eight phases, which
mark the increasing and decreasing light of the lunar month, in some
intrinsic manner correspond to the eight divisions of the increasing and
decreasing light of the solar year, as marked by the solstices, equinoxes,
and cross-quarter days that formed the basis of the Celtic seasonal festival
calendar.
Other divisions of the lunation cycle include those by Hellenistic
astrologer Vettius Valens, who described the eleven figures of the Moon
(conjunction, rising, first crescent, first half, double-convex, whole,
double-convex, second half, second crescent, setting), as well as the figure
when the Moon first begins to wane.1 Paulus Alexandrinus had his own
variation of the eleven lunar figures.2 An early medieval text in Latin
discusses the qualities of the Moon on each of the twenty-eight days of the
lunar month, although this refers to the electional use of the Moon for
planting, building, conducting business, and so on. Indian astrology uses
twenty-seven nakshatras, each associated with a particular deity; Chinese, Arabian, and Tibetan astrology used twenty-eight mansions based, not
upon the Moon's phases, but on its orbital path through a series of fixed
star constellations. THE EIGHT LUNATION PHASES
We have seen that the Sun and the Moon each hold a pre-eminent place in
the hierarchy of astrological delineation. The Sun signifies the soul and the
intention for the life purpose; the Moon signifies the body and the means
of actualizing the life purpose in the concrete world. The lunation phases
are a display of the changing relationship between these two luminaries
during the course of the Moon's monthly orbit around the Earth. Each
lunation phase describes the kind of energy that is generated at each stage
of the cyclical process.
We are each born during a particular lunar phase, and this natal lunation
phase describes the kind of energy inherent in that stage of cyclical process
we use to express and actualize the life purpose (see figure 7 on page 140).
While Hellenistic astrologers were aware of the different qualities of the
various lunar phases, it was Dane Rudhyar who first articulated the
classification of the eight lunation phases as eight personality functions
and types. Rudhyar used the image of a seed as a metaphor of how the
eight phases depict the successive stages of the life process by which life
forms unfold, fulfill, complete, and renew themselves. He then
extrapolated from these meanings to eight human personality types that
reflect the behavior of individuals born during each lunation phase.3
The process begins at the New Moon, when a seed containing a new
vision infused with an intention germinates in the darkness. With the light
of the waxing Crescent phase, the first tender shoots of this vision have
struggled to push themselves above the ground. During the First Quarter
phase, the life force of the vision takes root by establishing itself; its stem
and leaf structure give shape to a strong definite form. FIGURE 7. Keywords for the eight lunation phases.
The waxing Gibbous phase corresponds to the development of the buds
with the promise and expectation of the flower that blooms during the Full
Moon phase. Now halfway around the lunar cycle at the Full Moon, the
vision is fully illuminated and infused with meaning and content. The
waning Gibbous phase, also known as the Disseminating phase,
corresponds to the fruition of the cycle, when the vision is acted upon and
lived out through the lives of humanity, thereby fulfilling its purpose.
In the Last Quarter phase, the crop is harvested and what has been
realized through the cycle is ingested and assimilated. Whatever fruit is left on the vine begins to wither and decompose. The essence of the vision
is then distilled into a seed capsule that is buried underground during the
final dark, or Balsamic, phase of the cycle, where it is nourished and
prepared for rebirth. This germinal idea is subsequently released with the
initiation of a new cycle.
It has been suggested that, in a model that accepts reincarnation, each
person incarnates successively into each one of the eight lunation phases
during one eight-fold cycle of experience in the development of a theme or
lesson that extends over the duration of eight lifetimes. Thus the lunation
phase, while clearly not indicative of the age of the soul as new or old, can
be viewed as the stage of the soul's development in this life as
commencing, culminating, or completing a thematic motif that began in
previous lifetimes.
In a model that does not accept reincarnation, the stage of the plant's
growth can be used as a metaphor for the purpose of an individual lifetime
within a larger contextual organic process. For example, the life purpose of
those born early in the cycle, however it is defined by the Sun and Moon,
has to do with the generation and release of new visions; for those born in
the middle of cycle, it has to do with the dissemination and distribution of
what they have found meaningful; for those born late in the cycle, it has to
do with the summing up and distillation of their wisdom. New Moon Phase: Incarnate, Emerge, Project
(The Moon is 0-45° ahead of the Sun)
Like the seed germinating underground, this phase represents the
emergence of the life into a new cycle of incarnations, or into the
beginning stage of the development of a new theme or lesson. The soul has
a youthful, innocent, and sometimes naïve quality and is eager and open to
embrace new experiences and ideas, often plunging into them without any
preconceived plan. The personality operates in a spontaneous and
instinctive manner that can be very subjective. These people discover that
the logical analytical approach to decision-making does not work very
well; for them, the first impulses or thoughts that come to mind yield the
best results. Some New Moon individuals can feel hesitant and shy about
being in the world, while others feel compelled to push themselves
forward and act in an overly self-involved manner. Both extremes are manifestations of the young personality trying to become aware of its
identity and learning how to project itself.
For those born during the New Moon phase, the kind of energy that
stands behind the expression and actualization of the life purpose as
symbolized by the Sun and Moon is that of emergence, projecting a strong
image upon the screen of the world, learning to inhabit the body with its
new personality, and propelling their movements forward in an instinctive
manner. They are here to respond to the call of new directions and to
release the first intimations of new aspirations, even though they
themselves may not always be aware of the long-term implications or
outcomes of what they initiate. Crescent Moon Phase: Overcome, Focus, Move Forward
(The Moon is 45-90° ahead of the Sun)
Like the young tender shoot of the plant that struggles against the force of
gravity to push itself up through the dark soil so it can begin to derive its
nutrients from the sunlight through the process of photosynthesis, those
born during the Crescent phase experience their lives as a struggle against
the forces of inertia. They must take charge of their bodies, focus their
energies, and begin to relate to the dense physical environment of their
world. In the process, they may encounter the resistance of forces from the
past pulling them backward in the guise of family and loved ones who do
not support or understand their impetus to move forward in their own
direction. This resistance also manifests as a paralysis that results from
their own fears of the unknown and unfamiliar, insecurities, lack of selfconfidence, and habits and unconscious patterns carried over from the past.
The antidote is to access the resources available in the immediate
environment that will help to develop new talents, skills, and abilities. By
adding new tools to their toolbox, they can gain the self-confidence to
overcome the resistance from both outer and inner sources, break free of
the past, and move forward. As they do so, many opportunities will open
for them. The final challenge is to take advantage of the opportunities by
acting on them.
For those born during the Crescent Moon phase, the kind of energy that
stands behind the expression and actualization of the life purpose as
symbolized by the Sun and Moon is that of struggling away from the inertia and dependency of past conditions and mobilizing their resources to
assert themselves in forward-moving directions. These individuals are here
to incorporate new talents into their repertoire of skills, to establish their
fledging identities as viable independent life forces, and to develop selfreliance, faith in themselves, and the persistence necessary for the
realization of the aspiration released at the New Moon phase. First Quarter Moon Phase: Decide, Act, Build
(The Moon is 90-135° ahead of the Sun)
The plant now goes through a rapid-growth phase, establishing its root
system and putting forth stems and leaves to support the flower and fruit
yet to be developed. Those born during the First Quarter phase of the
Moon likewise must root themselves into their world and build structures
to support the realization of their aspirations. They are ready to test their
growing strength, to reach out and shape, manage, and control their
environment. In the process, they often encounter many external crises in
which their own or others' structures and plans are challenged or fall apart
and chaos ensues. They must learn how to harness the tremendous surge of
energies released during these crises and, as quickly and efficiently as
possible, solve the problems by taking direct action to build new structures
so that they and everyone else can get on with their business. At these
times, they may feel animated, energized, and excited as they embody the
role of the hero who saves the day.
For those born during the First Quarter Moon phase, the kind of energy
that stands behind the expression and actualization of the life purpose as
symbolized by the Sun and Moon is that of learning how to anchor their
life force in society, how to activate their personalities by taking strong
direct action upon what they have decided to do, and how to exercise their
will, repudiating anything that holds them back and constructing the
foundations in the outer world that can facilitate the realization of their
visions. Gibbous Moon Phase: Evaluate, Analyze, Perfect
(The Moon is 135-180° ahead of the Sun) Now the plant's buds come forth from the leaves, displaying the promise of
what is yet to come. Those born during the Gibbous phase of the Moon
likewise develop a growing awareness of the purpose behind the vision
that has been released. They often carry a sense of anxious expectation that
they are on the brink of a great revelation and feel the need to improve,
refine, and perfect the structures that have already been built to be worthy
vehicles for the expression of the vision. They do this by means of critical
analysis, discovering what does not work and then adjusting and fixing it,
so the forms can be functional and useful for their intended purpose. The
drive for perfection also manifests as the drive for self-improvement by
finding better ways of operating and better techniques for doing things or
facilitating their personal growth. They desire to become as skillful as
possible in their chosen field of expression.
For those born during the Gibbous Moon phase, the kind of energy that
stands behind the expression and actualization of the life purpose as
symbolized by the Sun and Moon is that of critical evaluation, with
subsequent improvement, so they can contribute forms to society that are
of value and practical use. Behind this outer expression resides a mind that
is introspective and awaiting the full revelation of the vision that will
infuse the structure they have perfected. Full Moon Phase: Culminate, Illumine, Fulfill
(The Moon is 180-135° behind the Sun)
As the buds open, the flower blooms, turning itself toward the light. In a
similar fashion, those born during the Full Moon phase open themselves
up to others, who reflect back to them the full illumination of their vision.
In the cyclical process, this is the phase where meaning is realized, and
content is infused into the form that has been built. These people look for
the ideal in all they encounter. They especially desire meaningful
relationships with either one significant person or with a group of people
who share their vision. It is through their interactions with others that they
come to realize their own larger purpose. Thus, it is important for them to
be fully conscious of how they relate to others. They must be willing to
take responsibility for the consequences that their words, actions, and even
thoughts have for others. Other people are crucial for the furtherance of their own purpose, not unlike the birds and bees that must pollinate the
flower in order for the plant to bear fruit.
For those born during the Full Moon phase, the kind of energy that
stands behind the expression and actualization of the life purpose as
symbolized by the Sun and Moon is that of developing clarity in their
thinking that guides their actions toward others in the formulation of
conscious relationships. They are here to illuminate what is meaningful, on
both a personal and collective level. Disseminating Moon Phase: Distribute, Disseminate, Convey
(The Moon is 135-90° behind the Sun)
The apex of the plant's growth cycle occurs when the flower gives forth
the ripened fruit that is ready to eat. In a similar manner, the lives of those
born during the Disseminating Moon phase are the fruition of the seed
impulse germinated at the New Moon. They are here to embody their
vision fully and take it into the world in a way that can be assimilated by
and of benefit to others. Like the word “disseminate,” the keywords for
this phase are about sharing, conveying, and communicating information
that has been of personal value. This can occur, not only in oral or written
form, but also through the living out of beliefs. Some Native Americans
taught that you must “walk your talk.” To the extent that disseminating
people have an important message they feel compelled to share and have a
vehicle adequate to the task and a receptive audience, they feel as if their
life is in the flow. When they are not impassioned about some idea or do
not have a means by which to convey it, they may be overcome with a
sense of meaninglessness, failure, or futility.
For those born during the Disseminating Moon phase, the kind of
energy that stands behind the expression and actualization of the life
purpose as symbolized by the Sun and Moon is that of synthesizing and
disseminating information and ideas that they have found to be of personal
value. They are here to teach and share their truths, fully immerse
themselves in society, and, in the process, take in the feedback and wisdom
of others. Last Quarter Moon Phase: Reevaluate, Turn Away, Revise (The Moon is 90-45° behind the Sun)
Now the crop has been harvested and whatever fruit is left on the vine
begins to decompose, drawing its energy inward to create the seed for the
next cycle. People born during the Last Quarter Moon phase likewise
periodically find themselves faced with the necessity of letting go of
obsolete forms that have fulfilled their purpose, and severing themselves
from the parent plant. Dane Rudhyar called this phase a crisis in
consciousness, because the crises that occur are not the physical crises of
the outer world, but rather crises of thought in the inner mental realms.
When these individuals realize that they no longer believe in the ideas they
used to hold because they now know better, it is excruciatingly difficult to
continue being the people that they used to be, since they no longer hold to
the values of their former selves. They turn away from old
accomplishments and begin to look for new ideas around which to
reorganize their thinking. It is often difficult for them to externalize the
change until they have first worked it through in their own minds. During
this transition, they often continue to act in accordance with the old image,
even though it is no longer a genuine reflection of their current authentic
selves.
For those born during the Last Quarter Moon phase, the kind of energy
that stands behind the expression and actualization of the life purpose as
symbolized by the Sun and Moon is that of reevaluating beliefs, revising
thinking, and reorienting around new creative possibilities. They are here
to challenge and tear down societal structures that are antiquated and have
outlived their usefulness. Balsamic Moon Phase: Distill, Transform, Envision
(The Moon is 45-0° behind the Sun)
Now the seed falls to the ground and is buried in the dark soil until it regerminates in a new cycle. People born during the dark Balsamic Moon
phase, which is the final phase of the eight-fold lunation cycle, live a
particularly karmic life as they straddle the past and the future, bringing
closure to the old and preparing for the rebirth ahead. Their relationships
are many, strong, poignant, and intense, as they must come to terms with
and resolve old issues. They often feel out of synch with the rest of the
world because they are ahead of their times, already envisioning what it will take the rest of us a number of years to realize. Many sense that they
have a special calling or destiny, which, in fact, is the need to distill the
wisdom they have gained into some kind of seed form that can be passed
on to others as their legacy. These souls carry within themselves the sum
total of the experiences from the previous seven lunation-phase lifetimes,
which they bring to some kind of final synthesis as the preparation for the
next round of incarnations.
For those born during the Balsamic Moon phase, the kind of energy that
stands behind the expression and actualization of the life purpose as
symbolized by the Sun and Moon is that of resolving and completing the
past, making peace with those they encounter, and releasing seed ideas to
assist the future.
The table on pages 148 and 149 contains summaries for the key
meanings of each of the eight lunation phases. You'll find instructions for
determining the lunation phase during which you were born in Appendix
A.
Table 5. Indicators of the Stages of Development in an Eight-fold
Cycle4 THE PROGRESSED LUNATION CYCLE
We are each born into one particular lunation phase and we resonate to
those qualities over the duration of our lives. However, because of the
timing system of secondary progressions, individuals experience the
qualities of each of the other lunation phases as well. The movements of
the progressed Sun and the progressed Moon have a thirtyyear cycle from
one progressed New Moon (progressed Sun conjunct progressed Moon) to
another, and each progressed lunation phases lasts about three and a half to four years. They are the successive unfolding stages of one thirty-year
cycle of the life purpose. Thus, we can see the lunation phases as a
prototype for the development of any organic process, and use this as a
lens through which to understand the nature of the life purpose as a stage
of a cyclical process that is based on the interactive relationship between
the positions of the two great luminaries, the Sun and the Moon. This
pertains to both the purpose of the life as whole, as indicated by the natal
phase, and to how this purpose unfolds over time, as indicated by the
progressed lunation phase.
The progressed New Moon occurs approximately every thirty years, and
the first phase of this thirty-year cycle lasts for about three and half to four
years. During this time, there is often a clear-cut demarcation between the
ending of an old way of life and the beginning of a major new cycle of
activity. The keynote is the emergence of some new kind of vision or
activity. At the progressed Crescent phase, the new direction begins to take
shape. Individuals must develop perseverance and new skills that can assist
them in overcoming fear and resistance so they can continue to move in a
forward direction. The progressed First Quarter phase calls for the
actualization of the new direction by taking action to build structures that
can anchor it in the social world. At the progressed Gibbous phase,
individuals must refine and perfect their skills and strive to master the
techniques of their chosen vocations. Making the necessary adjustments
ensures that the form will be a worthy vehicle for the expression of the
vision.
During the progressed Full Moon phase, the seed intention germinated
at the progressed New Moon flowers, and whatever was born then is now
fully revealed. It is through clear, conscious, and meaningful interactions
with others that individuals come to fully understand the larger purpose
intended for what has been created over the previous fourteen years. It is
difficult to sustain relationships or situations in the life that are not
personally meaningful. During the progressed Disseminating phase, they
move out into the world, link with others, and share the content of
whatever was illuminated at the New Moon, embodying the beliefs into
the life style. At the progressed Last Quarter phase, it is time to turn away
from what has already been done, revise the thinking, and reorient the life.
The progressed Balsamic phase is the bridge between the ending of one
cycle and the beginning of the next. Like the snake shedding its old skin, whatever has served its purpose in the life and is no longer of value for
what is to come falls away. This is the time for the inner work of healing
and regeneration, rest, introspection, and imagination. Some people are
called to bring their life work to completion and pass on the baton to
another. Some wait in the quiet stillness, dreaming dreams of the future
that will be born at the next progressed New Moon. INTEGRATING THE LUNATION PHASES
The obvious place in a chart reading for a discussion of the lunation phase
is after you have examined the individual meanings of the Sun and the
Moon. You can certainly place it there as a final synthesis of the
luminaries. However, sometimes by this point, you are well into the main
body of the session, and the insertion of this material may break the flow
and continuity. I have successfully experimented with opening the
consultation session with a discussion of the lunation phase, by both its
natal and progressed phases.
There are several reasons for this, and they speak to the immediate
establishment of credibility with the client. First, everyone has had a visual
relationship with the phases of the Moon, and it does not involve much of
a stretch of the imagination to consider that the lunar phase at birth has
some relevance to the life. The eight natal lunation phases are grounded in
the archetypal organic process, and this can provide a broad, but deep and
illuminating, portrait of the life as a whole that is not predicated upon
astrological language of signs and houses and aspects. When presented
with the lunation phase material, clients almost always immediately
recognize a central aspect of their personality and approach to life, which
makes them more receptive to what follows. It also makes them more
confident in your insight and skill as an astrological counselor.
The progressed lunation cycle is the only modern timing technique that
looks at the general periods over the duration of the life. The
understanding of where a person is at the present time relative to a longer
thirty-year cycle that is not predicated upon the significations of one
particular planet provides a frame of reference for the remainder of the
reading. Deeper insights can be gained by evaluating the effects of other
timing systems within this larger perspective. For example, a Saturn transit
to the Sun that occurs during a progressed Full Moon phase has a totally different meaning from that same transit during a progressed New Moon
phase. During the Full Moon phase, the emphasis is on defining your solar
identity relative to others; in the New Moon phase, you define your
identity in terms of releasing new visions that will shape the next thirty
years of your life.
After you discuss the natal phase, inform clients about their progressed
phase, giving the starting and ending dates. While this is meaningful
information in and of itself, it is very powerful to place the current phase
within the context of when the previous progressed New Moon phase
began.
Since a new thirty-year cycle begins at the progressed New Moon, note
that date. Look at the degree of the progressed New Moon and the house in
which it falls in the natal chart, and also look to see if it conjoins any
planets or asteroids. The house position will give information about the
topic from which the new directions have emerged—whether it is
livelihood (second house), relationship (seventh house), or profession
(tenth house). If the progressed New Moon conjoins a planet or asteroid
within several degrees, the significations of that planetary body will be
involved in the new emerging direction. The Sabian symbol of the degree
of the progressed New Moon can also provide insight into the spiritual
impulse behind the emergent direction. You may want to ask your client if
that time marked the end of an old cycle and the beginning of new
directions, aspirations, hopes, dreams, or intentions, and what that was all
about. Then you can discuss the current progressed lunation phase, and
where your client is currently in the ongoing development of the seed
vision that was released.
You should factor in:
The dates of the previous progressed Balsamic phase: What ended?
The dates of the previous progressed New Moon phase: What began?
The dates of the current progressed lunation phase: How has the vision
that emerged at the progressed New Moon developed up to this point,
and what is now being called for in order to keep it moving along?
This information can then provide a platform and context for the remainder
of the reading. Bill was born during the Crescent Moon phase, the second phase in
the eight-fold sequence of lunation phases. Rudhyar characterized
this phase with the keyword “struggle.” The newly sprouted
seedling, when it exhausts its food supply from the seed capsule,
must struggle against the force of gravity to push itself upward
through and above the earth in order to obtain its nutrients by
photosynthesis from the Sun. Likewise, the individual born during
this phase must struggle to establish the fledging identity as a viable
force in its own right. The pull of the past—and especially the
complex web of familial relationships and the conditioned patterns
born of fears of failure, the future, the unknown, and inadequacy—
can keep individuals tied to situations that, while providing security,
do not support independence and striking out on their own. The
keynote in this phase is one of self-actualization.
Bill's life purpose as defined by the Sun and Moon is driven by a
kind of energy whereby he experiences life as the struggle to
overcome the resistance created by the pull of the past and by the
density of the material world itself. He must develop new skills and
abilities that give him the increasing confidence he needs to
persevere in the forward momentum he needs to overcome obstacles
and remain focused as he moves toward his visions, which are
expressions of himself, apart from familial and cultural
expectations.
The previous progressed New Moon occurred in October 1992 at
19 degrees of Capricorn. This places the progressed New Moon in
the second house of livelihood, opposing the natal position of
Chiron. Bill said that, in November 1991, he was laid off at the TV
station where he worked, leaving him out of a job with a family to
support. In October 1992, he was still struggling to find a way to
make a living. By June of 1993, he had started his own business in
digital video recording. He has since divorced and retired.
Currently, Bill is in a progressed Gibbous phase that will end in
March 2008. In April 2007, the progressed Moon will conjoin natal
Chiron and this may be a significant timing event. The progressed
Gibbous phase will call upon him to refine and perfect his structure
and his techniques of operation for the illumination of meaning at the upcoming progressed Full Moon. As we know, Bill has recently
contracted to have prints made of films he made in the late 1960s
about the counterculture revolution on the West Coast to submit to
an international film festival. STUDY GUIDELINES
Determine the natal lunation phase for your practice chart and reflect
on the extent to which the personality resonates to the astrological
interpretations of that lunation phase. Write again your one-sentence
interpretation of the basic life purpose, distilling the meanings of the
Ascendant and its ruler, the Sun, and the Moon. Then add one more
sentence explaining the kind of energy that is drawn upon in the
expression and actualization of the life purpose, as defined by the
lunation phase at birth.
Determine the progressed lunation phase and the previous progressed
New Moon phase. Write a paragraph detailing what new directions
began at the progressed New Moon phase and what stage in the
development of this larger cycle the client has reached. What are the
challenges and opportunities? Consider the degree of the progressed
New Moon and the house it activates in the natal chart. Does it conjoin
any natal planet or asteroid? Also look at the Sabian symbol of that
degree. CHAPTER EIGHT FORTUNE, LUNAR NODES, AND ECLIPSES
IN THE PREVIOUS CHAPTER, we examined the lunation phase, which indicates
the kind of energy the Sun and Moon together utilize for the expression
and application of the life purpose, within a model of cyclical process. In
this chapter, we'll discuss other astrological factors that derive from the
combinations and interactions of the Sun and Moon. These are the Lot of
Fortune, the lunar nodes, and eclipses.
The Lot of Fortune is a mathematical analog of the Sun, Moon, and
Ascendant. It indicates an area of life where accidental good fortune and
happiness may come to us by means of luck or chance, rather than by our
actions and intent. The lunar nodes are the points of intersection between
the plane of the Moon's orbit with the plane of the Sun's apparent orbit
around the Earth, called the ecliptic. They demarcate an axis of how past
actions have led to current circumstances that provide opportunities for
personal and spiritual growth. Eclipses are derived from the nodal
relationship, so solar and lunar eclipses are actually a subset of the lunar
nodes. A solar eclipse can occur when the Sun and Moon are conjunct at
the New Moon; a lunar eclipse can occur when the Sun and Moon are
opposed one another at the Full Moon. Eclipses point to strong
intensifications of the energies involved. THE LOT OF FORTUNE
The Lot of Fortune speaks to the role of chance, luck, and fate in the
success of the life. It is more commonly known in modern astrology as the
Part of Fortune, which comes from pars, the Latin translation of the Greek
word kleros. In the world of the ancient astrologers, the Lot of Fortune was one of the most important points in the chart, equal in rank to the
Ascendant, Sun, and Moon. It was considered one of the five places of life
that were analyzed for length-of-life determinations. Its inclusion in the
chart was one of the distinguishing innovations of Hellenistic astrology. Its
calculation is dependant upon the exact degree of the Ascendant sign. The
mathematics necessary for this were developed by the Alexandrian
astrologer Hypsicles around 150 B.C.E.
The Lot of Fortune is the special lot of the Moon; the Lot of Spirit (also
called the Lot of the Daimon) is the special lot of the Sun. Each of the
other visible planets has its own special lot. These are collectively known
as the seven Hermetic lots. Fortune, as the lot of the Moon, speaks to
matters of the body, health, and wealth; Spirit, the lot of the Sun, addresses
matters of the soul, profession, and actions. In fact, Hellenistic astrologers
employed around ninety-six different lots—lots of marriage, children,
treachery, injury, accusation—each of which gave additional information
about any topic being investigated. Many of the lots are calculated
differently, depending on whether the chart is for a day or night birth (see
figures 8 and Mercúrio ). Check to see if your computer software gives you the
option of calculating lots. Here, we will discuss only the Lot of Fortune. Calculating the Lot of Fortune
The Lot of Fortune is derived from the zodiacal degrees of the two lights,
the Sun and Moon, along with that of the Ascendant. Ancient astrologers
took the arc (the degree interval) between the Sun and Moon, and
projected this arc from the Ascendant degree. Where it falls is the location
of the lot. In a diurnal chart, the distance is taken from the Sun to the
Moon in the zodiacal order of the signs; in a nocturnal chart, the distance is
taken from the Moon to the Sun.1
It has become customary to write out arithmetic formulas for the
construction of a lot using the celestial longitude of each planet or point in
the chart. We will follow that practice here. Figures 8 and Mercúrio give diagrams
that will help you understand the theoretical construct behind the
calculation of lots. FIGURE 8. Determination of the Lot of Fortune in a diurnal (day)
chart
1. Diurnal day chart because the Sun is above the horizon.
2. Take the distance from the Sun to the Moon in the direction of the
order of the signs; from 15 Leo to 15 Capricorn is 150 degrees.
3. Project 150 degrees from the Ascendant in the direction of the
order of the signs; 15 Sagittarius plus 150 degrees equals 15
Taurus.
The formula for the Lot of Fortune is:
Day chart: Asc. + Moon – Sun
Night chart: Asc. + Sun – Moon
Notice that the order of the Sun and the Moon is reversed for the nocturnal
lot. There is a tradition going back to Ptolemy in which the Lot of Fortune
in a night chart is calculated the same way as the lot in a day chart. In fact,
many modern software programs still do this. However, it was the more
common practice among Hellenistic astrologers to reverse the formula for a night chart. Check the preferences in your software program to see how
it calculates the Lot of Fortune and make any adjustments you want for
nocturnal charts. FIGURE Mercúrio . Determination of the Lot of Fortune in a nocturnal (night)
chart
1. Nocturnal night chart because the Sun is below the horizon.
2. Take the distance from the Moon to the Sun in the direction of the
order of the signs; from 15 Aries to 15 Aquarius is 300 degrees.
3. Project 300 degrees from the Ascendant in the direction of the
order
of the signs; 15 Sagittarius plus 300 degrees equals 15 Libra.
Bill, born during the day with the Sun above the horizon, has a
diurnal chart. Thus the number of degrees between his Sun at 24
Scorpio 23 and his Moon at Mercúrio Aquarius 51 moving forward in the
order of the signs is 75 degrees 28 minutes. If you add this number of degrees to the Ascendant at 16 Sagittarius 24, the Lot of Fortune
falls out at 0 Pisces 52, which places it in the fourth house. Interpreting the Lot of Fortune
In natal interpretation, the Lot of Fortune indicates an area of life where
accidental good fortune and happiness may come by means of luck or
chance, rather than by an individual's own actions and intent.
Lot, from the Greek word kleros, is related to the concept of fate.
During the era when the doctrine of the lots was being developed in
Ptolemaic Egypt, one of the meanings of kleros was an apportionment of
land in a foreign country that was arbitrarily assigned to citizens. In the
Greek literature of Homer and Hesiod, a person's allotment in life is
arbitrarily doled out by the gods, either by Zeus or by the Moirai—the
Three Fates. Fortune is associated with the Roman goddess Fortuna,
known to the Greeks as Tyche, the personification of the principle of luck
or chance. Poets describe how the capricious force of Tyche raises men
and women up and strikes them down for no reason. To appease her
unpredictable and uncontrollable elements, Tyche/Fortuna was widely
worshipped in the Hellenistic era as the local guardian of the luck of a city.
She is often depicted holding a cornucopia (horn of plenty) or the child
Plutus (wealth) in the hope that she will protect and bless a locale. She is
shown with wings, a rudder, and a ball as emblems of her variability. She
is also shown striding upon the prow of a ship.
From the Hellenistic perspective, the Lot of Fortune, like all the other
lots, thus carries the implication of fate as a random circumstance of
chance and luck that befalls individuals despite their own efforts and
actions. Lots attempt to quantify the amount of good luck an individual can
expect with reference to various topics through the agency of chance.
Individuals may thus be generally lucky or unlucky completely apart from
their intrinsic integrity, intelligence, talent, and capacity for hard work, and
this plays a considerable role in the overall success of the life.
In traditional astrology, the Lot of Fortune symbolizes worldly success
and material prosperity—all that contributes to the happiness and financial
welfare of the individual. In a more modern psychological context, Dane
Rudhyar discussed the Lot of Fortune as a focal point for the expression of
the power generated by the solilunar relationship (lunation phase). He spoke of it as the state of happiness that arises from an ease of function in
which the life force can flow most naturally. It is the point that integrates
the individual meanings of the Sun, Moon, and Ascendant, and, from this
point of view, the Lot of Fortune can be understood as the place where the
life purpose, as a combination of these three places of life, can be
expressed most easily. ANALYZING THE LOT OF FORTUNE
We are now ready to analyze the Lot of Fortune and interpret its meaning
within the chart. This is a three-step process that examines the house
location of the lot, its condition, and the condition of its lord.
In the most general sense, the house location of the Lot of Fortune
indicates an area of life where a person benefits by gain in the things ruled
by that house, and these gains occur due to the force of luck rather than
effort. The house location of the Lot of Fortune also points to the area of
life where the Ascendant motivation, the solar content, and the lunar
application of the life purpose can be focused and integrated. This purpose
can then find expression as a state of happiness, because the individual
finds it easy to do what he or she is best equipped to do. This lends
credence to the theory that we are most successful in doing what we enjoy,
which is doing what comes naturally. But we all know that this state of
grace is easier for some people to manage than others.
There are three factors that modify the condition of the Lot of Fortune.
The relative angularity of the house location of the Lot of Fortune
(angular, succedent, cadent)
Whether the Lot of Fortune is under the Sun's beams
Configurations to the Lot of Fortune by the benefic or malefic planets,
especially when present in the same sign
The best placement for the Lot of Fortune is the angular signs/houses. The
placement of the Lot of Fortune in the succedent signs/houses indicates a
moderate amount of luck. Fortune in the cadent houses is considered to be
rather unfortunate. If the Lot of Fortune is under the beams of the Sun, it is
thought to have no power or efficacy. The Lot of Fortune witnessed by the
benefic planets, Venus and Jupiter, portends gain and happiness through
the topics of the house in which the lot is located, but witnessing by the malefic planets, Mars and Saturn, suggests loss, damage, and sorrows in
connection with the significations of the house.
The final step in analyzing the Lot of Fortune is to examine its domicile
lord. If the planet that is the domicile lord of Fortune is in the signs of its
own rulership or exaltation, if it is in the angular and in the good/profitable
houses, if it is witnessed by benefic planets, direct in motion, and not
under the Sun's beams, these are all favorable indications for the person
being able to take advantage of accidental good fortune. You should note
that, if the Lot of Fortune is configured to its lord, this is a very important
factor indicating whether the planetary agent of Fortune is connected to
Fortune and thus able to take advantage of the luck it bestows. From a
modern perspective, a well-placed Lot of Fortune and its lord contribute to
the ease of the expression of the life purpose.
At what point in the delineation should you include a discussion of the
Lot of Fortune? There are several possibilities. If the Lot of Fortune
occupies the same sign as the Ascendant ruler, Sun, or Moon, or the first
house, you can bring in the concept of accidental good fortune when you
discuss these main significators of the chart. If the client brings a specific
concern to the session, and the Lot of Fortune falls in the house that
signifies the topic, (e. Vênus ., the fifth for children or the tenth for profession),
that is another opportunity to enfold its meaning into the delineation
concerning expectations of success. If you are developing a theme of life
purpose looking to the Ascendant and its ruler, the Sun, the Moon, and the
lunation phase, you can discuss the Lot of Fortune as the location where all
these factors can be integrated.
In Bill's chart, the Lot of Fortune occupies the sign Pisces and is
placed in the fourth house. Thus accidental good fortune and gain
may be expected from property, parents, and inheritance. Fortune
occupies an angular house, is not under the Sun's beams, and is copresent with the benefic Jupiter, all of which support the reception
of good luck. The domicile lord of the Lot of Fortune is the benefic
Jupiter, powerful in its own sign of Pisces, angular, and free from
affliction by both malefics. Jupiter is present in the same house as
Fortune, and thus can easily access the luck. Jupiter's weakness is its
retrograde motion, which is the only drawback to a most powerful
indicator of Bill being blessed by gods and capable of taking advantage of the many opportunities presented that portend good
fortune.
Placing our discussion of the Lot of Fortune within the context of
the place where the expression of the life purpose can occur most
easily and grant the greatest happiness, you can posit that it is
through participation in artistic or spiritual landbased communities,
or the implementation of altruistic visions concerning domestic
living environments, or other such combinations of the meanings of
Pisces and the fourth house that Bill can integrate the impulses of
his Ascendant, Sun, Moon, and Crescent lunation phase in terms of
the living of a purposeful life. THE LUNAR NODES
The lunar nodes are neither celestial bodies nor mathematical constructs,
but rather points in space where the plane of the Moon's orbit intersects the
ecliptic, which marks the apparent path of the Sun. Thus the lunar nodes
symbolize the two points where the paths of the Sun and Moon cross one
another. Eclipses occur at the New Moon or at the Full Moon when the
plane of the Moon is in alignment with the plane of the ecliptic, and thus
one of these bodies passes directly in front of the other, overshadowing
and obscuring its light. Eclipses, therefore, symbolize the obstruction of
the energies from either the Sun or the Moon.
The ecliptic defines the apparent annual path of the Sun as seen from
Earth (either as the tropical zodiac marked by solstices and equinoxes, or
as the sidereal zodiac marked by the constellations of the fixed stars). Most
of the planets travel in orbits that are within 15 degrees of celestial latitude
north or south of the ecliptic. Thus their orbits are inclined at variable
angles to the plane of the ecliptic. The two points where the planes of the
orbits of the planets intersect the plane of the orbit of the ecliptic are
referred to as the nodes. Although there is some interpretive material in the
astrological literature on the planetary nodes, in this lesson we will
examine only the lunar nodes. FIGURE 10. The lunar nodes.
The Moon's orbit inclines at an average angle of 5 degrees 8 minutes to
the ecliptic. The intersection of these two orbital planes forms an axis, and
the points of intersection are called the nodes. The ascending or north node
marks the point where the path of the Moon crosses the ecliptic from
south to north latitude; the descending or south node is where the path
of the Moon crosses the ecliptic from north to south latitude. The Moon
spends half of its time traveling above the ecliptic plane in northern
celestial latitudes and half of its time beneath the ecliptic plane in southern
celestial latitudes. The zodiacal degrees of the mean ascending and
descending nodes always occupy the same degree of opposing sets of
signs, although the true nodes have slight variations from exactitude by
opposition. In some cases, when using true node positions, one node can
occupy the late degrees of one sign and the other node can occupy the
early degrees of the opposing sign. The nodes move backward through the
zodiacal signs at a rate of about 3 degrees a day; the nodal cycle has a
period of 18.5996 years.
In modern astrology, the north lunar node is generally considered to be a
symbol of the future direction of integration and spiritual growth, while the
south lunar node points to the forces of past habit and unconscious
conditioning that limit the development of potential. It is only in the 20th century, however, that the nodes have come to be associated with their
present meanings.
The lunar nodes were mentioned in passing by Hellenistic astrologers,
who called them Anabibazo and Katabibazo, which mean simply “to make
go up” and “to make go down.” They were not, however, given the
importance they have today. Vettius Valens tells his readers that benefic
planets conjoined to either of the nodes, but especially the ascending node,
indicate success and reputation, but the malefic planets produce loss and
accusations. In another section, Valens explains that the nodes break down
the power of the zodiacal signs they occupy, as well as the power of their
rulers.2
The nodes are first called the Dragon's Head and Dragon's Tail in the
Sassanian Persian astrological literature of the fourth century C.E. These
names were transmitted into the Hellenistic texts by the time of Rhetorius
in the early seventh century C.E. Babylonian creation myth from the first
millennium B.C.E. records the story of Marduk slaying the dragon Tiamat,
whose head and tail subsequently formed the upper and lower hemispheres
of the world. A variation of this tale appears in a Zoroastrian text on the
thema mundi, the astrological chart of the creation of the world. Hindu
mythology tells of the severing of a world dragon, whose head was called
Rahu and whose tail was called Ketu. These were incorporated into
astrological symbolism as the north and south node, where they assumed a
rank equal to that of the planets. In contemporary Vedic interpretation,
Rahu (north node) is associated with material or sensual gratification,
while Ketu (south node) is linked with the powers of the unconscious, both
as irrational fears and as wisdom and enlightenment.3
Medieval tradition saw the north node as benefic, having the nature of
Venus and Jupiter and bringing honors and riches in accordance with the
nature of the planet conjoined to it. It saw the south node as malefic,
having the nature of Mars and Saturn and bringing poverty and afflictions
in accordance with the character of the planet conjoined to it. The lunar
nodes continued to be viewed in this way until the beginning of the 20th
century in the Western tradition. To the extent that upward northward
motion above the ecliptic plane as depicted by the north node is highly
regarded in connection with the ascent of the spirit, and downward
southward motion beneath the ecliptic plane as depicted by the south node is devalued as the descent of the soul into matter, we can argue for the
historical association of good and bad with the north and south node.
In 1936, with the publication of Rudyhar's The Astrology of Personality,
we see for the first time a more fully developed exposition on the meaning
of the nodes from a psychological perspective. This perspective has shaped
most of the subsequent literature on the topic. Rudhyar envisions the nodal
axis as the directives of destiny along a line of stress between that from
which the personality emerged and what it is meant to accomplish. He
writes:
If we should lie along the nodal axis, we would look into the future
facing North and accept the past facing South. The North Node
deals, therefore with the work to be done, the new accomplishment,
the new faculty to be developed; and if we are willing to exert
ourselves in that direction, from it we shall receive power in
abundance. The South Node represents the work that has been done,
the well-known accomplishment, the routine performance already
gone through many times, perhaps—the easy way out. The
opposition between, on one hand, self-integration, individuation,
effort, the line of greatest connection through exertion; and on the
other hand, self-undoing, automatism, inertia, the line of least
resistance. Júpiter When the themes of karma and reincarnation are superimposed upon the
nodes, the south node comes to symbolize karma from past lives—usually,
but not always, bad karma. By contrast, the north node is understood as the
actions that lead to future incarnations, which, if conscious and wellmotivated, can contribute to a favorable rebirth. It is not clear if Rudhyar
was influenced in his reframing of the meanings of the nodes by his
theosophical affiliations, which looked to the Hindu and Buddhist
teachings of India and Tibet as their source of inspiration.
In Finding Our Way Through the Dark, I attempt to revision the
negativity associated with the south node, wanting to give a more
empowering and useful meaning to working with the nodal axis. Thus I
suggest that the south node represents the sum total of our knowledge and
wisdom from the past, which can be a foundation upon which to build new
skills and capacities as indicated by the north node. It is only because we rely too much upon our innate abilities that we are led into problematic
behavior. From a modern perspective, this offers an opportunity for
counseling directives and a working definition of the nodes in delineation
that might read as follows:
The south node represents an innate talent or ability that may appear
at an early age and arises effortlessly within us. However we may
also be vulnerable to automatic fear-based behavior at the place of
the south node that can cause us to stagnate, repeat unproductive
behavior, and become limited in our growth. By contrast, the north
node points to a future that is waiting to be actualized by the
development of new attitudes and capacities that may create
discomfort by pushing us to go beyond ourselves, but that results in
great personal growth. ECLIPSES
While this definition of the nodes can be very helpful in psychologically
oriented astrological counseling and is not entirely inaccurate, it does not
take into account the primary reason for the nodes traditionally having
problematic significations. These significations derive from the intimate
connection between the nodes and eclipses, which were considered to be
ominous events indicative of calamity, disaster, and other unfortunate
circumstances. The ancient astrologers called the nodes “the eclipsing
places.” FIGURE 11. Solar and lunar eclipses.
Eclipses can occur only at a New Moon or a Full Moon when the Moon
is also conjoined to one of the lunar nodes. When the Moon, in its monthly
path, reaches the nodes, the plane of the Moon's orbit is aligned to that of
the Sun and Earth. Solar eclipses occur at a New Moon when the Moon
passes between the Sun and Earth, blocking out the solar rays from the
perspective of an observer on Earth. When this event occurs at a Full Moon, the Earth passes between the Sun and the Moon, blocking the lunar
rays and causing a lunar eclipse. These two alignments occur
approximately every six months, when the Moon and the nodes are at the
same celestial latitude and longitude at the time of the New or Full Moon.
In the ancient world, eclipses were looked upon with terror and awe, as
the Sun or Moon suddenly and unexpectedly disappeared from the
heavens. They were often viewed as portents of natural disasters, warfare,
and danger to leaders. They were carefully observed and much effort was
devoted to predicting their occurrence. There is substantial archaeoastronomical scholarship suggesting that megalithic stone monuments like
Stonehenge were designed to predict eclipses. Today, the interpretation of
eclipses still carries traces of this negative connotation, but reframed as an
influence that intensifies and stimulates, for good or bad, the points in the
chart that are affected. Since the Sun and Moon are two places of life,
when the light from one of these luminaries is temporarily obscured, it is
natural to infer a cessation of the life force emanating from that celestial
body. The ensuing struggle for survival, as when someone is being
suffocated and deprived of air, describes the agitation that people may
experience from the energies of an eclipse. This struggle propels them to
extend themselves beyond their natural limitations, and can result in
annihilation or in victory.
From a psychological perspective, when the light of the mind and
consciousness (Sun) or the instinctive wisdom of the body and emotions
(Moon) is blocked, something else that is normally held under restraint
emerges unimpeded. Consider the analogy of robbers who prefer to do
their work at night under the cover of darkness. Eclipses can allow us to
access that which has been concealed or repressed—what Jung referred to
as the shadow. This encounter with the hidden and rejected contents of the
unconscious as it refers to either the solar mind or the lunar emotions can
bring a person to integrate the unknown with the known, the dark with the
light, the past with the future. This is the potential inherent in the
encounter of the two lights perfectly aligned in conjunction or opposition
at the places of the lunar nodes, with the opposing pole being the
possibility of the breakdown or disintegration of the psyche.
Tibetan Buddhist spiritual traditions hold that the energies during
eclipses are greatly magnified, and propose that the end results of the good or bad actions that are done during an eclipse have significantly largerthan-usual ramifications in the life. Determining and Evaluating Eclipses in the Chart
There are three main considerations when interpreting eclipses in a natal
chart for a single consultation session. The first relates to whether the
person was born at the time of a solar or lunar eclipse. If you notice that
the Moon is conjoined to either the north or south node (this will occur
twice a month) and the Sun is conjoined to the Moon (New Moon) or
opposite the Moon (Full Moon, and thus conjoined to the other node), you
know that the person was born at the time of an eclipse. If the New Moon
is within 15 degrees of a node, or if the Full Moon is within Mercúrio degrees,
eclipses must occur. A slightly larger orb—17 degrees for the Sun and 11
degrees for the Moon—indicates that an eclipse may have occurred; 5
degrees indicates a total or annular eclipse. The technical terms for these
orbs are the major and minor ecliptic limits. Check your ephemeris for the
exact dates of eclipses.
This is an important factor in delineation, and should be discussed in
your interpretation of the Sun and Moon. The life will be especially
intense, with the collective forces of the past and future presenting
themselves in ways that bring the person to critical thresholds and turning
points that could go in the direction of either greater or lesser integration.
The sign and its domicile lord, house, and configurations of the eclipse
point will be the same as that of the Sun or Moon and should be interpreted
accordingly, unless the eclipse falls in an adjacent sign within 5 degrees of
either luminary.
Some computer mapping programs contain an option for determining
the path of an eclipse as its shadow sweeps over certain parts of the Earth
where it is visible. Research indicates that these geographical places have
particular import for the individual.
Second, you must consider the eclipses that will occur in the future.
Eclipses occur several times each year, in pairs. If a solar eclipse happens,
it will generally be preceded or followed by a lunar eclipse. As an
astrologer, familiarize yourself with the eclipses that will occur in your
client's chart in the coming year. When you are preparing the data for the
timing activations in the chart, take notice if the eclipse will fall on the degree of a planet or angle within a 5-degree orb of conjunction. This is
especially important.
Ancient astrologers were concerned if the eclipse activated the Sun,
Moon, Ascendant, Midheaven, or one of the malefic planets, which were
thought to be unfavorable influences. It is an open discussion among
astrologers as to whether aspects other than the conjunction should be
used, although I would not exclude a close opposition.
When evaluating what the eclipse may portend, look at the nature,
condition, and location of the planet being aspected by the eclipse degree,
as well as whether the benefic or malefic planets are witnessing the eclipse
degree. The sensitivity and the duration of the effects of the eclipse can
last for several years and, traditional astrology instructs, are triggered by
the transit of Mars over that degree and consummated under the transit of
Saturn. One rule of thumb used was that the effects of a solar eclipse lasted
as many years as the eclipse lasted in hours, while the effects of a lunar
eclipse lasted as many months as the eclipse lasted in hours.
The third consideration that can be used in a detailed study of eclipses is
the prenatal eclipse—the solar and lunar eclipses that occurred before
birth. There will be one, or possibly two, eclipses that occur within six
months of the birth date. The degrees of these pre-natal eclipses remain as
sensitive degrees in the chart for the duration of the lifetime. Transits and
progressions by planets over these degrees often trigger events that would
otherwise not be correlated to a timing activation. Again, the maps of the
eclipse paths can provide much insight. PRE-NATAL LUNATION
The pre-natal lunation (PNL) is the final of the five places of life. You can
use the pre-natal lunation in a more advanced analysis of the natal chart.
The pre-natal lunation is the degree of the New or Full Moon before birth,
whichever lunation is the closest. If a person is born during the waxing
part of the lunation cycle, between the New and the Full Moon, the PNL is
the zodiacal degree of the New Moon prior to birth. If a person is born
during the waning part of the lunation cycle, between the Full and the New
Moon, the PNL is the zodiacal degree of the Full Moon prior to birth. To
the extent that the Sun signifies the soul and the Moon signifies the body,
the pre-natal lunation represents the synergy between the body and the soul that occurs sometime in the month before birth. The degree of this lunation
remains a sensitive point over the duration of the life. In Hellenistic
astrology, it was used as a starting point for a time-lord procedure, and
both Hellenistic and Medieval astrologers considered it in length-of-life
considerations. Aside from this mention of the pre-natal lunation, we will
defer further explanation of this point. RECONCILING ASTROLOGY AND COUNSELING
Astrologers who are grounded in the historical tradition of nodes and
eclipses consider that the nodes portend difficulties because they are the
places where eclipses can occur. Eclipses block the lifegiving qualities of
the two luminaries, and thus open the way for life-destroying energies to
propagate.
This is not helpful information, however, for a counselor to give a client
in whose chart the nodes and eclipse points are emphasized. These clients
may be struggling to hold the forces of the unconscious at bay, fighting to
keep the past and the collective consciousness from overwhelming their
psyches and blocking the movement that brings them into the present and
reaching toward a beckoning future. In cases like these, it is the
transformative potential of eclipses you must encourage. Even if it is
unlikely, you should never completely exclude the possibility of grace
entering a life and changing a determined course or direction.
Always remain fully aware of the dangers inherent in the nodes and
eclipse points and lead your client to an understanding of how to take
advantage of the best expression of the south-node energies to cultivate the
possibilities implied by the north node. If the birth is an eclipse birth, the
life force is especially fragile, but it is laden with potential for massive
breakthroughs that can liberate an individual from the density of
conditioning by unconscious and collective forces. Eclipse degrees
preceding and following the birth remain sensitive over the course of the
life and can provide insight into the triggering of un-integrated aspects of
the psyche. And eclipses by transit over natal planets and angles can bring
death and rebirth experiences, intensifying the significations of those
planets to reach beyond their normal limits. When eclipses are witnessed
favorably by the benefic planets, they can also portend exceptional circumstances for good fortune, great accomplishments, significant and
dramatic shifts in direction, and victory over odds.
In Bill's chart, the north node is in Libra in the eleventh house and
the south node is in Aries in the fifth house conjunct to Vesta and
Saturn. From a traditional perspective, Saturn with the south node in
the fifth house indicates difficulties, loss, rejection by children or in
love affairs, partially due to selfcentered behavior in the pursuit of
his own needs and agenda (Aries). As a counselor, you can
encourage him to focus on the north node in Libra in the eleventh
house, where he can develop friendships and participate in groups
that share his ideals and visions in order to meet his intimacy needs,
and where he will experience collaborative efforts, strong
consideration for others, and balanced interactions (Libra).
As the Moon is not near either of the nodes, you can immediately
eliminate the possibility that Bill was born during an eclipse. Your
ephemeris shows that there was a total solar eclipse preceding his
birth on October 12, 1939 at 18 Libra 37, and an annular solar
eclipse after his birth on April 7, 1940 at 17 Aries 52. If, in
preparing for his reading, you notice that there are major transits to
these points, consider this in your prognostication.
On March 19, 2007, there is a partial solar eclipse at 28 Pisces 07,
and you immediately note that this will conjoin Bill's natal Jupiter,
the Ascendant ruler, to the exact degree. The solar eclipse will
further intensify and magnify the import of the events signified by
Jupiter, which is also receiving square aspects by transiting Pluto
and Jupiter in this year. During this month, Bill bought a large house
with the intention of creating an intentional spiritual community,
which he says had been his life-long dream. His mother also had a
stroke from which she recovered; he moved her next door to his
new home so he could better attend to her needs. Note how the
eclipse activation of Jupiter located in and ruling the fourth house
brought about significant events concerned with both the parent and
the home. STUDY GUIDELINES Determine, analyze, and interpret the Lot of Fortune and its lord in
your practice chart. Be sure to include a discussion of both the
traditional and modern approaches to this point of integration of the
Sun, Moon, and Ascendant.
Compose an analysis of the north and south nodes of the Moon that
factors in the sign and house placements of the nodes, as well as any
planets conjoined to them.
Check to see whether or not the person was born on an eclipse;
determine the sensitive eclipse degrees preceding and following the
birth; and note if the eclipses of the current year will affect any natal
planets or angles. CHAPTER NINE MYTHIC ASTEROID ARCHETYPES
THE ASTEROIDS are thousands of small planetary bodies revolving around
the Sun. Most of them travel in an orbital belt between Mars and Jupiter,
having mean periods of about four years. Thus their positions in a chart are
quite individual in contrast to the generational placements of the outer
planets. However, some asteroids, known as “orbit crossers” (for example,
Eros and Icarus), move from inside the asteroid belt to circle Venus and
Mercury. These faster-moving bodies have orbital periods of less than four
years. The orbits of other asteroids such as Hidalgo extend out toward the
orbit of Saturn, and these slower-moving asteroids have longer orbital
periods. In 1596, the prescient Johannes Kepler speculated on the
existence of a planet between Mars and Jupiter (many contemporary and
past astronomers regard the asteroids as the remains of a planet that
exploded), yet the first asteroid was not discovered until December 31,
1800. By the end of the 19th century, over 1000 additional minor planets
had been identified. Today, there are over 12,000 named and numbered
asteroids.
The first asteroid to be discovered was named Ceres, after the Roman
goddess of agriculture who was known to the Greeks as Demeter. This set
the precedent for the next three asteroids discovered, which were also
named for goddesses of classical antiquity—Pallas (Greek Athena), Juno
(Greek Hera), and Vesta (Greek Hestia). In fact, of the 1000 asteroids
discovered in the 19th century, more than 750 were named for goddesses
from a variety of mythological traditions. Others were named for gods.
When astronomers began to run out of mythic names, they started naming
them after everything from ordinary people (John, Nancy, William, Barbara) to famous people (Einstein, Shakespeare), to geographical places
(Dallas, Paris, Moscow, Arizona), to trees and flowers. They even named
some after concepts (Academia, Karma, Beer, Lust, and Compassion).
It is only since 1973 that astrologers have had ephemeredes available for
the study of the major asteroids, largely due to the efforts of Eleanor Bach.
In 1981, practitioners such as Lee Lehman, Al Morrison, and Mark
Pottenger began to calculate the positions of others and distribute these
calculations to the community. It is very likely that there is an asteroid that
has your own name and whose ephemeris you can obtain. While some tend
to dismiss the asteroids as irrelevant and unnecessary clutter in the chart,
remember that many astrologers in the 1930s refused to consider Pluto
valid, because they had enough other planets to deal with.
To the extent that the asteroids are real planetary bodies orbiting in the
solar system, and to the extent that the macrocosm of the heavens is
reflected in the microcosm of the human being, they, like all celestial
bodies, have correspondences to various aspects of human consciousness.
Thus, it is of value to integrate their symbolism into the astrological chart.
From an esoteric perspective, some suggest that the discovery of new
planets external to us corresponds to an internal awakening in the human
psyche of some aspect of consciousness represented by the symbolism
associated with that planet. Social scientists foretell a quantum leap of
consciousness, in which many dormant brain cells will become activated.
Yet others see, in the discovery of hundreds of new bodies and their
addition to the astrological pantheon, a mirror of the current explosion of
information available to the human brain as the result of the Internet. CERES, PALLAS, JUNO, AND VESTA
These first four asteroids are considered especially significant, not only
because of their early discovery, but also because their namesakes are
among the most important of the classical goddesses. Ceres, Vesta, and
Juno were the three sisters of Jupiter, Neptune, and Pluto, and thus are
equivalent in rank to the leading Olympian gods. Pallas was the favorite
daughter of Jupiter and tutelary goddess of Athens. These four asteroid
goddesses embody a large and comprehensive complex of symbolism and
meanings. If you look at the pantheon of planetary deities from an archetypal
perspective, in the traditional ten-planet system, all but two planets
represent masculine gods. Until recently, the Moon as mother and Venus as
wife were the only two significators of the feminine, and most women
were confined to these roles. The addition of four other powerful feminine
planetary deities brings gender balance to the symbol system used for chart
analysis, and thereby gives voice to many themes that express the feminine
energies in human experience that were previously unacknowledged in
traditional astrological symbolism. Since the discovery and astrological
availability of the asteroid goddesses, many more aspects of the feminine
principle have emerged in human behavior.
As you read the following summaries, note how the significations of the
asteroids can be derived from their mythical biographies. The underlying
premise of the mythic approach to chart analysis is that, when a celestial
body is prominently placed in the skies at the moment of a person's birth,
the mythological story of the eponymous god or goddess becomes a major
theme in that person's life. The process of interpretation involves the
telling of the story and the drawing of correlations between the mythical
biography of the planetary deity and the themes that shape a person's life
experiences. The story itself often overshadows the particulars of sign and
house position, although these do indicate how and where the story plays
itself out in a particular life. The rationale for this approach is the
supposition that the mythological deities are the symbolic external
expressions of the inner structures of the psyche. The astrology of the
ancient Babylonian, Greek, and Indian cultures all had implicit, if not
explicit, associations between the planets and the gods.1 Ceres
Ceres, known to the Greeks as Demeter, is the classical goddess of
agriculture who worked unceasingly to bring food and nourishment to the
people of the Earth. One of the most famous stories of antiquity tells of the
ravishment and abduction of Persephone (Latin Proserpina), Ceres'
daughter, by Pluto, Lord of the Underworld, and of Ceres' subsequent grief
and suffering as she wanders disconsolately over the Earth in search of her
missing child. In her anger, she causes a famine, withholding production of
all food, until her daughter is returned. Meanwhile, Persephone, in a symbolic act of rape, is tricked into eating pomegranate seeds, associated
with sexual awareness, thus giving Pluto a claim over her.
A compromise is reached between Ceres and Pluto whereby Persephone
spends part of each year in the underworld with Pluto caring for the souls
of the dead, but returns each spring to her mother in the upper world after
having initiated the dead into the rites of rebirth. For over 2000 years, this
drama was celebrated regularly in ancient Greece as the initiation rites of
the Eleusinian Mysteries.
In the human psyche, Ceres represents that aspect of our nature that
longs to give birth, nourish, and sustain new life, as well as to nurture and
be nurtured by others through the giving and receiving of unconditional
love and acceptance. She represents the essential bonding or lack thereof
that occurs between mother and child—a bonding centered on the giving
of food as the expression of love. In our early experiences as children, this
food/love may be freely given. In other instances, however, it is
conditionally awarded, withheld as a form of punishment, or denied
through neglect, causing the self-love and self-worth normally associated
with Ceres to be undermined and undeveloped, and precipitating a host of
psychological problems for the child and, later, the adult.
Psychological problems related to Ceres' symbolic withholding of food
from herself and others in the midst of her grief include an obsessive
relationship with food, a poor body image, and a range of eating disorders
and food-related illnesses. In her grief, Ceres became totally immobilized.
We, likewise, can be plunged into depths of depression and despair,
making us incapable of daily functioning, of working and being
productive.
The story of Ceres and Persephone is one of loss and return, death and
rebirth. Ceres speaks to the complex mother-child relationship, and her
mythos also contains the themes of physical or emotional loss, separation,
abandonment, rejection, or estrangements that occur between parents and
children, and, later in life, between other loved ones. As a symbol of
attachment to what we have birthed or created, Ceres guides us to learning
the lessons of letting go, as exemplified in the anguish we face when we
need to share our children with others in cases of divorce or adoption.
Ceres' daughter, Persephone, was symbolically raped by Pluto, her
mother's brother. This points to the fear that Ceres parents may have about
protecting their children from harm—or the fact that they may have experienced incest or sexual abuse as children. In the desire of Ceres
parents to keep their children safe, they can become overly controlling and
restrictive. Their children may then struggle against the parental
attachment in order to establish their own identities.
On a transpersonal level, Ceres, as the mother of the world, moves us to
care about the homeless, the hungry, and the destruction of the Earth's
resources. She urges us to take compassionate action, to provide for
fundamental human needs, and to care for the body of the Earth that
supports and sustains us. Not only did Ceres give birth to the living, in her
aspect as Persephone, she received the souls of the dead back into her
womb to prepare them for rebirth. Thus Ceres can also express as a
vocation for hospice work, facilitating the life/death transition on the
physical, as well as psychological, level.
Ceres teaches the wisdom that excessive attachment and possessiveness
often result in eventual loss, and that sharing and letting go lead to reunion.
She embodies the great truth of transformation— that from death comes
new life. Pallas Athena
Pallas was better known to the Greeks as Athena, the goddess of wisdom,
who was said to have sprung full-grown, clad in a suit of gleaming war
armor, from the crown of the head of her father, Jupiter (Zeus). She
immediately took her place at his right hand. As patroness of Athens, she
presided over military strategy during wartime and justice in peacetime.
Idealized as Athena Parthenos, the virgin warrior queen, she was always
accompanied by her great serpent, and she took no lovers or consorts. She
walked easily and freely through the worlds of gods, heroes, and men as
their colleague, advisor, equal, and friend.
Pallas Athena is mythically related to an ancient lineage of goddesses
from the ancient Near East, Egypt, North Africa, and Crete who were
associated with the serpent as a symbol of wisdom and healing. She
affirmed this connection by placing the head of her dark sister, Gorgon
Medusa, the serpent-haired queen of wisdom, on the center of her snakefringed breastplate. In kundalini yoga, this serpent image is depicted coiled
at the base of the spine, rising through the spinal canal, and emerging from the top of the head as cosmic illumination. This is a metaphor for the
wisdom of Pallas Athena, who likewise emerged from the head of Jupiter.
Pallas Athena was unique among goddesses in that she held a position
of power and respect in the eyes of the classical Greeks. Classical myths
have Pallas Athena denouncing and denying her maternal origins as she
arranged for the death of her sister, Medusa, and claiming that no mother
gave her life. She upheld male supremacy in all things save marriage. The
price that was asked and extracted of her for this power was the denial of
her feminine nature. She severed her connection with her mother, her
sister, the community of women, and her sexuality, and lost touch with her
feminine qualities of softness and vulnerability.
In contemporary culture, women who are smart, powerful, strong, and
accomplished are like Pallas in that they are not considered to be “real
women.” They are often pressured to make a choice between career and
creative self-expression on one hand, and relationship and family on the
other. Pallas Athena is epitomized by the girl in high school who is
applauded for her victory on the debate team, but not asked to the prom. In
Pallas Athena's symbolism, we carry the wounds of our severed feminine
encased in our armor, and instead act with a kind of cold, ruthless,
calculating, expedient strategy to further our ambitions. Healing in her
realm entails looking deep within to remember the feminine roots of
power, strength, creativity, and wisdom.
Pallas Athena also points to all the issues women face in their
relationships with their fathers and father-like figures, which began with
their own birth as their father's favorite daughter. Pallas portrays the ways
in which women emulate men, seek their approval, want to interact in their
world, and give them power over their lives. However, Pallas Athena's
earlier matriarchal mythology places her as warrior/wisdom queen in
Northern Africa, long before the arrival of the god Jupiter into Greece.
This theme suggests the importance for women of acknowledging their
own strength and wisdom nature rather than projecting it onto an external
male authority.
Pallas Athena's serpent symbolism also connects her to the healing arts.
One of her epithets is Hygeia, goddess of miraculous cures. She represents
the power of mind in curing disease, and her armor and shield are likened
to our immune system warding off attacks. Because Pallas Athena is a
woman dressed in a warrior's clothes, she also speaks to calling up and expressing the masculine within women, or the feminine within men. This
movement toward androgyny balances and integrates the polarities within
the self and reclaims our contra-sexual identity.
In the chart, Pallas Athena represents the part of our nature that feels the
urge to utilize our creative sexual energy to give birth to children of our
minds—our mental and artistic progeny. She represents our capacity for
clear thinking and creative wisdom, and speaks to our desire to strive for
excellence and accomplishment in our chosen field of expression. Pallas
shows how we use our creative intelligence to give birth to mind, art, truth,
and worldly power. Juno
Juno, known to the Greeks as Hera, is the goddess of marriage. She is
wedded to Jupiter (Greek Zeus), supreme king of heaven and Earth, and, as
such, becomes his Queen. However, in the mythical literature of an earlier
time, Juno, long before her meeting with Jupiter, was one of the primary
great goddesses in her own right. As the only goddess who is his equal,
Juno is chosen by Jupiter to initiate/inaugurate the rites of legal,
monogamous marriage. As the First Lady, she became but a titular
figurehead and was repeatedly deceived, betrayed, and humiliated by her
husband's many infidelities. In the myths, Juno is subsequently portrayed
as a jealous, manipulative, vindictive, vengeful, and malcontent wife who,
after tempestuous fights, periodically leaves her husband. However, she
always returns to try to resolve the difficulties.
In the human psyche, Juno represents that aspect of our nature that feels
the urge to unite with another person to build a future together through the
vehicle of committed relationship. This partnership is sustained over time
through a formal and binding commitment, whether it be a worldly or
spiritual bond. Juno speaks to our desire to connect with a mate who is our
true equal on all levels— psychologically, emotionally, mentally, and
spiritually.
When we do not receive intimacy, depth, equality, honesty, respect, and
fulfillment in our unions, Juno speaks to our emotions of disappointment,
despair, anger, and rage, which can overwhelm us. This is especially true
when we have given up a great deal—career, family, home, or religion—to
enter the relationship. Juno makes us confront the issues of fidelity and infidelity, trust and deception, betrayal and revenge, or forgiveness,
domination, and submission. In her domain, we find ourselves in power
struggles for equality as we attempt to balance and integrate ourselves with
others and learn to transform selfish desire into cooperative union.
Within a context of separation and return, Juno encourages us to take
the vow of “for better or worse, in sickness and health, till death us do
part.” She is the wisdom that conscious relationship is a path to spiritual
enlightenment and the knowledge that we must be in relationship to learn
how to perfect the form.
In the birth chart, Juno represents our capacity for meaningful
committed relationship, as well as the ways in which we express our
disappointment over broken unions. These relationships are predominantly
romantic in nature, but may assume other forms, such as business,
professional, and creative partnerships. In today's world, she is also a
symbol for the plight of battered and powerless wives and minorities; the
psychological complexes of love-addiction and co-dependency; the rise in
the divorce rate as people are driven to release un-meaningful
relationships; and the redefinition of traditional relationships in the face of
feminism and gay and lesbian coupling. Vesta
Vesta, known to the Greeks as Hestia, is the temple priestess who presided
over the vestal virgins of Rome. The vestals' lives were dedicated to
spiritual service, and they were responsible for keeping the sacred flame
that ensured the safety of the Roman Empire burning. If they violated their
oaths of chastity, they were punished by a public whipping, and then
buried alive. Vesta became the prototype of the Medieval nun. Several
thousand years earlier, in the ancient Near East, the predecessors of these
priestesses, who likewise tended the sacred flame, also engaged in sacred
sexual rites in order to bring healing and fertility into the lives of people
and to the land that nourished them.
Originally, the word “virgin” meant, not chaste, but rather unmarried.
These priestesses thus represented an aspect of the feminine nature that is
whole and complete in itself. In the transition from the old goddess
religions to those of the solar gods, sexuality was divorced from
spirituality. With the advent of the new gods, if a woman wanted to follow a spiritual path, she had to remain chaste— a virgin in the new sense of the
word. In earlier times, priestesses, as representatives of the Goddess, could
enter into a state of spiritual transcendence through sexual union with an
outer partner in a manner that did not call for marriage or commitment. In
patriarchal culture, however, the now-chaste Greek priestesses became the
brides of the god Apollo and the Christian nuns the brides of Christ.
Ecstatic illumination was experienced as the descent of the spirit of the
god into the person of the priestess—an inner union often described by
mystics.
In the human psyche, Vesta represents that part of our nature that feels
the urge to experience our sexual energy in a sacred manner. This may
occur in several different ways. Most of us are very much a product of the
social mores of our culture. So we tend to internalize our sexual energy.
We may devote ourselves to a spiritual, religious, or meditative path,
following in the footsteps of priestesses and priests, nuns and monks, in
contemporary settings. We may experience this union with the self as a
process of psychological integration that is part of our life-long therapeutic
work. In Vesta's realm, it is the quality of inner work that focuses or
clarifies and energizes our circuitry. This then enables us to follow a
vocation or calling to be of service in the world—a vision that arises from
the whole and self-contained core of our being.
Vesta, as virgin nature, speaks to the importance of the relationship
people have with themselves, which may lead to a single lifestyle in which
they do not partner. Or if they do marry, they may not be comfortable with
the total surrender asked for in the merging with another. In Vesta's realm,
you may find your most satisfactory sexual encounters in communion with
yourself. You, in a sense, may be your own best lover.
Those who hearken back to the earliest strata of Vesta memories may
periodically find themselves in sexual encounters with others who pass
briefly through their lives, or to whom they are not married or committed.
These unions are often marked by a sense that something special, healing,
and sacred has transpired. However, because our society has no context in
which to validate sexual unions that do not lead to committed
relationships, they are often left with a sense of shame, guilt, and
insufficiency. Through an understanding of the inherent nature of Vesta's
virgins, for whom sexuality and spirituality were unified, they can free themselves from their fears, guilt, shame, inhibitions, and restrictions in
the expression of their sexuality.
In the birth chart, Vesta shows how we use our sexual energy to deepen
our relationship to ourselves, integrating and regenerating on inner levels
so we can focus and dedicate ourselves to our work in the outer world. THE MAJOR ASTEROIDS IN THE CHART
While each of them means something, certain asteroids are more
prominent in some charts than in others. Asteroids that occupy significant
places in the chart will play more of a role in shaping the life experiences,
and so are useful for recognizing the major themes of a life. When giving a
one-hour consultation, focus on what is most important and put the other
material aside for later when you may do a more in-depth analysis.
How do you determine the significance of an asteroid in the birth chart?
There are four major criteria, which I will give in descending order of
importance. The orbs that I suggest are for the four major asteroids only.
For the thousands of others, your orbs may be much smaller.
1. High: Look to see if Ceres, Pallas, Juno, or Vesta is conjunct or
opposite the Sun or Moon, or conjunct the ruler of the Ascendant, or if
it is conjunct one of the four angles. The Ascendant and Midheaven
degrees are more important than the Descendant or IC degrees. Use an
orb of 10 degrees or a somewhat smaller orb of not more than 5
degrees if you need to cross sign boundaries. Location in any of these
positions gives an asteroid a high significance rating, because these are
the most powerful points in the chart. The asteroid adds its influence to
the significations of the planet or point it conjoins.
2. Moderate: Note if an asteroid is square either of the luminaries or if it
is conjunct or opposite an inner planet. This gives an asteroid
moderately high significance. A moderate rating denotes an asteroid
that is conjoined to the lunar nodes, and a moderately low rating
indicates an asteroid that is conjunct or opposite one of the outer
planets. Use an orb of not more than 5 degrees for these
considerations.
3. Low: Check to see if an asteroid completes a major aspect pattern (Tsquare or grand trine) or if it is trine or sextile the luminaries or
Ascendant ruler. Use an orb of not more than Júpiter degrees. This significance, although low, may still be relevant in some instances. An
angular house placement, especially in the first or tenth houses, also
gives an otherwise stray asteroid some importance. Júpiter . Nil: If an asteroid is not connected to any important planets or points
in the chart, it may not play a major role in the life. In a complete chart
delineation, of course, it has meaning. But for a one-hour consultation,
it is probably not the most important thing to discuss. Also be aware
that, although an asteroid may not be prominent in the natal chart, if it
is receiving an outerplanet transit, its symbolism will become activated
for the duration of the transit.
Once you have determined that a particular asteroid is important in the
chart, combine its meaning with the planet or angle contacted, and finally
modify its expression by sign and house placements, as well as any other
aspects it may be making. When interpreting a chart from the mythic
perspective, the story of the archetype itself may make a much stronger
impression on a client than a keyword synthesis of an asteroid in a sign or
a house, because it may relate more closely to his or her experiences.
In Bill's chart, Ceres is not conjunct the angles; not conjunct,
square, or opposite the luminaries; not conjunct the ruler of the
Ascendant; not part of a T-square or grand trine. But Ceres is
angular in the tenth house, giving it a moderately low rating of
prominence. Later, however, you will note that the asteroid Demeter
(the Greek equivalent for the Roman Ceres) is partile conjoined to
the MC degree, which boosts the importance of this archetype.
Pallas has an opposition to the Moon and is partile conjunct Pluto,
which gives it a moderately high rating of prominence. Juno is
square the Sun by close orb and conjunct the Moon by sign, in close
conjunction to Mars. Thus Juno gets a very high rating of
prominence. Vesta is not conjunct the angles, and not conjunct,
square, or opposite the Sun, Moon, or Ascendant ruler. Conjoined to
Saturn and south node, Vesta gets a moderate rating of prominence.
Therefore Juno and Pallas are most significant, followed by Ceres
and Vesta, both moderately strong. Emphasize to Bill the
importance of Juno in the analysis of the Sun, and Pallas in the analysis of the Moon. Depending on time and requested focus, you
may pass over the other two.
Pallas shows how we use our creative intelligence to give birth to
mind, art, truth, and worldly power. This goddess of wisdom and
artistic potential in the creative sign of Leo in the ninth house of
wide-ranging multicultural perspectives and of spirituality is
configured to the Moon and Pluto. This suggests that part of Bill's
demonstration of life purpose involves the power of his ideas,
expressed artistically to transform the larger world.
Juno is the archetype of the wife and the principle of committed
relationships. The close square to the Sun indicates that, while the
need to develop good communication in solid relationships that
support individuality are a major part of Bill's life purpose, they are
also fraught with conflict and competition (Mars conjunction) and
stress (square to the Sun). The Moon's connection to Juno
emphasizes the emotional need for intimate personal relating; but
the altruistic and impersonal ideals of Aquarius are not always
compatible with the Scorpio need for total bonding, closeness, and
merging with another. TWELVE THOUSAND MORE ASTEROIDS
Since the introduction of the asteroids to the astrological community
between 1973 and 1981, a number of contemporary astrologers have begun
to incorporate the symbolism of Ceres, Pallas, Juno, and Vesta, as well as
Chiron (1977), into their chart analysis, although there is still considerable
skepticism and resistance. The thought of including the thousands of
others, however, is simply too mind-boggling for most astrologers. And
yet, in my twenty-five years of working with the minor planets, I have
repeatedly seen how amazingly accurate these can be in detailing the
specifics of people and places and mythic themes in an individual's life.
Following are some striking examples from the charts of celebrities that
illustrate this point. Prince Charles, for instance, has the asteroids Camilla
and Parks conjunct his Venus within 15 minutes of arc. The name of his
life-long love and now wife is Camilla Parker. Bill Clinton has the
asteroids Paula, Monica, Asmodeus (the Persian demon god of lust), and
William opposite his Moon, and the asteroid Hillary conjunct his Moon as well as the asteroid Hilaritas conjunct his IC, the ground and anchor of the
chart. Jacqueline Kennedy Onassis has the asteroids John and Aristotle, the
names of her two husbands, opposite her Moon (within 1 degree), which,
as one of the significators of marriage, is itself conjunct the asteroid
Abunduntia, the Roman goddess of abundance. Her final life partner,
Maurice Tempelsman, is indicated by the asteroids Maury and Temple,
both on the degree of her Midheaven.
When looking for a philosophical justification for the inclusion of all the
asteroids in the corpus of astrological symbolism, consider the hierarchal
structure of the cosmos of late antiquity. In the writings of the ancient
Greek philosophers, the planets and stars were viewed as the visible gods.
However, between the divine realm and the human realm were thousands
of daimons, intermediary spirits who bridged these two realms. Some
philosophers wrote of the daimon as the conscience or guiding spirit. In the
Hermetic writings, certain daimons were associated with each planet,
carrying out the orders of that planetary god. The thousands of asteroids
may be the counterparts of a class of celestial beings for which the ancients
had accounted, but that were invisible—as were the asteroids before the
discovery of the telescope.
To include the asteroids in your readings in any meaningful way, you
must organize them thematically and have a methodology for determining
their significance within an individual chart. Remember that perhaps only
a dozen or so of the 12,000 asteroids will actually be relevant to a
particular chart. Both Mark Pottenger's CCRS Asteroid Program and David
and Fei Cochrane's Kepler Cosmic Patterns asteroid add-on module can
generate the positions of all 12,000 plus for a given birth date. These
programs also allow you to create custom lists. Appendix B gives a list of
around 250 asteroids that I have chosen—either for their mythological
significance or their representation of concepts. They can be sorted in the
printout either zodiacally, beginning with 0 Aries and ending with 29
Pisces, or alphabetically. Appendix B also contains information on Web
sites that will generate the positions of individual asteroids in your own
chart as well as other resource material.
When I am doing an in-depth study of a particular chart, I generate the
entire list alphabetically and pull out names and places that are meaningful
to that person. But for the bulk of my ongoing chart consultations, I use the
smaller zodiacal sort. I run down the list, pulling out and entering by hand into the basic chart certain mythic asteroids that I think are universally
important, as well as those that are conjunct the four angles, the two
luminaries, the ruler of the Ascendant, and anything else that strikes me as
interesting. The Kepler Cosmic Patterns software allows you to add the
chosen asteroids onto the chart directly. I look for personal names, places,
concepts, and mythic figures. However, it is highly unlikely that I will
interpret all these asteroids. What I look for is the emergence of certain
themes to guide me in my choices for additional entries.
Appendix B contains a list of about 250 asteroids arranged in a zodiacal
sort for the time and date of Bill's birth. From that list I have selected
certain asteroids to place in his chart that are located close to the degrees
of his Ascendant, Ascendant ruler, Sun, and Moon.
Another way to organize the asteroids is thematically—associating those
that relate to healing, divination, sexuality, or relationship, as well as the
clusters that are mythically related to each of the four major asteroids. For
example, if you see that Ceres is prominent, check for the asteroid
Demeter, which is the Greek version of her name. While these are two
different asteroids, their archetypal meanings are similar. In the myth,
Ceres' daughter is Persephone; the Latin form of this name is Proserpina.
So you can add these two asteroids to the chart. Finally, look to Pluto, who
abducted Persephone and was Ceres' major antagonist, and study the
relationship between all of these bodies. When certain deities are related
mythically and their planetary namesakes are all either prominent in the
chart or closely configured to one another, the mythic theme becomes
especially emphasized in that person's life.
It is true that, the more that you know about mythology and which
deities belong to each culture and have relationships with one another, the
more vivid your use of the many asteroids becomes. For example, in the
event chart of the fatal plane crash of John F. Kennedy, Jr., the Ascendant
was flanked by the asteroids Oceana and Anubis, the Egyptian dog-headed
god who guided souls to the underworld. The asteroid Icarus, the youth
who flew too close to the Sun and drowned in the sea below, was conjunct
to the ruler of the Ascendant, and the asteroid Daedalus, the inventorfather of Icarus, was conjunct the Moon. There are many excellent books
on world mythologies that can help you become familiar with the narrative
stories of myths. You may also want to obtain a dictionary of gods and
goddesses. In Bill's natal chart, the Sun is conjoined to Siva and Hidalgo.
Hidalgo is the name of a 19th-century Spanish priestturnedrevolutionary who was martyred and immortalized as the
Father of Mexican Independence. When this asteroid is prominent
in the chart, it may indicate a connection with Latinspeaking
countries, fighting for one's beliefs, standing up for the rights of
others, or advocating for the underdog. Siva, also known as the
Hindu god Shiva, is the god of ecstasy and transformation,
connected to the Greek Dionysus. The prominence of this asteroid
in Bill's chart may indicate a powerful urge to exult in strong
emotion, ecstasy, sexual intensity, spiritual transcendence, breaking
taboos, and pushing beyond barriers.
Bill has the Moon conjoined Psyche and Irene. Psyche was a
mortal princess who, in her quest for reunion with her lover Eros,
mastered heroic tasks given her by a wrathful Aphrodite. She was
later transformed into a goddess. In Bill's chart, Psyche may
represent psychic sensitivity to the minds and feelings of another,
which can lead to the yearning for a soul-mate union. Irene is a
personal name, and he may have an important encounter with
someone named Irene.
Finally, Bill's Midheaven is conjoined to Demeter, whose mythic
motifs are similar to those of Ceres. And we have already discussed
the asteroids Amicita and Fraternitas conjoined to Venus, Mercury,
and the Ascendant, and the asteroid Utopia conjoined to the
Ascendant ruler Jupiter. STUDY GUIDELINES
Examine each of the four major asteroids in your practice chart and
rate their importance: high, moderately high, moderate, moderately
low, and nil. State your reasons for your judgment.
To what extent is the theme represented by the asteroids that are
significantly placed a major component of that person's life
experience? Give a brief astrological delineation of the asteroid(s)
chosen. Chose one minor asteroid that is prominent in the chart and research its
meaning. If it is a mythic asteroid, what do you think is the
psychological principle behind the mythic biography? Ask the owner
of the chart if this meaning is relevant in his or her life. CHAPTER TEN ASPECTS PATTERNS
SO FAR, we have discussed the most important individual factors in the
birth chart that contribute to discerning the life purpose. However, planets
do not operate only in isolation as they guide us toward the fulfillment of
our life purpose; they also operate in combination. Planets have complex
relationships with one another that can be harmonious and supportive, or
difficult and obstructive. In astrology, the ways in which a planet connects
with other planets is known as the doctrine of aspects. Viewing the chart as
a map of the psyche, the lines formed by the web of interrelated aspects
that connect the planets can be seen as analogous to a wiring diagram of
the mind or the neural circuits of the body.
The doctrine of aspects has gone through considerable change since it
was first formulated during the Hellenistic era. At that time, the only five
aspects that were considered were the sextile, square, trine, opposition, and
conjunction, which was called a co-presence. The modern quincunx and
semi-sextile were not viewed as aspects; they were called aversions and
indicated that planets had no relationship to one another at all. In many
considerations, aspects were determined by whole sign rather than by
degree, but the closer planets were to exact, the more active the
relationship between the planets was thought to be. There was a special
relationship between planets that were within a 3-degree range of
application to another (or 13 degrees for the Moon) and able to cross sign
boundaries (outof-sign aspects). This more narrow range may have been
the condition for the blending of the individual planetary meanings that is
the standard today for any modern aspect interpretation. Especially
important was the witnessing of a planet by a benefic or malefic planet. This was credited with either enhancing or preventing its capacity to bring
about the matters it represented in ways that were favorable for the person.
In the Arabic/Medieval tradition, aspects were determined by moiety.
Each planet was assigned a certain number of degrees based on its heliacal
visibility—how far from the Sun a planet had to be before it was visible.
Each planet had a different moiety, and if the arc of separation between
two planets was less than or equal to the average of the sum of their
moieties, they were considered to be in aspect to one another. Thus, if the
moiety of Venus was 13 degrees and that of Saturn was 7 degrees, their
average was 10 degrees. If, in a particular chart, Venus was at 1 Leo and
Saturn was at Mercúrio Libra, their orb of separation within the sextile aspect was
8 degrees (within that 10-degree range), and hence they were considered to
be in aspect with one another. Note how this differs from the modern orb
of 6 degrees for a sextile aspect.
During the Renaissance, there was a movement to reform astrological
methodology. Johannes Kepler dismissed the validity of planets in signs
and houses, and looked only to their aspects. In the process of this inquiry,
he came up with many minor aspects—for example, the quintile, septile,
and novile—that subsequently have become part of the modern tradition.
Contemporary practice utilizes a multitude of different aspects that are
determined by orb of separation from exactitude, based on each individual
kind of aspect (such as 6 degrees for sextiles, 8 degrees for squares and
trines, etc.), regardless of the planets' moiety or sign position.
Depending on the kind of astrology you practice, you must decide what
model you will use to determine aspects and be aware of the variations in
the historical tradition. Regardless of the model, however, planets that are
in aspect to one another indicate that the planets are linked in some
particular way. Modern practice blends the significations of the planets
involved and calls their interaction easy/ flowing if they are linked by a
trine or sextile. It calls the interaction difficult/challenging if they are
linked by a square or opposition. This is essentially similar to traditional
interpretation. Ancient astrology also had a set of criteria that deemed one
planet dominant—that is, doing something to the other planet, which then
reacted in turn. This subtlety is generally not used in modern aspect
interpretation.
When you look at an individual aspect between two planets, first factor
in the meaning of each planet's basic nature, its modification by sign, the significations of the house it occupies, and the significations of the topical
meanings of the houses that it rules. Then consider the meaning of both
planets in combination with one another. Finally, analyze the kind of
interaction that exists between them. In some cases, it is appropriate to
blend the meanings of the planets— for instance, Mercury sextile Venus
indicates a “smooth talker.” But in other cases, you may want to interpret
the aspect as one planet assisting or hindering the other—for instance,
benefic Venus helping Mercury to accomplish its own significations.
This is an important step in the synthesis of the chart as a whole,
especially when one of the planets involved is one of the key significators
of the nativity. When analyzing the Sun, Moon, and Ascendant ruler, note
which other planets are connected to these three places of life, and then
factor in their influence when making your judgment. This is one of the
times in the consultation session when you integrate the influences of the
other planets—when they are connected to the three main planets in the
chart. Another is when you are analyzing a specific topic—for example,
relationship or career—in which case you focus on the planetary ruler of
the topical house under investigation.
Aspect patterns in which three or more planets are linked reveal the
broader themes of the chart, and the remainder of this chapter will be
devoted to a discussion of these patterns. In my experience, the most
significant aspect patterns are stelliums, T-squares, grand squares, and
grand trines.
A stellium is comprised of three or more planets in the same sign.
Imagine the situation as three roommates sharing a single room in a
household. They may get along and learn how to accommodate each
others' needs and agendas, or they may all be jockeying for the limited
space and interfering with each others' plans. Ancient authors spoke of
planets occupying the same house/sign as a co-mingling of their natures.
Planets in a stellium may act as a unit, bringing emphasis, focus, and
concentration to the affairs of the house they occupy. However, if the
planets are inharmoniously disposed toward one another, the result may be
confusion, conflicting agendas, imbalance in the topic that the house
signifies, or overemphasis on the qualities of the sign in which the planets
are located.
T-squares are comprised of two or more planets in opposition, with each
one in a square configuration to the same third planet. Because the square and opposition aspects are generally inharmonious, difficult, challenging,
and destructive, planetary energies bound up in this configuration generate
a tremendous amount of tension and stress. Two planets with conflicting
and opposing agendas, pulling the individual in opposing directions while
a third planet that squares the other two is at cross-purposes with both of
them is not a harmonious condition. The individual may feel torn asunder
and locked in a vice grip at the same time. Yet, like water held back by a
dam, a huge amount of potential energy is being amassed. Thus the
potential of a T-square is like that of a generator that can fuel the ambitions
to accomplish a task. Many successful people who have overcome great
obstacles in the achievement of their success have T-squares, as this is a
configuration that produces the energy to accomplish work if it can be
properly harnessed.
Grand squares are a variation of the T-square in which four or more
planets are all square to one another, with two sets of oppositions. The
energies of the grand square, or grand cross as it is sometimes called, are
an intensification of those of the T-square, with even less maneuvering
room to resolve the dilemmas presented by the life. Individuals may feel
boxed in or trapped by life experiences, seeing no way out of
circumstances that seem beyond their control to change. They may feel as
if they are carrying the burdens of others, sometimes even the weight of
the world; this may lead them to struggle against resignation and despair.
There are tremendous pressures upon them as they attempt to hold together
a number of diverse commitments and responsibilities. People whose
charts contain a grand square are called to develop great strength of will
and determination. In order to relieve the inner pressure and tension, they
must learn how to utilize their concentrated internal energies for outer
productivity. In the process, great things may be realized and brought into
manifestation.
Grand trines involve three or more planets, each in a trine relationship to
both of the other two. The simple trine is the most harmonious and helpful
aspect, so three interrelated trines give tremendous creative energy that is
easy to access and express. Some astrologers posit that a grand trine
represents an innate talent or gift that has been carried over from other
lifetimes, because it can emerge at an early age and seem almost effortless.
The energies flow, opportunities abound, and the results are good. In some
cases, the grand trine can be counterproductive, however, since the lack of internal pressure can cause certain individuals to lose their motivation to
do anything productive with their gifts, remaining full of unrealized
potential.
Some astrologers also consider the Yod (two quincunxes joined by a
sextile, often referred to as the Finger of Fate or Finger of God) and a host
of other patterns such as the Kite, Mystic Rectangle, and Star of David.
For the purposes of a one-hour consultation, however, focusing on these
rather than the first four mentioned can take you off track into scenic
detours. While they may be of interest and have meaning, they can divert
you from the essential themes of the chart. In longer in-depth or ongoing
sessions, it is certainly reasonable to explore these finer shadings of the
chart's meaning.
There is dissension among astrologers as to whether the nodes, lots, and
angles should be considered as part of an aspect pattern. Some see that the
tension built up in T-squares and grand squares can be released via a trine
or sextile from one of the planets involved in this configuration to some
other planet. Be aware that ancient astrological texts did not mention
aspect patterns at all, although there were special delineations for three
planets in the same sign. DELINEATING ASPECT PATTERNS
Not every aspect pattern will be equally potent in an individual's life.
There are several criteria you can use to determine whether an aspect
pattern is more or less prominent. Here are some guidelines to follow when
you consider aspects:
An aspect pattern is operative by sign; however, the closer to exact
degrees the planets are, the more active are the manifestations of the
events that the pattern signifies.
Aspect patterns involving planets in angular houses will be more
prominent as the manifestations of outer events in the lives of the
individuals.
Aspect patterns involving the Sun, Moon, or Ascendant ruler are more
likely to tie into the basic life theme.
Aspect patterns involving the personal inner planets tend to be more
personally significant, in contrast to aspect patterns involving only the
outer planets, which are more generational than individual. Before creating an interpretation of an aspect pattern, pay careful attention
to the significations of the houses, planets, and signs involved.
Look at the houses involved. If there is a T-square between planets in
the first, seventh, and tenth houses, you know right away that tension
is going to be present in the areas of self-identity vs. relationship, and
how that polarity impacts the career. For your own studies, create a
short sentence for each combination of houses involved in T-squares
such as the one above.
Look at the planets involved. Create a short sentence of just the
planetary archetypes.
Blend the influence of the sign with the planet, and then place them in
their respective houses, also noting what houses, and thus topics, those
planets rule.
Once you have established the where, who, and how of this pattern,
create a more flowing, detailed, and psychologically perceptive
delineation.
If you use Whole Sign houses and aspects by sign rather than by degree as
your default systems, the aspect patterns are more true to form in terms of
the natural relationships that exist between the various signs and houses.
The essence of the conjunction aspect is a co-mingling of the natures of
the various planets. Since stelliums connect three or more planets in the
same sign and house, they therefore point to areas of concentrated activity.
Depending on the nature of the planets involved and their individual
conditions, stelliums may function to augment or decrease the
significations of that area of life. But for good or ill, the topics of the house
and the qualities of the sign that contain the stellium will be emphasized in
the person's life.
The essence of the trine aspect is affirmation and support, and grand
trine patterns connect planets in the same element. Thus the grand trine
will link the three or more planets that occupy all of the fire, earth, air, or
water signs in a manner that facilitates a harmonious and supportive
interaction of the significations and topics represented by the individual
planets and the houses involved. Because all the planets occupy the same
element, a theme is immediately suggested that emphasizes the nature of
the element: freedom and vital energy with the fire signs; material security and competence in the physical world with the earth signs; communication
and intellectual activity with the air signs; emotional sensitivity and
nurture with the water signs.
The grand trine can occupy the following sets of houses: first, fifth, and
ninth (identity, creativity, higher wisdom); second, sixth, and tenth
(resources, work/illness, profession); third, seventh, and eleventh (siblings,
partners, friends/associates); or fourth, eighth, and twelfth (parents/home,
death/its benefits, afflictions/transcendence). Note that each of these sets
contains one angular, one succedent, and one cadent house. If you
understand the meanings of these sets of houses in combination—in terms
of their topical significations, their relative angularity, and their relative
good/bad condition with regard to configuration to the Ascendant—the
delineation begins to become transparent. For example, a grand water trine
linking the third, seventh, and eleventh houses—all “good” houses—
suggests a theme affirming emotional nurture and support (water) in the
area of peer relationships between siblings, partners, and friends.
The square and opposition aspects indicate negation or challenge, and Tsquares or grand squares connect planets in the same modality. Thus the Tsquare or grand square link planets that occupy either the cardinal, fixed,
or mutable signs in a manner that accentuates some kind of conflict,
struggle, or tension between the significations and topics represented by
the individual planets and the houses involved. Because all the planets
occupy the same modality, a theme is immediately suggested that
emphasizes action and external crisis for the cardinal signs, stability and
rigidity for the fixed signs, or change and indecisiveness for the mutable
signs.
The T-square and grand-square patterns also configure sets of houses
that are either angular (first, fourth, seventh, and tenth), succedent (second,
fifth, eighth, and eleventh) or cadent (third, sixth, ninth, or twelfth), and
this information indicates the amount of dynamic energy behind the
planets to produce outer events. Thus the most externally potent
combination involves planets in cardinal signs and angular houses, while
planets in cadent houses have less force for manifesting externally, or they
may be more likely to constellate internal processes. If, for example, the Tsquare is an opposition between the second and eighth houses, polarized
by mutual squares to the eleventh, you know that these succedent houses
indicate a moderate level of dynamic activity, and that the issue revolves around personal money vs. a partner's money as it affects group
affiliations. Furthermore, if the planets are in fixed signs, the individual
will tend to be rigid and controlling around these issues, while if in
mutable signs, the individual will tend to be more flexible, or even
changeable and flip-flopping about. Finally, the individual planets and the
houses they rule flesh out the details.
For instance, the major aspect patterns in Bill's chart are:
1. Stellium: Moon, Mars, and Juno in the third house.
2. T-square: Angular T-square in mutable signs; Neptune/Ceres opposite
Jupiter, both square Venus and Mercury. The opposition from Jupiter
to Neptune is tight, while the squares to Venus and Mercury are by
sign, not by degree.
3. Grand square: Cadent grand square in fixed signs; Sun opposite
Uranus both square to Moon, Mars, and Juno, which are opposite Pluto
and Pallas. This also by sign, but not by tight by degree. Júpiter . Grand trines: Water signs in houses four, eight, and twelve; Sun,
Jupiter, Chiron. This is by sign and by degree. Fire signs in houses
one, five, and nine; Venus and Mercury/Vesta and Saturn/Pallas and
Pluto. This is by sign, but is not close by degree.
How do you determine which of these is most important? If you look to
the key significators of the chart—Sun, Moon, and Jupiter (Asc. ruler)—
you see that they are involved in all the patterns except that of the grand
trine in fire signs, so that doesn't help you much. But the mutable T-square
is in the angular houses, which indicates great dynamic activity and
involves Jupiter, the Ascendant ruler. This may help you make a
reasonable determination. If I were interpreting this chart, the first planets I
would mention are Venus and Mercury, because they occupy the first
house. Then I'd point out Jupiter as the Ascendant ruler, and Jupiter's
square configuration to them and the opposition to Neptune. That pattern
would most likely assume primacy for both those reasons. Since the Sun is
linked to Jupiter by a close trine, I might next bring in the
Sun/Jupiter/Chiron grand trine briefly, but would tend to focus more on the
Sun's grand T-square, as it pulls in the Moon. In Bill's chart, the mutable T-square in the angular houses is
significant. Fourth-house family matters and tenth-house
professional concerns create a major dynamic tension with the
firsthouse sense of identity. You can posit that Bill's sense of
identity and effectiveness as an individual may be continually
shaped by stressful situations in connection with his family and his
career. In other words, Bill's sense of personal accomplishment is
defined by his ability to provide for his family through success in
his profession and actions in the larger world. Because the pattern
entails planets in mutable signs, his identity, family situation, and
career all go through a number of changes. He may experiment with
different options trying to make things work better, or he may be
unclear himself about just who he is and what he wants to do in the
world to support the home foundation.
Looking at the planets involved, Mercury's placement echoes this
theme as it rules the seventh house of relationship and the tenth
house of career, and is in its detriment in Sagittarius. Thus it may be
difficult for Bill to find a career that is effective; this may translate
into a sense of personal powerlessness and, consequently, a lack of
support and respect from a partner. Venus' rulership of the sixth
house of job reinforces the theme that this is a work-related issue,
and the square configuration between Venus/Mercury and Neptune
suggests that Bill's talents may lay in the field of the arts and
cinematography. In fact, we already know he achieved some
recognition as a filmmaker early in life making documentaries (note
Ceres' placement in the tenth house—goddess associated with
“going back to the land”). After marriage, Bill had his own business
with a TV production studio, but neither of these occupations
generated abundant financial revenue. Jupiter in the fourth house is
the strongest planet in this configuration, because it is placed in its
own sign of rulership, Pisces. In a very general sense, as the ruler of
the Ascendant, its placement points to the topic that drives the soul
and leads to a successfully lived life. Bill's participation in a
construction renovation business whose vision is to create an
intentional community thus provides a solid foundation for the
successful achievement of his goals and financial well being. In a session with Bill, you can acknowledge his artistic talents in
the career arena, but also indicate that they may not lead to ongoing
professional and financial success. Encourage Bill rather to focus
his energies on working with fourth-house matters—family, land,
homes, etc.—as this may be a more fruitful area for gaining a sense
of accomplishment, and may be a source of revenue that can support
the pursuit of his artistic ventures. STUDY GUIDELINES
Determine and list the aspect patterns in your practice chart. Rate them
in their order of importance and explain why.
Choose the most important ones, and prepare delineations for each.
Synthesize the meanings of the individual planets in their respective
signs and the nature of the pattern in which they are involved, but also
look at the grouping of the houses, their relative angularity, and
whether they are good or bad houses, as well as the element or
modality that contains the planets in question. Be sure to note if one of
the planets is a key significator of the chart, or if it conjoins one of the
angles by close-degree orb.
If you arrive at a conclusion that is less than glowing, think about
suggestions for how the person can use the difficult energy
constructively. CHAPTER ELEVEN ANALYZING RELATIONSHIP AND VOCATION
THERE ARE TWO MAJOR components to the natal portion of a complete
astrological reading. The first entails a broad general discussion of the
individual's personality and the purpose of his or her life, with an
articulation of the major themes of the chart. The second involves a more
detailed focus on particular issues. Before beginning a session, ask your
client if he or she has any specific questions, and make sure that you leave
enough time to address these concerns. The most frequent topics on which
clients ask for clarification and guidance are relationship, career, and
health. In this chapter, we'll discuss how to evaluate relationship and
career, and give a few guidelines about health.
The modern approach to chart interpretation looks at the chart as a
whole. To a certain extent, this tendency spills over into the evaluation of a
particular topic as well, reflecting the assumption that everything in the
chart contributes to who we are. Ultimately, this is true. But it can also be
difficult to discern just where to look in the chart for clear and specific
information about a particular concern. Traditional astrologers look first to
the house that signifies the topic under investigation.
The word “topic” comes from the Greek word topos, which means
“place.” This was the technical term used for the concept of an astrological
house. Just as we look to the topography of a landscape to locate various
geographical features, ancient astrologers looked to the twelve astrological
houses as the locations of the various topics, or departments of life. Their
analysis of topics, therefore, begins with the location of the house that
signifies the matter under consideration. The essential and most distilled
meanings of the twelve astrological houses are: First house: the body, character, physical appearance, personality
Second house: livelihood, finances, material possessions
Third house: siblings, neighbors, communications, short journeys
Fourth house: home, hearth, parents, land
Fifth house: children, creativity, romance, sexuality, pleasurable
pursuits, games of fortune
Sixth house: illness and health, accidents, jobs, servitude
Seventh house: marriage, sexual unions, partnerships
Eighth house: death and benefits gained from death, lawsuits, joint
resources, depth psychology, the occult
Ninth house: foreign travel, long journeys, higher education, religion,
philosophy
Tenth house: profession, actions in the world, honors, reputation
Eleventh house: friends, organizations, gain from patronage, social
activities and activism
Twelfth house: enemies, afflictions, suffering, loss, karma,
transcendence, the mysteries
Many ancient astrological texts devoted chapters to an analysis of the
topics pertaining to each house, with interpretations varying from one
author to another. In a discussion of marriage, Valens presents a relevant
procedure that examines the planet Venus, the seventh house and the lord
of that house, and the lot of marriage.1 From this, we can extrapolate a
general procedure for the investigation of any topic that involves a specific
planet associated with that topic, a house that signifies the topic, and a lot
that pertains to it.
1. Each topic has one or more planets that are its general significators,
such as Venus for marriage, Mars for siblings, Jupiter for children, the
Sun for the father in a diurnal chart and Saturn for the father in a
nocturnal chart, Venus for the mother in a diurnal chart and the Moon
for the mother in a nocturnal chart. Because this same planet can be
used in every chart, the indications to which it points are the most
general.
2. Each topic is located within the provenance of a particular house—the
seventh for marriage, the fifth for children, the fourth for parents, etc.
The planets that occupy a house, as well as the planet that is the lord of it, are investigated. The planets that occupy a house have an impact on
what takes place in that area of life, but it is the house's planetary ruler
that has the ultimate authority to render judgment about how the
matters will turn out in the final analysis. Imagine a restaurant where
the employees are likened to the planets located in the house. The
quality of the chefs and the wait staff (planets located in the house)
most certainly affect the operations of the establishment, but it is the
owner of the restaurant (ruler of the house) who has the ultimate say in
deciding the major policies.
3. Each topic has one or more lots that address the matter, and the lot and
its planetary ruler are both important.
Ancient astrologers looked at the relative strength and condition of these
factors governing a topic. They then decided whether or not the topic
would eventuate in the person's life, and, if so, whether the planet would
produce fortunate or unfortunate results. The major criteria to which the
significators of the topic were subject were configuration with the benefic
or malefic planets, the strength of their sign rulerships, direct or retrograde
motion, being under the beams of the Sun, and the relative angularity of
the house they occupied. If most of the significators were free from
affliction from the malefics, direct in motion, in signs of their rulership or
exaltation, and in angular or succedent and good houses, the eventuation of
that topic would likely have a beneficial outcome.
This perspective stands in sharp contrast to the approach of many
modern astrologers, who may not first consider whether the manifestation
of a topic is supported by the chart before beginning to discuss it.
Counseling protocol advises against telling a client that marriage or
children or profession are unlikely to be realized or prove to be the cause
of misfortune. However, this approach can provide useful and important
background information for guiding the counseling session. Here, we will
follow traditional guidelines, but interpret them in a modern context and
add the insights of more contemporary approaches. ANALYZING RELATIONSHIPS
Some of the most common inquiries that clients bring to their sessions are
about relationships, but the questions are often unfocused. People ask
astrologers to tell them about relationships, but often what they really mean is: When am I going to meet that special someone? Is my partner
being unfaithful to me? Will this current relationship last? Are we headed
for a break-up? Is there someone better for me out there? What kind of
person would be a good match for me? Am I compatible with so and so?
Will I ever get married (again)?
After years of doing relationship analysis, I have come to realize that the
important question is: What do I need in a relationship that will make me
happy and satisfied, and can this potential/current partner actually provide
that? The correlate to this is: What does my potential/current partner need
from a relationship in order to make him or her happy, and can I in reality
provide that? The real inquiry that underlies both of these questions is:
What is my capacity to do relationships well and do I have the inner
resources to sustain interactions with others? Identifying the factors
associated with these questions is more useful than telling someone that his
Moon is trine her Venus, so they will feel comfortable and find pleasure
together, even though this may be a true statement. We can be compatible
with all kinds of people with whom we cannot have successful
relationships. The starting place for all these inquiries, however, is to
assess if marriage is even a possibility for the person, or if the timing
factors point to this event occurring at an appropriate age.
Beyond the question of whether the chart supports the topic of a
relationship that will bring good fortune to the person, however, there is
the issue of fate or karma. Relationships will occur for people who have
problematic indicators and troubled synastry (comparing two charts for
compatibility), because the unconscious forces of the collective past are
usually stronger than those of immediate good judgment. Sometimes, we
have unions with others whose larger purpose has nothing to do with our
individual happiness. From an Eastern spiritual point of view, we are here
to work out unresolved karma from the past that is aptly described by
difficult chart contacts.
Before you can discuss these deeper matters, however, you have to
know the baseline from which the individual is operating. Here, I will first
present a procedure for a traditional analysis of the topic of marriage that
you can use primarily for your own information. Then I will offer
suggestions from the perspective of a modern counseling session A Traditional Approach to Analyzing Relationship One factor in analyzing relationship is the planetary significator. Look first
to the condition of Venus as a general indication of marriage for both
women and men. Some texts differentiate between looking at Venus for
men and Mars for women as significators of sexual union, and the Moon
for men and the Sun for women as significators of legal marriage.
If Venus is in a sign of its rulership or exaltation, and well-placed by
house, not afflicted by configurations with malefic planets, direct in
motion and not under the beams, this person will more likely be
capable of having beneficial relationships and ease in relating.
If Venus is in detriment or fall, placed in a difficult house, poorly
aspected by the malefics, retrograde in motion or under the beams, this
person may have difficulty entering into or maintaining relationships,
or may be involved in relationships that are not beneficial.
Remember that, unless Taurus or Libra occupies the seventh house,
Venus also signifies topics other than relationship, and thus can give
only very general kinds of indications in the matter of marriage
Another factor in analyzing relationship is the house significator. To
explore this, look to the seventh house of marriage and its ruler.
Planets occupying the seventh house show what influences are brought
to relationship matters. The benefics in good condition bring happiness
and prosperity to relationship; the malefics in poor condition can bring
strife, rejection, and unfortunate circumstances to marriage.
Difficulties may also arise if the malefic planets square or oppose the
seventh house. Planets occupying the seventh house generally rule
other houses; as such, they use relationships as the means by which to
bring the topics they rule to realization.
The planet that rules the seventh house is the specific significator of
relationship matters and has the ultimate authority in bringing about
this topic. The house placement of the ruler of the seventh indicates
what the person seeks from marriage—if the ruler of seventh house is
in the fourth, a home and home life; if the ruler of the seventh house is
in the fifth, children; if the ruler of the seventh house is in the second,
financial security; etc. The condition of the ruler indicates the extent to
which individuals will be successful in creating and maintaining good relationships, as well the likelihood of their specific needs in
relationships being fulfilled by a partner in a positive manner. Aspects
to the seventh-house ruler by the benefics or malefics can help or
hinder its functioning in ways that are fortunate or unfortunate for the
individual.
The last factor in analyzing relationship is the lot significator. Here, look to
the Lot of Marriage. You will encounter a number of different calculations
for the Lot of Marriage by various authors. Valens uses the formula of Asc.
+ Venus – Jupiter for a day birth, and the Asc. + Jupiter – Venus for a night
birth. Other astrologers have set forth alternate formulas. You may want to
experiment. Look to see if the lot is angular, succedent or cadent, under the
beams, or witnessed by the malefics or benefics and judge accordingly.
Then look to the ruler of the lot and apply the usual criteria. A Modern Approach to Analyzing Relationship
When counseling clients from the modern perspective, look to the sign of
Venus to describe the manner in which they express their sexuality and
magnetism, their approach to relationship, and what they find attractive in
a mate. The house placement of Venus can point to the arena in which
sexual/relational encounters and issues will eventually constellate.
Difficult aspects to Venus from Mars may indicate that issues of conflict
and domination arise, and difficult aspects from Saturn point to issues of
restriction or inhibition of the sexual/romantic impulses. But remember,
this is a very general kind of statement, because Venus may rule other
topics as well, unless the sign Taurus or Libra occupies the seventh house.
The addition of the asteroid Juno to the astrological pantheon allows
you to interpret Venus as the principle of sexual attraction and Juno as the
principle of commitment in marriage. If Venus and Juno are in
incompatible signs, the qualities that stir the attraction instincts may not be
ones the person can live with day after day. Venus in Sagittarius may be
attracted to the exciting free-spirited world traveler, but Juno in Cancer
wants the mate to show up at dinner every night. You can evaluate Juno by
sign, house, and aspect to derive information about what is necessary for
ongoing commitment and what else in the chart has the capacity to thwart it. A prominent Juno in the chart indicates that relationship is a very
important theme and concern in the life.
Look to the qualities of the sign on the Descendant by element and sign
as indicative of what is being sought in a partner or from partnership. The
attributes of the element and sign occupying the seventh house represent
the needs that the person seeks to have met from partnership. Fire signs
need freedom and power; air signs need communication and relating; earth
signs need physical and material security; water signs need emotional
safety and presence. Aries occupying the seventh house points to the need
for autonomy in relationships, Taurus to the need for material security,
Gemini to the need for mental communication, etc.
The house placement of the ruler of the seventh house indicates what
the person is seeking from marriage in order to be satisfied. For one
person, it may be children (ruler of seventh house in fifth house), for
another a home (ruler in fourth house), and for yet another, a best friend
(ruler in eleventh house). The condition of the ruler gives information
about the person's relative capacity for successful relationships. Again,
check the aspects to see if other planets support or curtail the capacity to
function well in relationship and what other agendas they represent that the
individual must heed.
Modern psychological theory also suggests that the sign on the
Descendant is the place of projection for the non-integrated parts of an
individual's psyche, and may describe the qualities by which he or she is
attracted to others in order to experience the unconscious aspects of the
self. For example, a person with Libra rising who is naturally skilled in
compromise will have Aries on the Descendant, seeking out forceful
partners in order to learn how to be more assertive.
You can examine asteroids whose mythic themes constellate around
love and relationship—Psyche, Eros, Aphrodite, Amor, Sappho, Cupido,
Hera, Lilith, Vesta, Lust, and Pecker. If they fall in prominent places in the
chart, they can give more detailed information. Also, the personal-name
asteroids can be very illuminating in confirming the importance of being
drawn to individuals who carry that name.
You can present the traditional analysis to the client or use it for your
own information to give you a solid baseline that can inform how you
present the analysis to the client within the modern context. If you are
concerned that the traditional approach is too deterministic and limits the free will of the evolving self, you can use this information as a guide for
pinpointing the areas where psychological counseling and right action can
transform difficult unconscious patterns.
You will most likely have conflicting testimonies from the above
analysis, as we humans are very complex creatures, especially when it
comes to love, sex, marriage, and commitment. Look to see if all the
indicators are favorable or if all of them are unfavorable. This will give
you an idea of whether to encourage the client in pursuit of relationships,
or whether to encourage the development of other parts of the life. This is
not to say that clients in relationships should not actualize their individual
paths. If some testimonies are favorable and others unfavorable,
relationship will be a mix of good and bad, or relationship will occur but
be varied, difficult, or transitory, as is the case for many people. However,
you should be able to identify just where the problems will emerge.
Ultimately, our capacity for creating successful relationships is more a
matter of our own charts rather than our synastry with others. Someone
who has well-situated relationship significators will naturally be attracted
to and merge with those who also are well suited to creating and
maintaining positive relationships. On the other hand, someone who has
poorly situated relationship significators will more likely be attracted to
those who are unsuited for intimacy and commitment, and to unions that
do not come to anything or do not turn out well. However, the synastry
between two charts can describe the specifics of the good or bad
interactions that do take place in any relationship. Relationships whose
main purpose is the resolution of difficult karmic patterns may be indicated
by key planets that are closely connected by challenging synastry contacts,
such as Venus in one chart opposed to Saturn in another. Generally, it is
not appropriate for you to make definitive statements to clients about
whether or not to marry or divorce based on a comparison of the charts.
Couples come together for all kinds of reasons, and you may not be aware
of the larger scheme of things. Where an astrologer is most effective is in
explaining the dynamics of the interactions and the range of options, based
on a careful analysis of the variables.
Astrologers are often concerned with whether good synastry over-rides
poor natal relationship patterns, and whether a good electional marriage
chart over-rides bad synastry between a couple. In the course of your astrological career, you will have to mull over and consider these questions
based on your own experiences in counseling others in this area.
In Bill's chart, Venus is in Sagittarius in the first house. Venus is
placed in a strong, angular, and good house, free from affliction by
the malefics, direct in motion, not under the beams, and in her own
bounds. While Venus is not in the signs of its domicile or exaltation,
her domicile lord, Jupiter, in its own sign, Sagittarius, gives much
support. These are all good indicators.
Others see Bill as a kind of “Renaissance man,” well educated and
well traveled. He is attracted to women with whom he can share
intellectual interests and outdoor physical adventures (Venus in
Sagittarius). With Venus in the first house, his sexuality and charm
are right up front and he is happiest when he is in love.
Gemini occupies the seventh house of marriage, and he needs a
relationship that supports the free expression of his ideas and
someone with whom he can make a mental connection and who will
listen and respond to him. No planets occupy the seventh house, and
the house itself is not afflicted by squares or oppositions from the
malefics.
Mercury, the ruler of the seventh house, occupies the first house,
conjoined to Venus. Talking and conversation turn Bill on. Because
the ruler of the seventh is located in an angular house, the topic of
relationships is extremely important to him and much of his life
energies are directed toward them. His own identity becomes more
solid when he can function as a partner in relationship to another. In
fact, with the ruler of the seventh in the first, he may want a partner
to put him and their relationship as first priority. Because Mercury is
in detriment in Sagittarius, he may have difficulty sustaining
partnership, or it may be that his mates cannot sustain that kind of
ongoing intensity and focus, much to his disappointment. However,
Mercury is not hindered by the malefics, is helped by a bonifying
conjunction with Venus, is direct in motion, not under the beams,
receives a lunar application, and is strong in the first; thus the topic
of relationship is relatively well supported. Therefore, good relationships are presented, but are challenged in their staying
power due to Mercury in the sign of its detriment.
Because Mercury and Venus are in T-square by sign with planets in
the fourth and tenth houses, issues around providing a home and
having a career create tension in Bill's efforts to enter and maintain
relationships as his primary agenda. With squares from both Jupiter
and Neptune, his expectations of relationship may be inflated and
idealistic.
The Lot of Marriage falls at 0 Virgo 32 in the tenth house. The lot
is angular, not under the beams, and free from harm by Mars and
Saturn, which are both in aversion to the sign Virgo. These are all
excellent indicators for the eventuation of marriage, and it suggests
that the marriage partner is linked in some way with professional
endeavors or joint efforts in the social world. The ruler of the Virgo
lot is Mercury, which is also the ruler of the seventh house.
Therefore, the same considerations described above apply.
Juno is in Aquarius in the third house, closely conjunct to Mars
and widely conjoined to the Moon. The Juno/Moon connection
reinforces Bill's emotional need for relationship, and, in an air sign
and the third house, echoes the theme of mental interaction. If you
consider the projection theme, Bill may be attracted to women who
are independent and free spirits (Aquarius), yet, with the
conjunction to Mars, experience conflict and power struggles when
divergent points of view are expressed, especially highlighted by the
ninth-house opposition by sign from Pluto and Pallas. As Mars is
the ruler of the fifth house of children and sexuality, much of the
conflict may center on disagreements over these topics.
Overall, relationship is indicated, as, aside from Mars/Juno, there
are no severe harmful influences to Venus and Mercury, who are
both strong by their first-house placement. The issue of relationship
will be very important in Bill's life. However, his relationships may
not be all that he had hoped for. As a counselor, you can discuss the
motif of projection and how the kind of women to whom he is
attracted—intellectual, free-spirited, independent (Venus in
Sagittarius, Juno in Aquarius, Gemini on the Descendant)—are likely to have vibrant lives of their own and may not want to merge
their lives with another in pursuit of a joint vision or collaborative
endeavor. ANALYZING CAREER
The tenth house is associated with the topic of profession. The Greek word
most commonly used to describe this house is praxis, which means
“action” or “what one does.” It is the area of life that speaks to the
question: So, what do you do? This house is also associated with honors,
reputation, and social standing. To the modern way of thinking, the ancient
astrological texts are confusing and difficult to understand in their analysis
of profession. This may be due partially to the different way the notion of
profession was interpreted in the ancient world as compared to today.
In ancient times, high social status, as indicated by the tenth house, did
not derive from a profession. In fact, those who were part of the upper
class did not work to make a living. Manual work was something the
poorer people did. What today are considered highstatus professions—
medicine and law—were looked on as trade skills in the world in which
ancient astrology was formulated. For the ancients, praxis meant rather
what someone did with his or her life—what we would today call a
vocation. Thus it is difficult to draw direct analogies between the
Hellenistic techniques for assessing profession and their modern
counterparts. But traditional astrologers such as Ptolemy, Paulus, and
Hephaistio nonetheless have important insights to share about praxis.
Ptolemy, in his discussion of how to locate the planet that governs
praxis, discusses the importance of the planet that has made its morning
appearance closest to the Sun or occupies the tenth house, especially when
the Moon is applying to it. If there are no planets in either of the above
conditions, he advises looking to the planet that rules the tenth house,
although such natives are generally inactive.2 I take this last statement to
mean that the ruler of the tenth is a weaker indicator of the matter of
profession than a planet that has made a morning appearance or occupies
the tenth house. Ptolemy and Paulus also discuss the significance of
Mercury, Venus, and Mars and their signs for determining the quality of
action. Paulus, like Dorotheus, mentions the importance of the placement of these planets in the angular or succedent houses, with the tenth, second,
and sixth houses being most preferred.3
Keeping all of this in mind as background, let's try to set forth a model
we can use to analyze the topic of career. In the contemporary world, this
often means answering the question: What am I going to do with my life
that will give me a social identity and make money to support my
livelihood?
The first thing to clarify when discussing the topic of career is the
difference between “vocation,” as the expression of how we want to be
recognized by society for our actions, and “job,” as something we do to
make money. For some people, these are the same; for others, they are
different. For example, someone who answers “I'm a musician” when
asked “What do you do?” may actually work as a waiter to earn money for
survival. You have to discern whether the tenth-house vocation just gives
social identity or is also the source of the second-house finances, and
whether the tenth-house vocation is the same activity as the sixth-house
daily employment. For some people, there will be a connection between
career, money, and job; for others, these topics are not connected.
Generally, the tenth, second, and sixth houses indicate the chart
signature for the topics of career, money, and job. Just as you looked to the
seventh house to evaluate the topic of marriage, you will assess these
houses to determine to what extent individuals will be successful in their
endeavors to produce a meaningful career, sufficient money, and beneficial
working conditions. Look to the planets occupying these houses, as well as
the planets ruling them. The nature of the planet tells you what kinds of
activities can be performed, and the condition of the planet tells you the
extent to which the endeavor will be successful. However, as a counseling
astrologer, be careful not to promise fame and fortune if it is not indicated.
At the same time, be careful not to tell clients they will be ineffective in
their career efforts. There is a fine line between describing what someone's
vocational aptitudes are and knowing how successful someone will be in
realizing them. And the soul purpose may be something altogether
different from a career. Here are some general guidelines for analyzing
career.
The tenth house, called praxis, describes our actions in the world, what
we do, our status, and our role in society. The second house, called bios, describes our livelihoods, how we
make the money to support our existence in the physical world.
The sixth house used to be the house of slaves and servants, but is now
the house of jobs, employees, and daily work habits and environments.
The ancients called this the House of Evil Fortune, perhaps signifying
the state of servitude resulting from having to work for others.
Unlike the topic of marriage, there is no single planet that is the general
indicator of profession, although Jupiter is associated with honors and
reputation. Ptolemy used Venus, Mercury, and Mars as rulers of the tenth
house, and the signs they occupy to designate different kinds of career
activities. And while there are lots for livelihood, reputation, praxis, and
honor, there is no Hellenistic Lot of Profession. Júpiter General Considerations for Analyzing Career
Here are guidelines to follow in the analysis of the topics of career,
income, and employment. As with the topic of relationship, we will follow
a traditional approach, but reframe it within a modern context.
Look to the element of the signs that occupy the tenth, second, and
sixth houses to see if the topics of career, money, and job are driven by
a need for freedom and power, by communication of ideas, by physical
security, or by emotional safety (fire, air, earth, and water signs
occupying these houses). In the Whole Sign system, all three of these
houses will be driven by the same elemental need. Then look to the
quality of the individual sign for more specific information.
In accordance with the ancient authors, look to see if there is a planet
making a morning rising relative to the Sun (keep to the visible planets
and make sure that they are not under the beams), or if there is a planet
that occupies the tenth house. This may be one of the strongest
indicators of profession, vocation, status, and reputation. The nature of
the planet will correspond to the kinds of activities that take place
within the career.
Check to see if the tenth house is being afflicted by squares or
oppositions from Mars or Saturn. If so, there may be obstacles or
difficulties. If there are no planets making a morning appearance or occupying the
tenth house, consider the planet that is the domicile lord of the tenth
house. The career will have something to do with the topic of the
house in which it is located. Analyze the domicile lord by location and
condition. For example, if Leo occupies the tenth house and the Sun is
located in the fifth, the career will have something to do with the topic
of children or artistic creativity or accidental good fortune, as in
speculative activities.
Examine the second and sixth houses in a similar manner. Begin by
looking at the planets occupying these houses to see how much activity
(number of planets) and what kind of activity (nature of planets) is
being expended in these areas. Note if Venus and Jupiter are providing
beneficial assistance or if Mars and Saturn are creating difficulties. If
Mars and Saturn are in good condition, they will help; if Venus and
Jupiter are in poor condition, they can't do too much good.
Examine the placement of the ruler of each of these houses. Its house
location will indicate in what area of life the career, money, or job will
be sought; its condition will indicate the relative success of this
endeavor.
See if these three rulers are configured to one another and by what
kind of aspects. If they are linked by trine and sextile, they are working
together cooperatively for the achievement of the goal; if they are
linked by square or opposition, they may be functioning at crosspurposes; if they are not connected at all, it may indicate that there is
no connection between the person's vocation, daily employment, and
earning potential.
Look to asteroids conjunct to the Midheaven degree or to the rulers of
these three houses for more specific information.
You may want to experiment with the various lots of action (praxis).
In Bill's chart, the earth signs occupy the tenth, second, and sixth
houses, indicating that the topics of career, making money, and daily
employment are motivated by a drive for physical and financial
security. No one of the classical planets is making a morning rising
relative to the Sun. Neptune, the planet of fine arts, illusion,
spirituality, and healing, occupies the tenth house, along with the
asteroid Ceres, which is connected with nurturing and the land. Begin by positing that the career and reputation incorporate
activities signified by these two planets. The tenth house is not
afflicted by any squares or oppositions from Mars or Saturn.
Because the sign Virgo occupies the tenth house, look to the
placement of its ruler, Mercury, for additional information. This
planet of communication occupies the first house in the visionary
and expansive sign of Sagittarius, while also being in detriment.
You can speculate the career involves some kind of self-propelled
(first-house) visionary communication (Mercury in Sagittarius) that
also entails the attributes of the fine arts or healing expressed with
technical proficiency (Neptune in Virgo) and land-based nurturing
(Ceres in Virgo).
We know that Bill made film documentaries and, later in life,
made a documentary about cooperative community activities. Here,
you can see how Neptune supplied the film and television
significations and Ceres supplied the topic of communes and
communities, while Mercury in Sagittarius shaped it into media
communications. However, the detriment status of Mercury deterred
the achievement of long-lasting success and extensive recognition.
An evaluation of the second house of livelihood indicates that it is
devoid of planets, and its domicile lord, a retrograde Saturn, is in its
fall in Aries in the fifth house of children and creative expression.
The ruler is also conjunct the south node and Vesta. Bill's
responsibilities as a parent are the primary motivator for earning a
living, but he has not made very much money from his artistic
endeavors. However, also note that Saturn is in mutual reception to
Mars gaining in power. So, despite the difficulties, he has managed
some accomplishment in and recognition for his artistic endeavors.
Uranus, the planet of individuality and rebelliousness, occupies the
sixth house of daily employment, which has made it challenging for
Bill to work for others. With Uranus' opposition to the Sun, Bill is a
highly individualistic personality who is rebellious to any kind of
external authority, especially from an employer. The ruler of the
sixth house, Venus, is in the first house of self. The conjunction of
the rulers of the tenth and sixth houses, which are located in the first, denotes a person who must work for himself. However, Bill
has always enjoyed working in a cooperative fashion with those
who are artistically talented and competent. The rulers of these
houses are all configured in a harmonious manner; Mercury is
conjoined to Venus and both are trine to Saturn. Thus there is a
good connection between the topics of profession, earnings from
livelihood, and jobs. ANALYZING HEALTH
While it is a question of utmost concern to clients, you must be acutely
aware, as an astrologer, of the dangers of playing physician. Although you
may be tempted to diagnose and prescribe, don't; it is illegal. Furthermore,
you do not have the medical training to do this. You can make general
statements as to the overall health and vitality of a client's body, the body
parts that are most vulnerable to illness, and timing for potential health
crises and their resolutions. But clients will want to know what is really
wrong with them, whether their physicians have diagnosed them correctly,
and when is a propitious time for a surgical procedure. Steer clear of these
questions, as well as those concerning medications and the advisability and
outcomes of operations. Do not share insights that may cause a client to
question the judgment of a physician. If a client has doubts about a
diagnosis, encourage him or her to get a second opinion. It is not that
astrology cannot provide clear insights into these questions; it is simply
that, if you, as an astrologer, err in your judgment and a client listens to
you instead of a physician, the consequences can be devastating for both of
you.
Here are several general guidelines for evaluating the topic of health.
The Moon is a general significator for matters of the body. The sign of
the Moon points to the region of the body that is most vulnerable, and
afflictions to the Moon from the malefic planets in the natal chart
indicate a problem with that body part.
The sixth house and its ruler are significators for the topics of illness
and accidents. If the ruler is in a bad condition and location, there may
be chronic problems. If the malefics occupy the sixth house, there may
also be difficulties with maintaining good health. Timing activations to
sixth-house planets or to its ruler may indicate periods of health crisis. The first house and its ruler are indicators for the topic of vitality. How
strong is the basic constitution to withstand bouts of illness and make
good recoveries?
Some astrologers set up electional charts for surgeries that have
already been advised by a physician. There are a number of guidelines
to follow, including that the Moon should not occupy a sign that
governs the part of the body being operated on. Try to keep the Moon
free of conjunctions, squares, and oppositions with Mars and Saturn.
The astrological lore also advises against surgeries occurring at the
New or Full Moon, due to the danger of excessive blood loss during
these times. STUDY GUIDELINES
Examine the topic of relationship and career in your practice chart.
Prepare written delineations for these topics, following the procedures
set forth.
Then write out two statements. In the first, make notes to yourself as
an astrologer about how likely and how fortunate the outcome of these
topics will be for the client. If you see problems in the topics of
relationship or vocation, write a second statement in which you outline
the problem. Include ways in which the problem may be addressed or
give alternative directions to pursue.
Think about how you will proceed if your client really wants to be
married and the indicators are not favorable, or if the client is
desperate to find a successful career, but prospects of that are unlikely. CHAPTER TWELVE TIMING BY SOLAR RETURNS AND ANNUAL
PROFECTIONS
IN THE PREVIOUS CHAPTER, we saw how transits and progressions can
indicate the kinds of events and issues that will be activated at a particular
time in a person's life. The influences of the slowermoving outer-planet
transits can last for several years, but within that span of time, there can be
yearly fluctuations of better and more difficult periods. Many clients want
to know what the current year or the year ahead holds for them. The Solar
Return chart is another timing method you can use to investigate the
nature, potentials, and challenges of a particular year.
The Solar Return is cast every year around the birthday, when the Sun
returns to the same degree and minute at which it was located at birth,
providing a snapshot of the coming year. Because the year has 365¼ days,
this return can occur the day before, the same day, or the day after the birth
date. The positions of the planets at the time of the Sun's annual return
give indications about the likelihood of the realization of the natal potential
during the coming year.
The question to ask in analyzing the Solar Return is whether the events
indicated in the natal chart as possibilities are likely to eventuate during a
particular year that runs from birthday to birthday. How do the positions of
the planets at the time of the Return support or negate the realization of
that natal potential? Remember that the Solar Return chart cannot indicate
the occurrence of anything that is not already indicated as likely in the
natal chart.
In modern astrology, there are four possible combinations for
constructing the Solar Return chart, each depending on variables of location and precession. Here, we will use the natal location, as opposed to
the relocation at the moment of the return. We will also use the exact
degree and minute of the Sun as it was in the natal chart, as opposed to the
precessed degree position. Thus, natal location and non-precessed Sun are
our defaults.
The Solar Return chart is most often viewed by modern astrologers as
an independent chart. Prognostication of the year ahead is based primarily
on this chart, without necessarily making reference to the natal chart. One
of the main problems with this approach is that there are four different
possible charts, depending on the options used for location and precession.
It is a stretch to consider that all four charts will give valid, clear, and noncontradictory indications.
Traditional astrologers had a different approach to the interpretation of
the Solar Return. They saw the positions of the Solar Return planets
primarily as transits to the natal chart on the birthday, rather than as an
independent chart. However, the interpretations of these Solar Return
transits on the birthday itself influence the nature of the entire year. The
Solar Return Ascendant and its lord were also important factors in the
evaluation of the year. This method was used in conjunction with another
timing technique called annual profections that focuses on a particular
planet as the annual profected time lord in the natal chart.
A time lord, called a chronocrator in Greek (literally a “ruler of time”),
is a planet that governs the life for a certain period of time. Traditional
astrology used a number of timing procedures that have been lost to
modern practice (circumambulations, zodiacal releasing, decennials, and
firdaria) and each timing system generated its own time-lord sequences.
When a planet becomes a time lord, it is “turned-on” for a period of time
that varies according to each procedure. Whatever that planet signifies in
the natal chart is most likely to be realized during the period when it is
activated. In the timing system of annual profections, the annual profected
time lord has a period of one year in which to bring about the matters it
represents. The time-lord method of profections was used in conjunction
with the Solar Return chart to obtain a picture of a specific year.
Profections are a simple and powerful timing procedure that was used
by many Hellenistic, Arabic, and Medieval astrologers to investigate the
events and nature of a particular year, with subdivisions of months and
days. The most basic version of the procedure entails moving from one sign to the next, house by house, and taking the domicile lords of these
successive houses as the time lord. When this movement takes place every
year, we call them annual profections. Beginning with the Ascendant, the
ascending sign moves to the next house in the chart on each birthday. The
sign occupying each successive house in turn becomes the ascending sign
for the year, and the topics that are signified by the profected house
become highlighted during that year.
For the first year of a person's life, the Ascendant itself is the sign of the
profection. When the person turns one year old, the ascending sign
“profects,” moving on to the second house of the birth chart. Then the
ascending sign profects to the third house, and so on. After twelve years,
the cycle repeats itself from the Ascendant, so that starting at the twelfth,
twenty-fourth, thirty-sixth, forty-eighth, sixtieth, and seventy-second
birthdays, the sign of the profection is co-incident with the natal
Ascendant. Thus each year, various topics become highlighted in some
way in orderly sequence around the chart—second-house livelihood, thirdhouse siblings, fourth-house home and parents, fifth-house children, sixthhouse illness, seventhhouse marriage, etc. Any natal planets located in that
house or any Solar Return transiting planets configured to that house play
a role in the interpretation of the year.
Furthermore, the domicile lord (ruler) of the profected sign becomes the
annual profected time lord. The annual profected lord of the year is the
planet responsible for the general activities and conditions of a person's
life within a particular year that runs from birthday to birthday. Whatever
that planet signifies in the natal chart in terms of the house it occupies and
the houses it rules, it has the opportunity to realize those significations
during the year when it is time lord. Thus an evaluation of its condition in
the natal chart is an important factor in prognosticating what to expect
during the year in which it is the annual profected time lord.
In reflecting upon this procedure, it is clear that the pattern indicated by
the annual profected sign and the natal placement of its lord repeats every
twelve years. Yet, every twelfth year is not identical to the previous cycle
in the specific details of the projected events. These qualitative differences
were determined by the ancient astrologers by identifying the annual
profected time lord as the planet that has the authority to handle the affairs
of the life for that year and bring about its own events. This planet's
condition at the time of the Solar Return, as well as its location and configurations relative to the natal chart, are critical to how capable it will
be of doing things successfully. This, in turn, affects what in fact is likely
to be accomplished and realized by the individual.
The Hellenistic astrologers all discuss the primary role that the annual
profected time lord plays in the evaluation of the Solar Return chart. The
annual profected time lord was considered the most important planet in the
Solar Return chart, because it has governance over the affairs of the year.
Hephaisto tells us to investigate how the lord of the year is situated, both in
the natal chart and in the transit chart at the time of the Solar Return, with
regard to its “mixture, position, and phase.”1 This means we must look to
its condition by sign rulership, its house location relative to the natal chart,
whether it is under the beams of the Sun or retrograde, and if it is being
witnessed by benefic or malefic planets.
If the annual profected time lord in the Solar Return chart occupies a
sign in which it has rulership, is located in an angular or succedent and
good house relative to the natal chart, can witness the house of the annual
profection as well as its own natal position, is direct in motion and not
under the beams, and is well configured by benefic planets in good
condition, you can expect that the year will be good and the events it
signifies will be accomplished with fortunate outcomes. But if the annual
profected time lord in the Solar Return chart occupies a sign of its fall or
detriment, is located in a cadent or bad house position, cannot witness the
house of the annual profection or its own natal position, is retrograde,
under the beams, or configured to the malefic planets in poor condition, it
indicates a problematic or uneventful year.
In addition, because this planet is “turned on,” the transits it makes to
other planets will be intensified and the transits made to it in the natal chart
will point to very significant events and motifs for the year. Use Bill's chart
to locate the profected sign and the annual time lord for a particular year,
and its role in the Solar Return chart. In addition, note if the domicile lord
of the Ascendant of the Solar Return chart is in a good or bad place in the
natal chart and how it is configured with the annual lord of the year, both
natally and by transit at the time of the Solar Return.
In Bill's chart, the natal Ascendant is Sagittarius, and thus the
annual profected time lord of his first year of life was Jupiter, the
lord of Sagittarius. The sign of the profection of his second year of life was Capricorn, the sign occupying the second house; the annual
profected time lord was Saturn, the lord of Capricorn. Now
investigate the year that began on Bill's sixtysixth birthday
(November 17, 2005). To find the profected sign for the year he
turned sixty-six, count from the natal Ascendant as sixty years old.
Counting in a clockwise direction, sixty-six falls in the seventh
house. The topical meaning of the seventh house will thus be
highlighted in some way for this year.
The seventh house signifies marriage. The sign Gemini occupies
the seventh house, and the domicile lord of Gemini is Mercury, who
then becomes the annual profected time lord, governing the affairs
of that year. The topic of relationship will probably be important,
since Mercury, its lord, is intensified, activated, and turned on, and
thus has the opportunity this year to bring about its significations.
Start with a natal analysis of Mercury, in terms of its capacity to
bring about and sustain relationships. If the topic of relationships is
not indicated or supported in the natal chart, then no timing
procedure, whether it be transit, progression, or Solar Return, can
make marriage occur. In the previous chapter, we determined that,
for Bill, Mercury is strong by placement in the powerful first house,
bonified by a conjunction with Venus, and not afflicted by either
Mars or Saturn. Thus, Mercury promises relationship and this is a
major theme in the life. However, because Mercury in Sagittarius is
in detriment, not having access to its own resources, there may be a
difficulty in sustaining unions. FIGURE 12. The natal and Solar Return charts for 2005. In 2005,
Bill turned 66 years old.
At age 66, the 7th house is the annual profected house.
The annual profected time lord is Mercury, the ruler of the 7th
house. In the Solar Return chart, Mercury is located at 10 Sagittarius 28
retrograde, activating the 1st house in the natal chart.
Now examine Mercury in the Solar Return chart and, through an
analysis of its condition at the time of the Return, determine if it is
sufficiently powerful to bring about its significations and, if so,
whether the outcome will be fortunate. In the Solar Return for 2005,
Mercury occupies the sign of Sagittarius, is retrograde, and occupies
the first house of the natal chart. Because the angular first house is
the strongest house, and because Mercury is configured to its natal
position (both are co-present in the same sign) and is able to witness
the seventh house as the annual profected house, Bill may expect a
relationship to eventuate. However, Solar Return Mercury's
detriment in Sagittarius (as in the natal chart) suggests a difficulty in
sustaining the relationship, and its retrograde motion points to a
reversal in status—what is given will be taken away. Solar Return
Mercury is not afflicted by the malefics (conjunct, opposed, or
squared by Mars or Saturn), nor is it helped by the benefics
(conjunction, trine, or sextile from Venus or Jupiter) in the Solar
Return chart.
The Ascendant of the Solar Return is Sagittarius, the same as his
natal Ascendant, and Jupiter is the domicile lord. In the Solar
Return, Jupiter occupies the cadent and bad twelfth house relative to
the natal chart, is not in any positions of its own rulerships, and is
opposed by Mars and squared by Saturn. While Mercury, the annual
profected time lord, and Jupiter, the domicile lord of the Solar
Return Ascendant, are configured by square in the natal chart, they
are in aversion with no connection at all in the Solar Return chart.
This indicates some difficulties around the motif of loss and
suffering in satisfactorily bringing about the matter of relationship
this year. Because the condition of both Mercury and Jupiter in the
Solar Return chart are worse than their condition in the natal chart,
we can say that this year will not be as successful in the matter of
relationship relative to the baseline established by the natal
potential. Within a week of his birthday in November, Bill entered a new and
very passionate and intense relationship with someone who
embodied his “ideal”; by springtime, it was over.
Further study of the Solar Return entails looking to see if any Solar
Return planets make close conjunctions to natal planets or natal
angles. If so, these contacts will precipitate significant events. From
a modern perspective, you can also say that a Solar Return planet
falling in a natal house seeks its expression during that year through
the topics indicated by that house. Thus during this year, natal
Venus seeks expression through second-house livelihood matters;
natal Moon seeks expression through seventh-house relationship
matters, and so on. MONTHLY PROFECTIONS
A more in-depth study of profections can give you indications on a
monthly and daily basis. In a seventh-house yearly profection, the seventh
house governs the first month following the birthday—in Bill's case,
November 17 to December 17. The eighth house governs the following
month—December 17 to January 17, etc., with each of the lords governing
the time for that month under the auspices of Mercury as the year lord.
You can use monthly profections and the lord of that house to track which
house is activated month by month and how those affairs will turn out. You
can also look to see when the monthly profection arrives at the natal house
location of the planet that is the annual time lord. Often, it is during that
month that the effects of how the time lord is functioning in the life
become fully apparent.
In Bill's case, the yearly profection is the seventh house, beginning on
November 17. Counting one house per month, on May 17, the monthly
profection reaches the first house, where natal Mercury, the annual time
lord, is located. It is during the month from May 17 to June 16 that it
becomes clear just what Mercury has been able to bring about in terms of
relationship. And around that time, it was obvious that the relationship was
over.
Thus the Solar Return chart is used to study the potentials of a given
year. The most important planet to study in the chart is the annual
profected time lord. This is the planet whose significations in the natal chart have the opportunity to be realized during the Solar Return year in
accordance with its condition and its location relative to the natal chart at
the time of the Return. The domicile lord of the Solar Return Ascendant is
another important planet to evaluate. Remember that the Solar Return chart
cannot indicate anything taking place that is not already indicated as a
possibility in the natal chart. A well-situated annual time lord at the time of
the Return can bring opportunity and gain, while a poorly situated annual
time lord can lead to loss and reversals in fortune, but these conditions are
temporary and will not supersede the natal indications for the duration of
the life. STUDY GUIDELINES
For your practice chart, determine the yearly profected sign/ house and
the annual profected time lord. What area of life is being highlighted?
Give a brief interpretation of what the annual time-lord planet signifies
in the natal chart and its condition in the natal chart.
Calculate the Solar Return chart for this birthday year, placing the
Solar Return planets in a bi-wheel around the natal chart. Give an
analysis of the condition and position of the annual profected time lord
in the Solar Return and also relative to the natal chart.
Check to see what other planets may be occupying or witnessing the
yearly profected sign/house.
Examine the position and condition of the domicile lord of the Solar
Return Ascendant and its configuration to the annual profected time
lord.
Determine if any Solar Return planets are making close contacts to
natal planets and angles.
Make a prognostication about the kind of year it will be and the extent
to which the annual profected time lord can bring about its
significations. CHAPTER THIRTEEN THE FINISHED STRUCTURE
WE HAVE DISCUSSED many of the individual components of astrological
analysis, all of which contribute in some way to a description of the nature
of life purpose and to the timing of its unfoldment. Now let's review what
we have covered and consider how to assemble the information and
present it in a coherent and orderly manner. Ultimately, each astrologer
must find his or her own voice and procedure, but you can look at this
model as a starting point from which you can make your own adaptations.
There are many ways to approach the reading of a chart. Here, we have
attempted to answer the question: According to my chart, how am I
supposed to be living my life? In choosing this perspective, however, you
have to be careful not to ignore other subsidiary issues about which the
client may also be concerned. Be sure that you address these as well. How
do you fit in all the material? Where do you start the reading? And where
do you go next?
It always helps to have a plan. For the most part, you should follow that
same plan for each reading, especially the first time you do a reading for a
client or the first time you read a particular client's chart. Some astrologers
prefer to work more spontaneously, jumping in at whatever point calls
them most strongly. For most beginning students who are just learning
how to synthesize and organize a reading, however, this is too unstructured
an approach. For the many who do not have benefit of seasoned
experience, it creates confusion and undermines self-confidence, resulting
in sessions that are scattered and unfocused. What ends up being discussed
may not be what is most important about the chart. Table 6. Proposed Schedule for a One-hour Consultation Segment Each session—even each one-hour session—is different. The exact
length of the session may vary from client to client, depending on the
variables of the chart and the needs of the client. Be sure that, by the end
of the session, you have covered all the important points that you planned
to discuss. Hold the fine line between being responsive to the client and
maintaining control of the session. If the client comes to you as an
astrologer, he or she may have expectations that you will give information
for which you are being paid. On the other hand, if the client comes to you
as a therapist/astrologer, he or she may want the opportunity to do most of
the talking. Locate where on this spectrum you are most comfortable
working, and always honor the desires and needs of your clients.
As you look over the following outline, you will notice that most of the
session time is devoted to a discussion of the lunation phase, Ascendant,
Sun, and Moon. This is because the thesis of this book is that the most
important themes in the life are indicated by the interrelationship of these
factors.
You have obtained the birth data and verified its source, scheduled the
appointment, and prepared all the charts. You may have an idea of the
client's questions or you may wait until the session begins to ask what has
brought the person to you and what his or her concerns are. In the initial
interview, you also get a sense of the level at which you should give the
reading—in terms of both the complexity of the astrological terminology and the client's own level of comprehension, awareness, and personal
development. You must establish rapport and compassion, extract the
pertinent information, and prevent an overly talkative client from going on
and on about the details of his or her life and problems for the next fifteen
minutes. You have only five minutes for this initial portion of the session.
You may begin the formal reading of the chart with a short statement
that simply tells the client what the Sun, Moon, and rising signs are.
Almost everyone is familiar with their Sun sign, and this affirms
immediately that the client knows something about astrology. Many have
at least heard the terms Moon sign and rising sign in casual conversation.
If the client already knows this information, it is another affirmation; if
not, the client will often like to learn it right at the beginning of the
session. You can then explain that many astrologers consider the Sun,
Moon, and rising sign the three most important significators of the
personality, and that you will discuss each one in turn over the course of
the session. However, there is one more very important factor to add to this
triad, and that is the relationship between the Sun and Moon at the time of
the client's birth, which is called the lunation phase.
Point out that the Moon circles the Earth each month, and the various
Moon phases reflect this changing relationship between the two lights in
the sky. In astrology, this is called the lunation cycle, and it is divided into
eight distinct phases. Explain that each person is born during a particular
phase of the Moon's cycle, and that the Moon was in a particular phase at
birth. Each month, this phase reoccurs for several days. During that time,
the person will be especially sensitized emotionally, as symbolized by the
Moon, and these feelings will come closer to the surface of conscious
awareness, as symbolized by the Sun, particularly with regard to the
meaning or lack of meaning in his or her life. Illustrate how you locate the
natal Moon phase each month by reference to an astrological calendar or
by looking at the weather page of the daily newspaper.
Because everyone has a regular and direct visual experience of the
phases of the Moon, we all have a visceral sense that the Moon has
something to do with our personality. Thus, you are beginning the session
with information that is accessible and tangible to everyone, and this
makes your clients feel as if they are starting off the exploration of their
lives on firm ground. You can then give an explanation of the
interpretation of their natal lunation phase. Again, because there is little or no astrological jargon involved, clients can receive the information easily.
This establishes an immediate sense that you, the astrologer, are telling
them something that they can understand and relate to, and that makes
sense in terms of their own life experiences. Clients are then more
receptive to receiving what follows.
After a discussion of the natal lunation phase, move on to the progressed
lunation phase. Explain that, while each person is born into one particular
phase, due to a timing system in astrology called secondary progressions,
everyone goes through the qualities of each of the other phases as well.
One phase follows another in approximately four-year periods in the
sequential development of a thirty-year cycle that unfolds in accordance
with the nature of each phase in a cyclical process. Tell clients when this
thirty-year cycle began at the previous progressed New Moon and in what
phase they currently are by progression. This gives them a broad view of
their lives over a long period of time and indicates what qualities they are
being called upon to express at this time. You have no more than ten
minutes for both the natal and progressed lunation phases.
We have already presented the full interpretations of the natal and
progressed lunation phases for Bill's chart, but let's distill this information
somewhat and re-present it so you can see the flow between these two
sections and those that follow.
Bill was born during a Crescent Moon phase, and his life is
characterized by a struggle to establish his own identity apart from
familial, social, and cultural expectations. By accessing the
resources available in his immediate environment, he can develop
new talents, skills, and abilities that give him the means by which to
move beyond the old and familiar into new uncharted territory that
stimulates his curiosity. Cultivating focus and perseverance can help
keep him progressing in a forward direction, and his final challenge
is to take advantage of the many opportunities that present
themselves by taking action upon them.
By progression, Bill is almost halfway through a thirty-year cycle
that began in October 1992, when the progressed New Moon
heralding the beginning of a new cycle and the release of a new
vision occurred in his second house of livelihood. He ceased
working for others and began working for himself, putting his video and computer skills into creative endeavors. Currently near the end
of the progressed Gibbous phase (October 2004 to March 2008), he
has been refining and perfecting his techniques of operation, and
becoming as skillful as he can be in his chosen field of expression.
He has been called to do the “finishing work” on the structure he
has been building since 1992. He has assembled all of his early
films and made new prints of them, using the latest state-of-the-art
technology. He has also completed the renovation of the building
that houses the intentional household. In March 2008, he enters the
progressed Full Moon phase, halfway around the thirty-year cycle.
Over the next four years, the content of his vision becomes infused
in the form he has built. It will be through his conscious
relationships with other people that he illuminates his larger
meaning in his life.
Once you have discussed the natal and progressed lunation phases, giving
clients a snapshot of their stage of development within a model of cyclical
process, you are ready to begin a discussion of the chart proper. The
Ascendant marks the moment of our birth; thus this is a good place to start
the reading. Describe the ascending sign as the personality characteristics
of the outer image that are projected to the world at large, and speak to the
psychological need that stands behind the expression of those qualities. It
is appropriate at this time to mention any planets or major asteroids that
occupy the first house or are within a 3-degree orb of the Ascendant degree
crossing sign boundaries. Also note if there are any minor asteroids within
a 3-degree orb of the Ascendant. Using Whole Sign houses, for the most
part those planets and asteroids will be located in the same sign as the
Ascendant, so whatever you have said about the Ascendant sign applies to
their signs as well. However, it will scatter and diffuse the discussion if
you begin to talk about the aspects being made to the first-house planets at
this point, so defer that for now. FIGURE 13. Main factors to consider in the delineation of the
Ascendant in Bill's chart.
Describe the ascending sign by element, referring to the basic drive that
motivates the life, and discuss the first house as the helm of the ship where
the steering mechanism of the life journey is located. Planets in the first
house have their hands on the rudder and their agendas are front and center
as the life moves forward. However, it is the planet that rules the
Ascendant that is likened to the steersman of the ship, who gives the orders
that guide the life toward its destination. This brings you to a discussion of
the planet that is the Ascendant ruler. Describe this planet according to its
own nature, giving an archetypal image if possible—Venus the lover,
Mercury the communicator, or Mars the warrior. Explain that the house in
which it is located is the topic that steers the life—relationship, children, profession, etc. Look to see if this planet is configured (conjoined, sextile,
square, trine, or opposed) to the Ascendant by whole sign. This is
indicative of a line of vision and communication between the steersman
and the helm.
Examine the condition of this planet to determine how capable it is of
doing its job in a manner that will bring about fortunate results for the
client, looking to its sect status, sign rulerships, house location, and its
speed, direction, and visibility as derived from its relationship to the Sun.
You can factor in any aspects made to the Ascendant ruler by other planets
at this time as an affirmation or negation of the calls the steersman makes.
Include all the planets, and the four main asteroids and Chiron if you want
to. Consider them by Whole Sign aspects, but know that the closer they are
to exact orb, the more active the influences will be. Pay special attention to
help and assistance by conjunction, sextile, or trines from Venus and
Jupiter, or hindrance and negation by conjunction, square, or opposition
from Mars or Saturn as aiding or hurting a planet's capacity to express its
favorable significations. In the process of observing the influences from
other planets, you will explain the significations of those planets and bring
them into your reading.
If the lunar nodes or the Lot of Fortune occupy the first house or the
same house as the Ascendant ruler, discuss their influences. If there
happens to be a major outer-planet transit activating the Ascendant or its
ruling planet, expand on what that means for the current time period.
Bill projects an expansive, idealistic, and philosophically questing
personality that arises from a desire to explore the horizons of his
mind and world (Sagittarius Ascendant). He is seen as both
communicative and charming (Mercury and Venus in the first
house). He is motivated by a drive for power and influence (fire
sign) in manifesting his Utopian ideals (Jupiter as ruler of the
Ascendant and conjunct the asteroid Utopia). The topics of land and
home (Jupiter in the fourth house) steer his life toward its intended
destination in a manner that is compassionate and that arises from
spiritual insight (Jupiter in Pisces). He has the necessary resources
(Jupiter in its own domicile) and focus (Jupiter angular) to
accomplish this intention, and the capacity to overcome the
obstacles on the way (Jupiter configured to the Ascendant sign by square). The final outcome may eventuate in the latter part of his
life (Jupiter retrograde). He can expect a substantial amount of
accidental good fortune to arise from his ventures in real estate and
relationships with his parents (Lot of Fortune in the fourth house
with a well-situated domicile lord, Jupiter).
Neptune in Virgo in the tenth house opposing Jupiter is pulling Bill
in the opposite direction, however, toward a professional career in
the arts in which he can utilize his technical skills. Venus and
Mercury in Sagittarius in the first house are working at crosspurposes with both Jupiter and Neptune, lobbying for a life of
personal enrichment and development through travel, adventure,
and learning, in which he has the opportunity to share his ideas and
be in love (Mercury and Venus in Sagittarius). He finds it
challenging to be in a relationship and simultaneously have the
focus for artistically creative or work endeavors. The Sun in Scorpio
in the twelfth house, which seeks deep introspection into the
mysteries of life and spiritual transcendence, is sympathetic and
helpful to Jupiter's aspirations, as it provides a source of meditative
insight that can be incorporated into the Utopian vision.
In 2007, the transit of Jupiter passed over Venus, Mercury, and the
Ascendant, bringing opportunities for travel, growth, and expansion.
Bill studied French and brought his films to the Cannes Film
Festival. Pluto by transit activated natal Jupiter by square, and this
influence will continue through 2008, bringing endings, new
beginnings, and transformation to both personal identity (Jupiter as
Ascendant ruler) and matters of the home environment (Jupiter
located in the fourth house). Bill purchased a large home, moved his
aging mother next door, and began his intentional spiritual
community.
You can see that, in the process of looking at the main aspects made to
the Ascendant ruler, Jupiter, we have touched upon the significations of
four other planets in the chart: Neptune, Mercury, Venus, and the Sun.
Now you are ready to complete the delineations for the Sun and the Moon.
Examine the Sun to determine the areas of life that describe the content
of the life purpose. This content will partake of the significations of both the house the Sun occupies and the house it rules, which will be whatever
house contains the sign Leo. The Sun is trying to bring about the matters
associated with the house it rules, but it does so by means of its activities
in the house in which it is located. The sign in which the Sun is located not
only indicates the mode and manner by which this comes about, but also
acts as a filter that shapes the expression of the purpose in accordance with
its own attributes. If the Lot of Fortune or the lunar nodes occupy the same
sign and house as the Sun, bring them into the discussion. You have five
minutes for this discussion.
In Bill's chart, the Sun in Scorpio rules the ninth house, and thus the
matters it is trying to bring about are those connected with higher
wisdom, philosophy, spirituality, multi-cultural motifs, and longdistance travel. It does so by immersion in twelfth-house activities
that have to do with solitude, experiences of suffering and loss,
purification of karmic actions or self-defeating unconscious
patterns, selfless service, and the desire for transcendence and
liberation. Scorpio is a feminine, watery, and fixed sign that speaks
to the desire to penetrate the mysteries of life, as well to the
intensity of the emotions. You can say that the content of Bill's basic
life purpose as represented by the Sun is the learning and
application of spiritual teachings (Sun ruling the ninth house) for
self-transformation (Sun in Scorpio) that arises from his need to
heal his own emotional suffering over losses and his desire to
understand the transcendent nature of reality (twelfth house). This
comes about in a slow and steady manner (feminine, fixed sign) that
is contingent upon the actions of others (watery sign). FIGURE 14. Main factors to consider in the delineation of the Sun in
Bill's chart.
Bill relates that, as a young person, he felt unrecognized and
socially rejected by his peers. As he grew older, these experiences
made him sympathetic to the underdog and motivated him to search
for causes and relief of suffering through spiritual teachings and
practices.
Now, how capable is the Sun of actually bringing this about? To
find out, evaluate the planetary condition. The Sun belongs to the
sect in favor, and is the sect leader; thus it has the authority and
leadership to set the life agenda for bringing about favorable
outcomes. The Sun does not occupy the signs of its rulership or
exaltation (nor of its detriment or fall). So it does not have access to its own resources, but rather is dependant on those of its domicile
lord, Mars, to whom it is configured by a square. Mars is the Sun's
host, but is working at crosspurposes with the Sun and tends to
withhold its support. If support is given, there are obstacles thrown
in the way. The Sun occupies and rules cadent houses. From a
modern perspective, the cadency indicates that the life purpose will
not manifest as outer dramatic events, but rather as inner processes.
Now consider which other planets are sympathetic or harsh to the
Sun's desire to express the life purpose. The Sun is opposed by
Uranus in Taurus in the sixth house, pulling Bill out of the
contemplative realm into the world of busy, physical, tangible daily
activities connected with jobs and employment. The Sun is also
square by sign and degree with the asteroid Juno (committed
relationships), which may also be working at cross-purposes with
his meditation practice, and may be one possible cause of the
suffering. The Sun is also squared by sign to the Moon, which is a
general significator of family responsibilities and, in particular in
his chart, of financial affairs with others (Moon ruler of the eighth)
that compete with his inner work. It is the trine from Jupiter that
gives the Sun the most support and affirmation.
Overall, you can make a judgment that the Sun is challenged in its
aspiration to apply higher spiritual and philosophical teachings to
Bill's life for personal transformation, alleviation of suffering, and
service to others. And yet that is what he is here to do. The
affirming trine from the strong benefic Ascendant ruler, Jupiter,
points to eventual success in overcoming the obstacles.
Here we have touched on the significations of three additional planets—
Mars, Moon, and Uranus—as well as one of the major asteroids, Juno. If
there are any major outer-planet transits or upcoming eclipses activating
the Sun, be sure to include timing prognostications at this point in the
session. Now, let's focus on the Moon as the area of life where the content
of the life purpose seeks application in the everyday world. FIGURE 15. Main factors to consider in the delineation of the Moon
in Bill's chart.
This application of the life purpose will partake of the significations of
both the house that the Moon occupies and the house that it rules, which
will be whatever house contains the sign Cancer. The Moon is trying to
bring about the matters associated with the house it rules, but it does so by
means of its activities in the house in which it is located. The sign in which
the Moon is located not only indicates the mode and manner by which this
comes about, but also acts as a filter that shapes the application of the
purpose in accordance with its own attributes. If the Lot of Fortune or the
lunar nodes occupy the same sign and house as the Moon, as well as any
significant timing factors, bring them into the discussion. Again, you have
about five minutes to devote to the Moon. In Bill's chart, the Moon in Aquarius rules the eighth house, and
thus the matters it is trying to bring about are concerned with death
and dying, benefits gained from death (inheritances), financial
ventures with the money of others (as opposed to that earned by his
own labor), the psychological unconscious, and personal
transformation (as extensions of death, the underworld, and rebirth).
The Moon does so by immersion into thirdhouse activities that
pertain to siblings, his own neighborhood community, the nature of
mind, and all kinds of communications involving media,
networking, writing, and speaking. The Aquarius (masculine, fixed,
airy) filter indicates that the application of the purpose is shaped by
a humanitarian, progressive, and innovative vision that facilitates
social change and can utilize the new technology. You can suggest
that the application of Bill's life purpose entails taking the wisdom
he has gained from his meditative practices and personal
introspection (the content of the solar purpose) and disseminating
information through various media (third house) concerning
personal transformation and cooperative financial ventures (eighth
house), with a vision to create progressive social change through the
development of group consciousness (Aquarius).
The Moon is cadent and thus less than totally focused on its task,
and it is located in a mildly good/profitable house. It is dependent
on the resources of its domicile lord, Saturn, which, despite being in
the sign of its fall, is made more powerful by its mutual reception
with Mars. The Moon is assisted by the sextile from the benefic
Venus, and hindered by co-presence with Mars. It is traveling with
slower-than-average speed, and is thus less active, but it is
increasing in light. You can conclude that the Moon has good
aspirations and access to resources in order to bring about its
intentions, but it suffers from being easily distracted or diverted.
Bill may find that, sometimes, he is not able do as much or as well
as he had hoped in accomplishing his aims. Nevertheless, he does
have some visible success.
The Moon is influenced by the opposition from Pluto and Pallas,
pulling him away from local community involvement into the larger
world of foreign travel and higher wisdom teachings that both challenge and stimulate his own points of view. By sign, this axis
forms a grand-square pattern with the Sun and Uranus. The Moon is
also influenced by its co-presence with Juno, indicating an
emotional need for intimate and committed relationships that
function within a social and group context. The co-presence with
Mars may point to emotional arguments and conflict with others. As
Mars rules the fifth house of children and love affairs,
responsibilities with children and turbulence in love affairs can be a
cause of disruption.
As you completed the discussion of the Moon, you made reference to the
influence and significations of two other planets—Pluto and Mars—and
two of the four major asteroids, Pallas and Juno. You are now two-thirds of
the way through your one-hour session and have fifteen to twenty minutes
remaining. At this point, there are several different directions in which you
can move.
This may be an appropriate time to pause and give a one- to
twosentence summary that integrates what you have said so far concerning
the lunation phase, the Ascendant and its ruler, and the Sun and Moon. The
ability to make a statement of the essential meaning of a chart in a hundred
words is a valuable and an excellent skill for you to develop. This will be
much appreciated by the client as a distillation of the most important
points of the reading.
Bill has an expansive, intellectually questing nature that is
motivated by a need for freedom and influence to bring a spiritual
Utopian vision to matters pertaining to housing that facilitates
cooperative living. His basic life purpose is the application of
wisdom teachings for personal liberation and service to others. This
is best accomplished in the world by the dissemination of
progressive and innovative information about personal
transformation within his own community. The energy that drives
the expression and actualization of his larger purpose is that of
pushing through resistance and persevering in his vision. (94 words)
This is also a good time to ask if the client has any questions or requires
further clarification of what you have covered. Depending on the time remaining and whether the client's focus questions have been addressed,
you may decide to cover the sections of the chart that have not yet been
discussed. In our sample delineation of Bill's chart, this would be the fifth
house of children, creativity, and romance. This area is important, as it
contains the lunar nodal axis and the two planets that have not yet been
discussed, Saturn and Vesta. However, you may need, instead, to move to
the questions of vocation or relationship that brought the client to the
session. In Bill's case, you would note that these two topics are both ruled
by Mercury. During the last part of the session, it is important to discuss
any current timing not yet mentioned that may concern the
prognostications for the year ahead.
What I have been trying to illustrate here is how much of a chart can be
covered and synthesized by following the sequence of natal and progressed
lunation phase, Ascendant, Ascendant ruler, Sun, and Moon. The meanings
of other planets or points and current timing are brought into the
interpretation as they connect to these major significators of the chart. You
can address relationship, vocation, health, money, children, parents, travel,
homes, etc. earlier in the reading if the planets ruling these topics are one
of the three main chart significators. Otherwise, you can discuss them later
in the session, framed within the context of what the chart indicates as the
main purpose of the life. If there is a major timing activation of a particular
planet that you have not yet brought into your reading, be sure to include
some words on the nature of the planet, the topics of the houses it rules,
and the duration of the timing activation. When you speak about vocation
or home life, look at the Midheaven or IC angles and to planets or
asteroids conjunct the degrees of these angles.
Periodically, check to see how many minutes you have used and how
many minutes are remaining in your session. This tells you if you have the
leisure to develop more detail and explore tangents, or if you have to speed
up, condense what you want to say, and remain focused. However, it is
important not to be so rigid that you can't be responsive to the needs and
desires of your client. You must be flexible enough to give the client the
space to express strong emotional reactions or to disclose additional
background information. Be sure to leave some time at the end of the
session for any last-minute questions the client may have.
If it seems to you that there is more to cover than the time I've allowed,
you can schedule your sessions for seventy-five or even ninety minutes. Many astrologers like to give themselves the additional time to go deeper
into the chart and answer more client questions that may arise later in the
session. Ultimately, pick a length of time that gives you the opportunity to
do a thorough reading without feeling rushed. Since most astrologers tape
their readings, your clients will be able to listen to the tape many times in
order to absorb the information you have communicated. STUDY GUIDELINES
For your practice chart, make a list of the key points of your reading
and the order in which you will present them.
Give the reading to your “client” and time how long it takes you to
cover each of your points. Assess where you are at the end of the hour.
Ask your “client” for feedback.
If necessary, spend some time reorganizing your plan, cutting it back
or filling it out. Then give the reading a second time. PART IV: THE PERSON WHO LIVES IN THE CHART CHAPTER FOURTEEN ENCOUNTERING YOUR CLIENTS
NOW THAT YOU have a procedure for uncovering the essential meaning of
the birth chart and evaluating the capacity of each planet to bring about the
matters it represents, you should feel fairly comfortable about your ability
to look at a chart and decipher the symbols that reveal a portrait of a
human life. The chart itself is a structure that supports a living person,
pointing the way to the themes and events that are potentially available for
experience in the course of the life. But the chart itself is only the structure;
it is not the living, breathing, feeling human being that dwells inside the
structure. It is one thing to assemble and display the vessel that contains us
and provides us with the resources by which to shape our experiences, but
quite another to acknowledge and relate to the person who inhabits it.
After the structure has been built, someone must move into it. Let's now
turn our attention to the person who lives in the chart and consider how
best to relate to that person.
I was once told by my literary agent that, when my book was written
and published, and copies of it were stacked in boxes in my garage, I
would think that I had completed the monumental task of becoming an
author. However, nothing could be farther from the truth. The real work
was yet ahead—that of promoting, distributing, and selling the book. It is,
likewise, not enough for you to have knowledge of astrology. You may
know how to calculate a chart, or know the significations of all the planets,
asteroids, signs, and houses. You may be versed in the variations of
modern, traditional, or Vedic astrology. You may be able to interpret
horary, electional, mundane, business, and synastry charts, or have a dozen timing techniques at your disposal. That's the easy part. The hard part is
facing your clients and saying something meaningful about their lives.
In the original formulation of the discipline of astrology in ancient
Mesopotamia, astrologers belonged to a class of the priesthood. The act of
interpreting the will of the planetary deities to the kings of the land was a
religious act that ensured that the kingdom and its people were governed in
accordance with divine intention. Despite the attempts of successive
cultures to take the soul out of the planets and transform astrology into a
secular discipline, astrologers today remain as astrologers always have
been—mediators between a cosmic realm depicted by the positions of the
celestial bodies at the moment of a person's birth, and the earthly realm
filled with conditions of human suffering and the universal desire for
happiness.
While some people come to an astrological consultation out of casual
interest or curiosity, others want specific practical information about their
business, health, or the recovery of missing items. Many come because
they are troubled or confused and are seeking guidance. Once astrologers
make the shift from dispensing objective impersonal information to
helping clients solve personal problems, they assume the awesome mantle
of responsibility that was traditionally donned primarily by the spiritual
representatives of a society who were thought to have a direct link to the
divine realm. PREPARING FOR A READING
You must have a full awareness of the role you take on as an astrologer
and an appreciation of the responsibility for other people's lives that this
profession entails before you are ready to encounter your clients. Very few
modern astrologers would identify themselves as spiritual counselors; yet
the seers of old always prepared themselves for the descent of divine
inspiration to increase their clarity of mind and connect them to a higher
source. If you know that you have a session at 1 Plutão .M., you must “hold your
energy” until that time. Ideally, you don't want to engage in any
conversations or activities that drain and agitate you or fill your mind with
disturbing thoughts and emotions. However, we do not live in an ideal
world, and many astrologers schedule their sessions in the evenings, which
makes taking care of daily business unavoidable. Nevertheless, it is important to cordon off a certain segment of your energy and save it for
your readings.
The priestesses at Delphi are described as entering a state of ecstasy
before giving oracular pronouncements. Ecstasy comes from the Greek
word ekstasis, meaning “to stand outside of oneself.” Then they entered
into a state of enthusiasm—enthusiasmos—which in Greek means literally
“having the god inside of you.” In a similar manner, try to get all of your
own “stuff” out of the way. As the time for your session approaches—you
have all your charts prepared, your ephemeris at hand, your computer
booted, your recorder hooked to the phone line, your consulting room
picked up, and your water bottle or coffee cup filled—take a few moments
to clear your mind. Take all your mundane problems, anger, irritations, and
things-to-do lists, and set them aside temporarily. Visualize placing all that
mental clutter on a high shelf in the coat closet. Once your inner space is
cleared of your personal baggage, there is space for the presence of the
transcendent. The ancients all concurred that divination, or the ability to
foresee by supra-natural means, is a gift from the gods.
It is the spark of divine inspiration that distinguishes an enlivened
reading from a flat recitation of analytically derived facts. This spark
elevates dry facts into a lively, transformative, healing experience.
Lighting a candle before the session is one way to acknowledge the source
of the wisdom and request that the presence of the ineffable infuse your
words. A correlate to this is that, having donned the mantle of an
astrologer, the more skillful you are in the techne of your craft, the more
worthy and functional a vessel you will be to receive the descent of the
spirit. WHAT DO YOU SAY . . . AND HOW MUCH?
Unless you have received psychological training or credentials and see
clients on an ongoing basis within the context of psychotherapy, chances
are you will see your clients only once, or perhaps once every year for
annual updates. Thus, assuming that you will see your clients only once,
for perhaps a one- or one-and-a-half-hour session, how do you make the
most effective use of the time allotted? And just how much can you
actually convey in a one-hour session? Just as there is a huge gulf between knowing the individual
significations of each planet, sign, and house and synthesizing these
meanings into statements about the life, there exists a gulf between
knowing what a chart signifies in all its complexity from the dozens of
techniques you have available in your toolbox, and knowing what you
actually want to say to your client. As you gain experience interpreting
charts, you will likely have many, many hours of material that you can
discuss. However, in my experience, clients can only absorb information
for about an hour—one hour and fifteen minutes at the maximum. You can
continue to wax eloquent, but your clients will glaze over and no longer be
able to absorb the meaning of your words.
I remember a humorous incident from my early days when my sessions
sometimes lasted three to four hours. An emotionally exhausted client was
inching his way to the door, desperate to get out and get relief from the
scrutiny of his psyche. I was, figuratively, grabbing onto his leg, saying,
“But wait, I still haven't told you about Mercury quincunx your Saturn.”
The point is that you must be able to distill from all that you perceive in a
chart what is most important, both in the natal chart and in the current
timing, and to organize and condense it into a concise session, while still
allowing time for client questions and feedback.
There may be patterns and possible portents that you see that you may
not think are appropriate for the discussion—sexual abuse, or upcoming
transits that may be disastrous. You need to decide how to present this
material, so that you do not infuse the client with a sense of shame,
despair, or terror. If you look at a client's chart that has a difficult
configuration—like Moon conjunct Saturn in Scorpio in the twelfth house
receiving a Pluto transit—you may shudder and say to yourself, “Oh
#* Lua !” But in the actual session, you have to take a deep breath and
attempt to address the difficult signature in a manner that has some
redeeming possibilities, while subtly conveying the cautions and warnings.
Should you give readings that are “all and only good and positive,” or
should you be honest about exactly what you see, no matter what it is? On
one hand, clients in a state of malaise who come to you for guidance want
to leave feeling somewhat healed, or at least with a perspective on or plan
for what lies ahead that frames the possible difficult experiences within a
larger context of growth toward their highest good. Some astrologers
explicitly say that they discuss only positive things with their clients, because our thoughts create our reality. They do not want to set up a belief
system in clients that predisposes their thinking toward manifesting the
negative possibilities of the configuration in question. However, if you see
clear indications for, let's say, major health problems, and don't inform
clients to seek medical advice because you don't want to scare them or say
anything bad, you end up being irresponsible. If your doctor doesn't tell
you about the tumor that shows up on your x-ray because he doesn't want
to encourage negative thinking and worry in you, is he doing you a favor?
Of course, you should never predict a fatal health condition as inevitable;
just guide your clients to appropriate follow up.
On the other hand, if a chart really depicts problematic themes and
issues and a client has indeed had a difficult life, there will be a disconnect
between the session content and his or her experience if you only give a
glowing report of what is and what is possible. Clients may leave feeling
even worse if your analysis of their charts leaves them with the sense that
they have not actualized the best-case scenario of their chart indications set
out by you as the picture of their life. Perhaps it is ultimately more
compassionate to acknowledge the reality of the hardship of a client's life,
and discuss just what may be possible within a limited range and what is
not likely to occur.
This brings us to the very sensitive issue of how deep you can go into a
client's psyche and still be respectful of boundaries. This will vary from
person to person. You need to learn how to pick up cues from your clients'
tone of voice, their demeanor, the kinds of information they give you, the
kinds of questions they ask, and from their age and general background.
Some clients are emotionally open—perhaps used to counseling and
therapy sessions from other practitioners—and are desperate to understand
something that has been the cause of much suffering. Here, you can go
deep. But first, test the waters.
For example, if you suspect a client may have been subject to some kind
of abuse as a child, ask if he or she is aware of any traumatic experiences
in childhood in which circumstances conspired against expectations of
being protected. Depending on the response, you can proceed farther or
pull back. But never give a pronouncement on these kinds of topics as a
definite statement of what is. If the client is not ready to accept or not
capable of dealing with this kind of information, the results can be
disastrous. It is irresponsible to stir up repressed emotional material in clients and then send them out the door with no resources by which they
can process and integrate the implications of what has been surfaced.
Another way of handling this situation is to ask clients directly if they
feel comfortable discussing this particular topic. If not, tell them that there
are many other things in the chart to address. Again, take your lead from
their responses. In this way, you allow clients to help you navigate around
safe or unsafe waters. Sometimes, they may call back for another
appointment to discuss something that they were simply not ready to
acknowledge previously.
Are there certain topics that are taboo? For some people, yes, and for
others, no. Sex, infidelity, abuse, bank-account figures, and religion are a
few potentially dangerous subjects. You must learn to be a shrewd judge of
what is permissible for each person. You must be willing to respect other
peoples' values and sense of propriety. As an astrologer, your role is not to
shock, badger, frighten, undermine, or liberate the client from a belief
system and morality that you deem antiquated or ignorant. Always keep in
mind that your clients are paying you to help them solve problems in a
manner that does not destroy or challenge the world in which they live.
When they leave your consulting room, they still have to go back to their
lives. Certainly, suggestions for change, healing, and transformation are
appropriate, but it is up to them to implement these suggestions in their
own time and in their own way, and in a manner that is consistent with
their own conscience and values.
So how do you, as an astrologer, decide what and how much you are
going to say? How do you know what not to say or what you must reframe
or spin? And finally, how do you make a quick assessment of your clients'
level of emotional resilience, or how much truth they either want or can
handle, without precipitating an eruption from the unconscious that you do
not have the training to manage? THE INITIAL INTERVIEW
In chapter 3, we discussed the importance of the initial interview,
conducted in the first five minutes of the session. In this brief period, you
must ask about your clients' previous astrological background, as this
radically affects what you say to them. This puts you in touch with the
level of simplicity or complexity with which you can frame the technical astrological terminology you use. For novices who are totally unfamiliar
with the language of astrology, take the time to explain what you are doing
in careful and straightforward terminology. Make sure that, by the time
they leave the consultation session, you have discussed the basic meanings
of the Sun, Moon, and Ascendant in a manner that they can grasp.
For example, I might say something like this to a first-time astrological
client:
We are now going to discuss your rising sign, which is also called
the Ascendant. You may have heard both of these terms mentioned
by your friends, and they refer to the same factor. The rising sign
describes, first of all, your appearance, outer personality, and
bearing. It is determined by the zodiacal sign that was rising,
ascending, coming up over the eastern horizon at the exact moment
of your birth and is calculated from the time of day that you were
born. No matter what your Sun sign is, you can have any one of the
twelve signs as your rising sign. The qualities of your personality as
signified by your rising sign are . . .
Then I would elaborate about the factors connected to the Ascendant and
its ruler.
However, for clients who have had annual readings for a number of
years and are somewhat familiar with the language of astrology, even if
they are not practitioners, the last thing you want to give is yet another
rendition of the rising sign unless the Ascendant was receiving a major
outer-planet transit at the time of the session. For these clients, quickly
assess which parts of the chart they already understand and find out what
they want to focus on for this session. Again, depending on how well these
clients understand “astrologese,” this will affect how much technical
jargon you toss about and to what extent you explain it.
Finally, for clients conversant in the language—intermediate or
advanced students, or even professionals—you can jump right in using
technical shorthand and without any explanation of terms:
Venus, in the twelfth house, debilitated in the sign of Virgo and
square Mercury, its domicile lord, and ruling the second and ninth,
will be receiving a transit from Jupiter over this next year, who happens to be your annual profected time lord beginning at the time
of your Solar Return, and you may expect . . .
If you begin a reading like this for a first-time novice, the client will likely
feel lost, confused, and frustrated.
You should pay attention to the speed and tempo of your clients' speech
in this initial interview as well. Notice how long it takes them to process
the information you give them. Try to match your rhythms to theirs for the
most effective communication. Some clients have sharp quick minds and
you can quickly deliver dense ideas in technical vocabulary. Others take in
the meaning of words at a much slower rate. For them, slow down and
pause frequently between phrases and concepts to allow them time to
absorb the material.
As astrologers, we must remember the importance of putting the client
first, and developing, using Rudhyar's terminology, a clientcentered
approach to consultations. The purpose of your sessions is not for you to
show off how much knowledge you have and how accurately you can “nail
a chart.” Your purpose is to put the needs of your clients first, and to talk to
them on a level they can understand—one that is neither too simplistic for
the advanced client nor too sophisticated for the novice. My editor has
repeatedly admonished me to identify my audience when writing. At first,
this was a continual source of irritation to me. I wanted to say what I had
to say just as it came flowing from my mind. I soon realized the wisdom of
this advice, however. I realized that, even if I set down a profound
exposition, if it wasn't intelligible to the audience for whom it was
intended, there was no ultimate benefit for anyone. So identify your
audience. Each time you encounter a new client, ask him or her point
blank: What is the level of your previous astrological background? Then
shape the manner in which you present the information accordingly.
As an astrologer, you need to know why your clients have come to you
and what concerns they have in their lives about which they want insight
and reflection. Some people see astrologers on a regular basis for their
“yearly updates,” and do not have any specific questions. It is of value to
them to obtain a sense of the “weather” in store for them in the year ahead
—they want clues about opportunities they may have or obstacles they
may encounter. For repeat clients, ask them about what has occurred since
you last spoke. For the many who come to you because some kind of crisis, change, or decision is before them about which they need insight
and guidance, listen carefully and make a few notes to yourself about their
expectations for the sessions and the questions they are bringing you. Then
make sure that you address those situations.
If the client is inquiring about practical matters and outer events like a
move or a job change, focus the session there. This kind of reading occurs
at a very different level of intimacy than one that attempts to unravel
sexual problems within a relationship. But, beyond your clients’ specific
questions, this initial interview informs you of whether they want a
practical, psychological, or spiritual perspective from you in this particular
session. An effective astrological counselor speaks to clients in a language,
manner, level, and orientation that brings the greatest ease of
understanding and focuses upon each client's stated concerns, whatever
they happen to be.
Furthermore, the manner in which your clients describe themselves and
the nature of their concerns tell you much about how deep you may
penetrate into their psyches and still remain respectful of their boundaries.
If they ask you to discuss their blockages in sexuality and you see
indications of early sexual abuse, it may be permissible to bring that up.
However, keep checking in with the client and know when to stop a
particular line of discussion. Above all, remember that, while you are an
astrologer and have the intention to be a healer, you are not a
psychotherapist unless you have been formally trained as one. There are
many situations where what is called for is a referral to another
professional, and you should keep a list of these resources. It does not
mean that you are an inadequate astrologer if you send a client to a
specialist who has more expertise in the particular situations that face the
client.
Again, many people will come to you because they have a blatant or
gnawing problem, or a sense of malaise or confusion. Most often, this
indicates some kind of major outer-planet transit that is triggering the chart
and precipitating a crisis. Sometimes, one of the most reassuring things
that you can tell them is:
Given these transits, if you are having a meltdown, you are right on
schedule with the unfoldment of your birth potential. If everything
were fine in your life, then you would really have a problem. What we are really addressing here is the need to establish rapport with
your clients in the first few minutes of the session so they feel you have
actually heard them, understand what is going on, and are sympathetic. For
many people, opening their soul to a stranger and admitting their failings
and shortcomings requires a huge leap of trust. As an astrologer, you also
are up against the cultural bias that fortune-tellers take advantage of
people's vulnerabilities. So, for your readings to be effective, your clients
must feel they can trust you. You can reassure them of your
trustworthiness by being completely present with them.
This involves listening carefully, asking probing questions, seeking
greater clarification of their situation, and restating their concerns so that
they know you understand what they conveyed. Then, you must mirror
back to them that you are aware of the distress that they may be feeling,
that there is something objective in the chart that indicates what is
occurring, and that, however painful it may be, it is part of a larger process
of timing that ultimately can bring them toward the next phase of their
development as a realized being. If you are working within a one-hour
session, all this must transpire within seven to ten minutes maximum from
the moment the reading begins.
Based on what transpires in this initial interview, you will have a sense
of what your clients' desires and expectations are for the reading, as well as
their own relative degree of involvement in the process. There is a wide
range of client styles and, as an astrologer, you need to adapt yourself to
the various positions your clients will present. Here are some of the types
of clients you may encounter:
Some clients want the facts, the bottom line, whether it's good or bad
news. That's what they are paying for. No psychological analysis,
thank you.
Some clients want you to reassure them that, no matter what is going
on, everything will work out all right in the end.
Some clients want you to see into their souls and validate them and tell
them they are on the right path.
Some clients are more interested in the “why” of what is occurring or
in when to expect the event and when it will be over.
Some clients want to be given options from which they can make up
their own minds; some want precise directives as to what to do. Some clients want you to do all the talking; some want an interactive
dialogue; some want to do all the talking and simply have you listen.
Some clients are willing to disclose personal information; some are
zipped-mouthed and want to see how much you can “get” on your
own.
Some clients come because it is a choice they themselves have made;
some may have been pressured, forced, or gifted by a friend, partner,
or family member, and thus may be skeptical and resistant. WHO HAS THE ANSWERS?
One of the dangers of being an astrological counselor is an overweening
pride that arises from the assumption that you know all the answers—that
your clients are ignorant and should be the passive recipients of your
wisdom. Both you and your clients can be complicit in fostering this
situation, in which you can be terrified that your clients will discover that
you may not know how to interpret some factor in their chart. This can
cause you to assume a false bravado as to your competence. In other
instances, your clients, in their confusion and fear, may project the
archetype of savior onto you— and you may accept it.
The first thing you must admit is that you don't know everything, and
that there may be parts of the chart that will evade your best attempts at
interpretation. But even more than that, you must consider the possibility
that your delineation of a client's chart may not be accurate. When clients
cannot relate to what you are telling them about themselves, who is right?
You or the client? Before you panic, double check to make sure you have
used the correct birth data to calculate the chart. Ask your client to verify
it. Then ask the client just where this information comes from—a birth
certificate, or the parents' memory, or something they just always thought
was true? If you think that the birth time is suspect, that error can affect the
accuracy of the reading.
If the birth time is accurate and your client still cannot relate to your
reading, don't jump to the conclusion that the client is in denial and ignore
the possibility that your own powers of penetrating insight may be off the
mark. Occasionally, denial is the case, but most often it is not. At this
point, pause, come down a few notches, and try to work with the client to
understand just what some factor signifies. We know that each symbol carries a range of significations and that there is an almost infinite variety
of combinations that produce different results. You must respect your
clients' feedback, because they know their own charts better than you do,
since they reflect their own lives. In fact, your clients are your best source
of education, because they provide immediate verification of a living chart
in the moment. You do not lose stature when you are willing to interact
with your clients to arrive at an interpretation that is meaningful to their
lives.
Periodically, in the course of the reading, check in with your client to
ensure that what is being said makes sense and is relevant to the life
circumstances. To particularly reticent clients, I may say: I am speaking in
general principles, hoping that they will trigger the specific circumstances
in your mind. I do not need to know the details, as long as I know that I am
on the right track. If they indicate that this is the case, then I proceed.
Another technique to diffuse the aura of “astrologer as God” is the art of
skillful questioning, whereby you carefully lead clients to making the
realization on their own. If, for example, you see the ruler of the third
afflicted and in a harsh aspect to the ruler of the eighth, instead of telling
your clients that a sibling is cheating them out of their inheritance, you can
instead ask if there are problems in a sibling relationship that center around
shared resources. In this way, you stimulate your clients to draw the
conclusions themselves—conclusions that may be too intrusive or
offensive to be made by you. RECOGNIZING YOUR BIASES
No matter how much you try to put aside your own personal problems
before a reading, everything you say to your clients cannot help but be
filtered through your own personal orientation. The slant that you give to
all your interpretations will be affected by your own values, conditioning,
beliefs, and experiences. Therefore, it is incumbent on you to follow the
maxim inscribed on the temple of the Delphic Oracle: Know thyself.
You must recognize your own biases and wounds, and how they affect
what you say to your clients. If you were abused by your father, are you
automatically suspect and unforgiving of your clients' relationships with
their own fathers? If you had an abortion and later regretted it, does that predispose you to advise your clients against abortions, regardless of their
own circumstances?
In this same vein, be vigilant about how your politics, your religion or
lack thereof, your sexual orientation, or your morality may color how you
discuss these issues with others or guide them in problem-solving. Can you
be respectful of others' beliefs, even if they conflict with your own? If a
woman client faced with a Pluto transit to a relationship point feels
absolutely committed to a difficult marriage because of spiritual vows she
took before God and you are an atheist, can you support her decision to
stay and try to find some solution? Can you avoid being impatient or
dismissive of her stance? If you are a staunch believer in marital fidelity,
and especially if you have been betrayed by a partner, and your client has a
variegated sexual life, can you be non-judgmental and hold the client with
compassion?
This process of self-examination is very difficult. Astrologers who have
psychological training often advise students to go through some kind of
analysis or therapy so they can at least be conscious of the areas where
their own blockages may affect the ways in which they guide others. How
much personal work you have done, what kind of astrology you do, what
kind of clients you attract, and how deep you go with them will determine
how you should proceed following another classical maxim: Physician,
heal thyself.
Finally, what is your position on the fate/free-will issue? You must find
a place on this continuum where you feel comfortable and be able give a
good rationale for your stance. Sooner or later, a client will ask you: Do
you think that the chart says that this situation is definitely going to happen
in this particular way, or do you think that it is up to me how it will turn
out? If the chart is an accurate depiction of a person's character and
destiny, to what extent can choice and chance and therapy alter what has
been ordained by the stars, and still have astrology work? How much
freedom do individuals actually have to fashion the course of their lives?
Are there limits as to what is possible or probable, as determined by the
planetary conditions?
The manner in which you answer these questions for yourself will affect
the way in which you present the information to your clients. The more
you pride yourself on accurate predictions, the less free will you afford
your clients. Some astrologers who believe strongly in free will do not do predictive work at all, but rather use the chart as a springboard for
discussing the client's issues without pronouncing any judgment. Other
astrologers believe that astrology's capacity to predict is its greatest asset
and benefit. This is a question that has yet to be resolved in 4000 years of
astrological practice, and each and every practitioner of the art is forced to
enter into the discussion. You can't avoid it. Furthermore, in your career as
an astrologer, your views are likely to oscillate and change. SETTING BOUNDARIES
There are a number of situations in which it is important to set
boundaries with your clients. In some cases, you may even need to contain
certain clients. You have to decide whether you will maintain firm
boundaries or loose ones, and when you can be flexible and to what extent.
Having no boundaries at all will encourage your clients to make your life
crazy and unmanageable. Here are some of the situations you may face and
on which you should take a position.
When you first discuss your services with a client, you indicate the
length of the session. How do you respond if, when that time has elapsed,
you have not covered what you wanted to or what the client requested?
And what do you do if clients are so excited about what you are saying that
they want more time? Do you continue, and do you charge for the
additional time? How do you handle clients who won't hang up the phone
or leave when the session is over, because they are trying to extract every
last drop of essence from your brain? What do you do if they attempt to
prolong their session by crying or having an emotional breakdown? What
if they call back a few hours later with another slew of questions, or want
you to clarify and repeat what you said earlier?
And speaking of payment, do you insist on receiving payment before
the session? Or are you willing to trust that the client will send payment?
And what if they want their money back or refuse to send payment because
they are not satisfied with your reading?
Will you see clients only by pre-arranged appointment or will you make
yourself available whenever they happen to call? If your best time for
doing readings is in the mornings, will you allow clients to push you for an
evening appointment because it is more convenient for them? If you
reserve weekends for your own rejuvenation or family time, will you let pushy clients convince you to schedule a weekend session? If your client
quota is filled for the day or the week, do you allow insistent clients to
squeeze themselves in? How hungry are you for the money and does it
affect your own well-being?
What do you do when a client does not allow you to direct the session
and keep your focus, but instead constantly interrupts you, asks irrelevant
questions that take you off track, or disputes what you say based on what
another astrologer, psychic, or tarot reader said? How do you respond
when clients are more interested in hearing themselves talk than in
listening to you?
Suppose a client suddenly wants you to run the chart of a partner, child,
boss, or parent, and compare it to his or her own or reveal what is going on
in that chart. Do you do it? Or do you say that you agreed to read your
client's chart, and that this entails another session? Do you say the client
must ask permission of the other person before you will work with that
secondary chart?
Are you willing to do “blind readings,” in which clients send birth data
and a check, and you prepare a cassette tape or written interpretation,
never having had any personal contact? If you have discovered that this is
not your forte, do you allow some clients to talk you into doing it
nevertheless?
How strict are you in maintaining client confidentiality? Do you take
clients who are in adversarial relationships with one another, and if so,
how do you use the information to which you are privy? Do you discuss a
difficult session with your best friend or partner, because you need to
process or vent or have a supply of amusing conversation?
What happens when you run into one of your clients in some kind of
social situation or on the street? If the client is with someone else, do you
allude to your professional interaction? What if clients see you and
immediately launch into their charts, wanting to know what is going on?
What if they feel embarrassed, having bared their souls to you, and now
regret the exposure and want to avoid you? How do you keep what
happens in the consulting room in the consulting room, and not allow it to
spill out and over into ordinary life?
These are some of the many issues that arise in the life of an astrological
counselor. Each one of us deals with them differently, depending on our
own personalities and styles. You must examine these situations carefully from your own personal perspective, and think about the response that is
best for you and why. If you encounter a difficult situation in which you
are struggling to come up with the right response, consult an experienced
mental-health practitioner or another practicing astrologer to help you deal
with the issue. You do not have to solve these problems by yourself. Good
therapists always have other therapists supervise them when needed.
Being clear on what is comfortable and acceptable for your own
behavior affects how you interact with your clients. Individuals come into
your consulting room seeking clarity, guidance, and healing. It is of the
utmost importance that you see them as real living people and not just
astrological symbols on a piece of paper. Make a genuine connection with
your clients and, to the extent that they allow you, move past their physical
appearance and engage with their personalities; dip into their psyches and
touch their souls if you are able. In order to illuminate the authentic self
within each of your clients, you, as an astrologer, must be authentic in how
you present yourself to them. And part of that authenticity entails being
clear on your boundaries. BRINGING CLOSURE TO THE SESSION
As you proceed through your consultation, stay aware of how much time
has elapsed and how much remains. You have a general plan of what you
want to cover, and, depending on the available time, you will condense or
elaborate upon the material. Try to be about 95-percent complete by ten
minutes before the session is over. At that point, pause and ask clients if
they feel you have satisfactorily addressed their concerns and if they have
any questions—either on what has been covered already or about anything
else. Then, use the remaining time either to respond to their final queries or
to mention some last details that are of secondary importance. Many
clients appreciate a summary of the main points you have discussed. Try to
end on a positive note so clients leave feeling inspired and hopeful, even if
a difficult situation has emerged in the course of the consultation.
Two minutes before the end of the session, tell clients you are coming to
the end of their time. Finalize any issues about payment, confirm the
correct address, and wish them the best. Have your schedule book
available in the event that they want to make another appointment at this
time. What do you do if a client does not want to terminate the conversation
or leave your office? Occasionally, you can go overtime ten to fifteen
minutes if you feel that essential information or processing needs to occur.
But generally, you should be firm. I often say I have another client waiting
or that I have a medical appointment I have to keep.
Clients may ask if you feel you have covered all the important points in
the chart or if there is more that you can say. This is how I respond:
I could talk ten to twelve hours about your chart, but in my
experience most people cannot take in anything more after one hour
and fifteen minutes. However, I have covered what I think is most
important for you at this time. If you are interested in discussing the
finer points of your chart or going into more detail about anything,
you are welcome to make another appointment after you have
listened to the recording of this session and integrated what we have
spoken about today. I do have some clients with whom I work in an
ongoing manner, and many people schedule yearly updates.
At this point, clients can choose whether or not to schedule another
session. This same general procedure applies to those who call back a few
hours later with questions about their reading. However, you should be
careful not to encourage unnecessary sessions so that you can build up
your practice or foster in your clients a state of dependency in which they
feel fearful and powerless to take any action without first consulting you.
After a client departs, blow out your candle and give silent thanks for
the inspiration and guidance you have received. Wash your hands under
cold running water to clear your psyche. Remember that you are a channel
for divine inspiration and not a psychic sponge. You can be present in the
moment with your clients' lives, but you should not take their situations
into yourself and hold onto their difficulties. The ancient priestesses
always bathed in the sacred springs in order to renew their virginity and be
cleansed and purified for the next ritual encounter. STUDY GUIDELINES
Look over the various questions posed in this chapter concerning client
styles, personal biases, and setting boundaries. Think about how you would answer them for yourself or handle such situations should they
arise.
If one of these challenging situations has already occurred in your
practice and left you unnerved, describe what happened, what you did,
and how you could handle it differently if you had the opportunity to
do it over.
Consult with another astrologer or counselor to share your concerns
with someone who can understand the situation and give you reflection
and feedback. CHAPTER FIFTEEN THE HEALING POWER OF MYTH TO ADDRESS
SUFFERING
IN THE PROCESS of giving readings for clients, you will inevitably see
certain themes suggested in the birth chart that point to very sensitive
issues that are difficult to discuss directly. They may refer to material that
is sensitive, embarrassing, painful, shameful, hidden, or socially
unacceptable—sexual violation, spousal abuse, or same-sex preference.
Clients may not feel comfortable discussing these matters or may react
with mortification at the implication that they had such an experience or
have such an issue. They may feel as if their carefully guarded privacy has
been violated and exposed. Yet, as an astrologer, you may suspect that this
motif is central to their experience of who they essentially are, or to the
suffering that permeates their lives. How do you address the elephant that
is standing in the middle of the room?
The frank articulation of such issues is rarely appropriate, unless you
have ascertained beforehand that the client is open and willing to discuss
these topics. One effective way to speak to subjects that no one wants to
acknowledge is to talk about them as universal stories as told in the myths
that are common to many people. You can test the waters by recounting
stories like Pluto's rape of Persephone, or Jupiter's spousal abuse of Juno,
or Sappho's love for her female students. Then provide a space in which
clients can offer information that reveals whether the story mirrors any of
their personal experiences. In this way, you allow the client to lead the way
or block the way into what some may consider taboo subjects beyond the
scope of an astrological session. The telling of mythological stories can be a path by which to enter this hidden terrain of the psyche and initiate a
process of understanding, acceptance, and healing.
The first portion of this book emphasizes a logical and analytical
approach to chart delineation that can help you discern where problems
may lie. In this chapter, we'll consider a more imaginal, psychological, and
archetypal orientation to accessing the deeper meaning of the astrological
symbols to facilitate healing.
Before we go more deeply into the use of myth as a healing modality in
astrological counseling, let's digress briefly into a discussion of the theory
behind the interpretation of myth and archetypal psychology. For those
who question the validity of mythology associated with planetary bodies as
a basis for astrological interpretation, and for those intrigued by the
possibilities inherent in the union of mythology and astrology, I offer a
rationale for a mythic approach to chart interpretation. MYTH IN ARCHETYPAL PSYCHOLOGY AND
ASTROLOGY
The corpus of mythology is comprised of the lives, deeds, and
relationships of the various gods and goddesses of a culture. People in both
ancient and modern times believed that either one or many deities were
responsible for the generation and dominion of the world. The gods were
worshipped in ritual ceremonies and invoked to avert troubles and to grant
blessings.
Theoretical explanations of the nature of myths fall into two broad
categories—external theories and internal theories. In the first, myths are
interpreted as the recording and oral transmission of beliefs and history, an
attempt to explain natural phenomena, or justifications for religious, social,
or political institutions. In the second, myths are seen as the spontaneous
expressions of the human psyche.1 This is the understanding of myth that
we will investigate in this chapter.
The psychological view that myths are projections of the structures of
the human psyche is most useful for astrologers. Carl Jung called myths
“the great dreams of humanity” and the “archetypes of the collective
unconscious.” He posited a human psyche that operates on two levels. The
personal level derives from the experiences of our own biographical
history. The collective level contains innate structures of the mind that, like the physical structures of the body, are common to all human beings and
present from birth. This collective level is part of the unconscious and is
composed of archetypes that are the universal primordial patterns
representing the typical experiences of humankind. The contents of the
archetypes are revealed in religion, the arts, creativity, dreams, visions, and
myths.
In a cross-cultural comparison of mythologies, it becomes apparent that,
while the gods and goddesses have different names and appearances, the
pantheons of various cultures are generally comprised of the same
archetypal figures. For example, Sumerian Inanna, Babylonian Ishtar,
Phoenician Astarte, Greek Aphrodite, Egyptian Hathor, and Roman Venus
are all identified as goddesses of love, beauty, and desire. This similarity
suggests that mythic deities may be none other than the outer symbolic
projections of the inner structures of the psyche that are common to most
cultures. The myths, as projections of the unconscious psyche, contain the
images and experiences through which we grasp the underlying reality of
the human condition. Myths are not simply tales of happenings in the
remote past, but eternal dramas that live themselves out repeatedly in our
own personal lives and in what we see all around us.2
Jung gives an archetypal interpretation of psychology, suggesting that
Olympian gods of old are now understood as various forms of neuroses.3
Archetypes as living psychic forces demand to be taken seriously; when
they are neglected, they become the unfailing causes of neurotic and
psychotic disorders. Júpiter Murray Stein explains that the unconscious
psychological contents that once created images of gods and mythic events
have not disappeared with the waning of religious belief, but continue to
affect human consciousness, revealing themselves in diseases and
symptoms. Insight and therapy can be greatly enhanced by knowing the
correspondences between mythic patterns and psychopathological
symptoms.5
In fact, this perspective was also known to the Greeks. The earliest
literature of Homer alludes to the divine causation of disease; illness and
misfortune were sent by the gods as punishment for those who failed to
honor them. Cure of the disease involved a pilgrimage to a cult site of the
offended god, offerings at the temple, and perhaps initiation into divine
rites. Archetypal therapy recommends a similar treatment, advising that the cure for psychological symptoms includes discovering which archetype
(god) has been neglected and then honoring it.6 The symptoms are seen as
messages from the psyche indicating what the individual needs to do for
greater psychological integration and healing. The modern word “therapy”
is derived from the Greek therapeia, which means “attendance upon the
gods.”
In the astrological pantheon, the planets, asteroids, fixed stars,
constellations, and nakshatras all carry the names of deities. In the
cosmology of the Babylonians, and later the Greeks, the celestial bodies
were perceived as the visible manifestations of the divine gods. This was
the basis for the earliest proto-astrology in Mesopotamia over 4000 years
ago, in which the appearance of a planet was an omen heralding the
presence of a god displaying its will to humanity. For example, a celestial
omen from the first millennium B.C.E. tells us: “When Ishtar stands on high,
lovemaking on the land.” The planet we know as Venus was identified as
the embodiment of Ishtar, the goddess of love, and each of the other visible
planets was likewise understood as a god. Thus, an intimate and explicit
connection between planets, gods, and human experience underwrites the
very foundation of astrology.
When the Greeks encountered the astronomy of the Babylonians in the
sixth century B.C.E., the Pythagoreans gave the names of the Greek gods
who most closely resembled their Babylonian counterparts to the planets—
the planet called Ishtar was renamed the star of Aphrodite; the planet
Nebu, scribe of the gods, became the star of Hermes for the Greeks and
Mercurius for the Romans. The attributes associated with each deity
became part of the significations assigned by astrologers to the planet
bearing its name.
Greek philosophers pondering cosmology put forth a number of ideas
that later provided a philosophical foundation for the validity of astrology.
The relationship between macrocosm and microcosm and the notion of
cosmic sympathy led to speculation that the planets might be the visible
appearances of the gods, or that they might signify the qualities of the soul
or point to the concrete manifestations of divine principles. Hermetic
astrological texts are precise about the direct correlation between the
planets and zodiacal signs to the parts of the human body, where the
human being is a reflection of the structure of the cosmos. In offering a rationale for the use of myth as a basis for astrological
interpretation, we can say that myths are a culture's stories of the lives and
deeds of its gods; archetypes are certain primordial structures in the psyche
that are common to all human beings. Myths are one of the contents of the
archetypes and, as such, they are the symbolic projections of the internal
structures of the psyche. They describe the universal and timeless patterns
of human experience that underlie and inform the expression of each
individual's life. Astrology was based on the notion that the planets were
one of the manifestations of the gods, and their appearances in the sky
indicated the presence and influence of that god in earthly affairs. The
attributes of the gods, as derived from their myths, became part of the
significations of the planets, and the ancient gods are now understood to
reveal themselves in the modern psyche as diseases and symptoms caused
by the neglect of a particular archetype/god. Healing entails embracing and
honoring a neglected part of the self.
Thus, if the nature of a celestial body has a chain of correspondences
that manifest in the terrestrial and human realms, the mythological story
associated with the planetary deity likewise shapes the life experiences of
human beings. The birth chart, which depicts the placement of the celestial
bodies in the sky at the moment of a person's birth, can be used as a map to
identify which planetary bodies are most prominent. And the mythological
motifs associated with those planets become the major themes that
influence a person's life. Myths, as the archetypal expressions of the
psyche, represent the basic dramas or scripts through which we live out the
meaning of our lives and recognize our paths and purpose.
In ancient cultures, myths were not read, but recited aloud by storytellers. Likewise, in the mythic approach to chart interpretation, it is the
telling of the stories that initiates the process of internal recognition in the
client. Through hearing the story, what may previously have been seen as
unrelated incidents in the life are perceived as part of a larger story infused
with an integrated theme. Furthermore, these stories, although experienced
as personal, are also understood as archetypal, signifying universal patterns
that others have experienced and endured. Once you begin to recite the
mythic biography of a god or goddess whose planetary namesake occupies
a prominent placement in a client's birth chart, you become a channel of
expression for the power of the story and its timeless wisdom. You and your client discover that the ancient stories of the mythic deities are everpresent, and live on in the hearts and souls of us all.
In the analytical approach to chart interpretation, you relied on
astrological techniques. In the mythic approach, it is the story itself that
constellates a healing in the client. The sign, house, and aspects of the
planetary bodies give specific details of how the story plays out, in much
the same way that each theatre group that enacts a play has different
costumes, sets, and props, but still delivers the same core features of the
drama. In my experience, the details of sign, house, and aspect are almost
insignificant compared to the power of the story itself, which, stripped bare
of astrological considerations, can convey the essential meaning and trials
of the human condition.
The mythic approach to chart interpretation entails knowing the myths
and knowing which deities have natural relationships with one another
from their mythic biographies. The inclusion of the asteroids, thousands of
which are named after deities from various cultures, expands the mythic
pantheon on which you can draw for meaning. You can also use this
approach to discuss the fixed-star constellations that carry the names of
gods and heroes—like Perseus and Hercules, or the nakshatras in Vedic
astrology that are named after Hindu deities. The reading can become
primarily a telling of stories—stories that you choose based on the
prominence of that celestial body at the birth moment. When clients hear
their own personal stories, they experience a sense of internal integration
and self-acceptance. USING MYTH IN COUNSELING
Now let's look at a few examples of this approach. If a client has Juno
prominent in the chart, perhaps configured with Pluto or Mars, suggesting
a theme of power struggles, obsession, or potentially violent conflict
within relationships, be sure to mention how Juno was continually
betrayed and humiliated by her husband Jupiter's many infidelities. When
telling the story of Juno, include the fact that, when she protested her
subjugation and domination, her husband hung her upside down from the
heavens with her wrists weighted with heavy golden bracelets. You can
also recount how Juno valued the honoring of her marriage vows and
repeatedly tried to reconcile with Jupiter in hope that the marriage would work. To the extent that your client sees a parallel between this story and
his or her own life and offers that information, you can begin to explore
that issue in more detail. This is a more subtle and compassionate way to
address the potential of these themes in a client's chart, rather than asking
point blank: Your mate is unfaithful and abusive so why do you remain in
this marriage? Or perhaps, even worse, ignoring altogether a core issue in
a client's life that he or she may be too ashamed to mention.
Same-sex preference is another taboo subject. This is slowly becoming
more openly acknowledged, but, for many, continues to be a difficult thing
to admit for fear of being ostracized by society. The asteroid Sappho, when
prominent in the chart or conjoined to Venus, the ruler of the seventh
house, or to Juno may be a story that can open up the gay/lesbian
conversation. Sappho was a historical personage, born on the island of
Lesbos in the sixth century B.C.E. Famed as a poet, she was called the tenth
muse by Plato. Sappho composed lyric love poetry detailing the emotional
terrain of intimacy. Many of her poems were dedicated to Aphrodite and
addressed to her female students. After giving the biographical details of
her life, you can say that Sappho in the birth chart indicates an aptitude for
poetry, the education of women, especially in the fine arts, extreme
sensitivity regarding affairs of the heart and sexuality, or a strong
emotional or physical connection with members of the same sex. Sappho
does not always indicate a client is gay or lesbian. By giving choices as to
her signification in a particular chart, you leave it open to your clients to
locate and discuss how they may or may not experience this archetype in
their lives.
Because Ceres was such an important goddess in the Greek pantheon
and religious life, her story embraces many different themes that are
actually connected by means of the story. Ceres, as we saw in chapter Mercúrio ,
can have powerful implications for a chart. One of my clients has Ceres
conjunct her Capricorn Ascendant. As a young woman, divorced with a
child, she and her current partner set out across the country to search for a
new home. En route, the child suddenly died in a freak accident. As her
partner was unable to father children, she was faced with remaining
childless. After years of grief and depression, they arranged for the private
adoption of a child rejected by his alcoholic mother. The client was
intensely devoted to gardening and preparing nutritious meals. This led to
the creation of a home-based organic bakery business. She went to school for nutritional counseling and discovered that most of her clients had
eating disorders from an inability to take or keep nourishment, and that
most of them had developed these illnesses after having been sexually
abused as children. She continued her education in therapy, and now works
with sexually abused children trying to heal these wounds and prevent the
wounds from destroying their adult lives. I am waiting to see if, near the
end of her life, she becomes involved in hospice work and facilitates
conscious dying.
This case history illustrates how the major themes in the client's life
correspond to the mythic biography of Ceres, which included growing
food, the loss of a child, the fostering of another child, working with
clients for whom withholding of food is an act of power, and counseling
the trauma of children abducted into underworld experiences. Without a
mythic perspective, however, the client may not be able to identify the
connection that unifies all of these life circumstances and events into a
larger picture. Once clients recognize them as related, they can
acknowledge that their individual lives are unfolding in conformity with a
universal motif, and this can lead to a transpersonal understanding of their
place in the larger whole.
Myth provides the integrated image that connects all individual thematic
threads. There is some comfort to clients in the realization that many other
people have also experienced the particular pathos that they thought was
their own personal cross to bear. This allows them to accept the
circumstances of their life predicament more fully, in the realization that
the broad outline of their lives is one of the templates that arise from
within the collective psyche. These archetypal templates, envisioned
through myths, are the very means by which we can follow the paths that
guide us to live life with a sense of meaning and purpose. It is at this
instant that astrology becomes a therapeutic modality.
An archetypal approach to the healing of the psyche enables you to help
clients identify malaise as a psychosomatic response to a part of
themselves, as symbolized by the planetary deity that has been neglected.
Chronic depression may be the symptom of an individual who has a
prominent Ceres and who has suffered the loss of parents or children.
Finding a way to express the fundamental need to nurture another being—
fostering an abandoned child, caring for a pet, or growing a garden to feed
others—may be various means by which the neglected Ceres archetypal energy is actively integrated back into the life. The motif of nurturing is
expressed in the archetype of Ceres' daughter as well. Eating disorders are
often the symptoms of women who have been molested as children. As for
Persephone herself, who refused to eat during her time of captivity when
she felt powerless and victimized, the withholding of food with which to
nourish the self appears to be an avenue of maintaining some kind of
control in the life. Eating disorders thus tend to be the bodily expression of
the ongoing terror of the Persephone child, who needs the reassurance of
feeling safe and protected.
When you encounter Persephone as the prominent archetype, tell the
story of the abduction from the child's point of view. Focus on the scene in
the story where Persephone is left behind briefly by her mother, told to
play with the other maiden nymphs picking flowers in the fields, but to
stay away from the narcissus flower, known to symbolize sexual
awakening. Irresistibly drawn to the intoxicating fragrance of the flower,
Persephone precipitates the rest of her archetypal story. Her appearance as
a prominent archetype thus often indicates some kind of early childhood
trauma. The child has an expectation of being watched over by the mother,
but for some unexpected reason is plunged into an underworld experience
where it encounters loss, terror, confusion, and feelings of abandonment.
This can be due to factors such as the death of the parents, divorce or
illness in the family, a physical accident, or abuse. The child often survives
by disassociating and retreating into some kind of fantasy world. As an
adult, he or she remains frozen at the age of the emotional trauma and
spends much time living in some kind of internal alternate reality. This is
also the Persephone child's earliest initiation into the spirit world. A sense
of victimization overshadows the life, with feelings of being powerless to
control the outer circumstances of a harsh world.
Let's take another example. A woman has a configuration in her chart
consisting of the Sun, Moon, and Ceres conjoined to the asteroids
Persephone and Nyctimene, all within a 5-degree range located in the fifth
house. Persephone is located within 1 degree of the Sun. In mythology,
Nyctimene, a daughter of the King of Lesbos, is seduced by her father. Out
of shame, she hides herself in the forest, and is later changed into an owl (a
bird that comes out only at night) by Athena. Putting these two myths
together, you can surmise that this woman was sexually abused by her
father and is still reeling from the trauma. In fact, this was exactly the case. The first time I saw this client, I simply related the stories, without stating
the conclusion. The client remained silent and did not offer any
commentary, and so I went on to other factors in the chart. The following
week, she called and told me that she was not ready at the time of the first
reading to acknowledge that pivotal episode in her life, but that now she
wanted to do a follow-up and explore the symbolism in greater depth. In
ensuing years of psychological counseling, she has seen how the turbulent
emotions generated by this act of violence have fueled the creative output
of her artistic and musical compositions. This corresponds to the planets'
presence in the fifth house of artistic creativity.
A male client has the asteroid Persephone conjoined to his Sun. As a
seven-year-old child, he discovered his mother's suicide by hanging and
was told by a distraught relative that his mother had killed herself because
he was such a naughty boy. From the age of eleven, he anesthetized his
pain and shame by drinking alcohol every day. For him, just being able to
get up every day and go to work was a victory. Some Persephone children
remain trapped in the underworld due to the severity of the wounding.
In some cases, the telling of the myth gives clients another broader and
more inclusive perspective with which to better understand their lives. In
other cases, this is not enough. The myth, combined with the astrology, can
point the way toward the healing of the psyche, and offer clues for the
alchemical transformation of lead into gold. In other words, the next step
in the healing process can involve a discussion of how the experience of
the pain and suffering can lead a person to a state of greater wisdom and
positive purposeful action. It is often in the process of helping others that
we can alleviate our own suffering. This leads us into a deeper exploration
of the wounded-healer archetype, and the astrological indications as to
whether this is a central motif in the life. It is important for clients to
acknowledge difficult life experiences, and to attempt to put them into a
perspective that gives some kind of redeeming meaning. THE ARCHETYPE OF THE WOUNDED HEALER
An analytical approach to astrology acknowledges the likelihood that
certain events in clients' lives will be problematic, bringing illness,
poverty, misfortune, failure, loss, or pain. Unfortunately, the chart does not
tell you why these bad things happen to seemingly good people. You will have clients, however, who will ask you what they have done to deserve
such suffering, or why God has punished them so. The pat response, and
not an incorrect one, is that astrology itself cannot provide this kind of
answer. And yet, as a counseling astrologer, you must learn to deal with
and acknowledge the pervasive condition of human suffering.
If you subscribe to the Eastern doctrine of karma and reincarnation, you
may think that current misfortunes are the result of harmful actions from
past lives, but that train of thought is generally not helpful in the
immediacy of a client's predicament. Or if you approach the situation from
a Christian perspective, you can fall back on the saying that God works in
mysterious ways and who are we to know God's will for us. While both of
these statements may be true in their own context, your client is still left
with abstract explanations and the distant possibility that things may be
better in the next life or in eternal life after death if he or she does good
deeds now or has more faith. How can the insights of both of these
spiritual approaches be made more concrete within an astrological context
that has severed itself from its religious origins?
The archetype of the wounded healer offers a way to discuss how
painful experiences can sometimes be a training ground for the knowledge
and compassion required to assist others in similar situations. It may also
be the case that this activity leads us toward our destiny. Two mythic
figures that speak to this situation are Persephone and the centaur Chiron.
The wounded-healer motif can also be suggested by the location of planets
in the twelfth house.
Chiron is a celestial body—most likely a comet that arrived from
outside our solar system—that revolves around the Sun. It does not travel
in the asteroid belt, but rather between the orbits of Saturn and Uranus. It
was photographed on October 31, 1977, on All Hallows Eve, and
recognized as a new body the following morning on All Souls Day,
November 1. According to folklore, on that eve the veil between the
worlds is most transparent, allowing the easy passage of spirits from the
realm of the dead into that of the living. Chiron was named after the
mythological centaur from the Mount Pelion area who was half man and
half horse. He was conceived through an illicit union between his father,
Saturn, disguising himself as a stallion, and an unsuspecting nymph,
Philyra. When his mother saw the monstrosity she had borne, she
immediately cast him aside. Chiron's first wound was abandonment by the mother and denial by the father. He was found and fostered by Apollo and
Artemis.
Unlike the other centaurs, who were boisterous and rowdy drunkards,
half-immortal Chiron was famed for his wisdom and kindness. In a cave
beneath the summit of Mount Pelion, the parentless child in his adulthood
became a foster parent to many Greek youths, raising them and educating
them in whatever they needed to fulfill their heroic destinies. Among his
students were Jason, Achilles, and Actaeon. Chiron was noted for his
knowledge of medicine, which he taught to the divine physician Asclepius,
including instruction in the use of many medicinal herbs that grew
profusely in the Pelion area.
Some say that Chiron was king of the centaurs, who, in a prolonged
battle with their hereditary enemies the Lapiths, were driven to take refuge
on Mount Malea in the southern Peloponnese. On their way, they
encountered Heracles in a skirmish, and Chiron was wounded in the thigh,
knee, or ankle by a poisoned arrow dipped in the blood of the Hydra.
Chiron's wound was fatal, but because he was partly immortal, he could
not die and so was doomed to a life of eternal suffering. Chiron eventually
became aware of the plight of the Titan Prometheus, who was punished for
giving the fire of the gods to humankind by being bound to the highest
crag in the Caucasus Mountains, where an eagle devoured his liver daily.
Prometheus could be released only if some other immortal took his place
in the underworld. So Chiron, founder of the art of healing who himself
had a wound he could not heal, went into the underworld, taking upon
himself the suffering and death of Prometheus so that a benefactor of
mankind could be liberated. Zeus later transformed Chiron into the
Centaur constellation in honor of his service.
Chiron symbolizes the quintessential shamanic healer. What
distinguishes a shaman from any other kind of healer is that the shaman is
always wounded first. It is the descent into the pain and suffering of the
wound that leads the shaman to an encounter with the spirit realm where
wisdom and insight are received. The destiny of the shaman is to be of
service to his or her community, bringing back messages from the spirit
world about the healing of the body and soul. The credentials of the
chironic healer are those of direct reallife experience, as opposed to the
theoretical knowledge gained in books and classrooms. Concurrent with
Chiron's discovery in 1977 was the emergence of many twelve-step recovery programs, in which those who have suffered trauma or addiction
facilitate the healing of others in similar predicaments. In Chiron's world,
the wound is never completely healed and, to varying degrees, the
individual is in a continual process of both suffering and recovery.
Wherever Chiron is placed in the natal chart, it signifies some kind of
core wounding in the life that becomes a central challenge. However,
dealing with the challenge can lead a person to his or her destiny. When
Chiron is a prominent archetype, located with either of the two lights or
with the Ascendant ruler or on the angles, the motif of wounded healer
becomes part of the essential meaning of the life path. As a counseling
astrologer, when you see this pattern, give guidance to the client that one
reason for the suffering may be to gain personal knowledge of a condition
that will enable him or her to help others. Often, a sympathetic ear and
expression that conveys, “I know just what you are going through, because
that happened to me too” can be a tremendous source of emotional support
to another. In other cases, what you do will have a much larger impact than
the simple expression of compassion.
A client had natal Chiron in the first house, and I suspected that wound
might occur in the physical body. When the client was twenty years old,
the transit of Pluto passed over the natal Chiron, and she was diagnosed
with cervical cancer. Traditional treatment recommended surgery that
would most likely prevent her from bearing children in the future. She
researched alternative treatments, and found an herbal protocol that was
successful. In the ensuing years, she pursued training and certification in
herbal studies, and is now an established body worker. It was the
confrontation with the near-fatal wound that catalyzed her future path as a
healer.
So when a client looks at you and says, “Why has this terrible thing
happened to me,” look at the chart and see if the person has some afflicted
and debilitated planet signifying the matter. Simply telling the client that
the condition of the Moon is wretched is not helpful in and of itself,
however. You must help the client find some kind of redeeming value in
the suffering. Most basic and true guidance will lead clients to see how
they can use the suffering to help another. It is in the process of helping
others that they can ultimately bring healing to themselves.
Let's return to Persephone. Like Chiron, she also made a descent into
the underworld. According to the compromise reached between her mother, Ceres, and her husband, Pluto, to share her presence for part of
each year, she returns to the realm of the dead after the annual harvest has
been safely stored in the world above. She is a fluid traveler, passing back
and forth between the world of the living and the world of the dead.
During her annual sojourns in Hades, she watches over the souls of the
dead and initiates them into the rites of rebirth. As we mentioned before,
the Persephone child's early tragedy brings him or her into an encounter
with the spirit world.
This may speak to the Persephone person's destiny as a psychic who
brings messages from the astral plane, or as a psychotherapist, guiding
others through the terrain of the unconscious and facilitating psychological
rebirth. In recent years, a healing modality called soul retrieval has
emerged. In this healing, the Persephone healer may engage in methods to
help people reintegrate parts of their psyche that have split off and become
dissociated in order to survive the trauma. Work in hospice and care for the
dying, befriending young children who have been abused or are at risk, or
counseling substance addicts whose addictions are frequently a response to
the need to numb the memory of trauma are all vocations that can bring a
redemptive value to the suffering of those who carry the archetype of
Persephone. It is the telling of the myth that evokes the archetype and
thereby stirs the unconscious into a chain of images and associations that
makes the client more receptive to the information that follows. THE TWELFTH HOUSE
The final wounded-healer motif we will discuss is the twelfth house. While
this house does not directly correspond to a mythic archetype like those
symbolized by the celestial bodies, we can continue to utilize the
archetypal approach to this area of the chart through a discussion of the
concept of bodhicitta found in Eastern philosophical and religious
doctrines.
Traditionally, the twelfth house signifies suffering, loss, affliction,
enemies, and confinement. Modern astrology has added the meanings of
karma, the collective unconscious, solitude, retreat, and hidden
motivations. Influenced by Vedic astrology, which assigns the concept of
moksha, or spiritual liberation, to the twelfth house, it now also carries the
connotations of spiritual transcendence and selfless service. Generally, when an individual has placements of planets in the twelfth house, he or
she experiences some kind of loss, suffering, or difficulty with regard to
the significations of that planet and to the topics of the houses it rules—
more so if the planet is in poor condition.
Depending on the belief system of the astrologer and the client, these
themes can be framed in terms of karma and reincarnation, making the
difficult experiences the results of past actions, trauma, and unresolved
issues from previous lives that seek healing and resolution in this lifetime.
Or it may be that commitments in the form of an “I owe you” have been
made in previous lives whose chips, so to speak, are now being called in.
Or these disturbing events may be eruptions from the unconscious of
negative and toxic mental and emotional patterns that are either carried
over from the past or residues of events that occurred before the client's
own biographical memory. The living out of shadow motifs in the personal
life that have collective significance or are the hereditary issues of one's
family, religious, or cultural trials may also be a factor.
While all of these approaches may offer somewhat satisfying
explanations for the pathos of twelfth-house planets, they do not
necessarily help a client move through the suffering or utilize the suffering
for some kind of beneficial action, thereby transforming it. The crises that
are experienced in the twelfth house often do illuminate the woundedhealer archetype, in that early difficulties can become the formative
experiences that enable a person to recognize that particular pain in others
and feel moved with compassion to help them. This takes us to a
discussion of the archetype of the bodhisattva, which can be one of the
highest expressions of the twelfth house.
In Eastern doctrines, a bodhisattva is an enlightened being who
consciously chooses to incarnate in order to alleviate suffering and to assist
others in the search for liberation. Bodhicitta is the enlightened motivation
or attitude that inspires a person to become a bodhisattva in order to
benefit all beings. You don't need to subscribe to an Eastern religion to
emulate the altruistic behavior that ensues from the cultivation of
bodhicitta.
Depending upon the belief system, you can suggest that, if there is some
kind of consciousness prior to incarnation, the evolving soul may make
decisions to take on the burdens of others willingly and out of compassion
for their plight, or for personal redemption, or because it sees the necessity for self-sacrifice for the benefit of the greater good. This can be indicated
by the location of planets in the twelfth house, where the individual carries
a heavier burden than others do—not due to punishment for wrongdoing or
past trauma held in the unconscious, but through a voluntary undertaking
arising from an enlightened awareness.
I want to close this chapter with a teaching from one my own teachers,
Lama Tsering Everest. I asked her what a birth chart actually represents.
Her response was that, from a Buddhist perspective, the chart is a picture
of our basic karmic situation in life, as the fruition and result of our actions
from previous lives. As such, it represents our limitations and negative
emotional patterns, which are the source of our suffering. However,
simultaneously, the birth chart is a picture of what we would look like as
enlightened beings if we were able to transform the negative karmic
mental patterns into their corresponding wisdom qualities through
meditative practice and right action.
The archetypal approach to therapy postulates that suffering is a
message from the psyche—from some neglected part of the self crying out
in pain to be noticed. In Buddhist philosophy, suffering is the result of
wrong thinking that leads us to wrong actions and reinforces the
predisposition to future suffering. Astrology is one means by which we can
recognize the indicators of suffering as depicted in the birth chart. As
astrological counselors, we can acknowledge the reality of the difficulties
our clients have, in fact, experienced, and discuss various ways that the
suffering can hold the key to selfhealing, to realization of potential, and to
spiritual progress through altruistic action to benefit others. Archetypal
mythology and the telling of these timeless universal stories offers us an
entry point into this path of healing. STUDY GUIDELINES
Look at your practice chart and determine if you see any sensitive
issues that can be approached by mythic storytelling. Practice by
telling this story to your “client”; ask if the story mirrors any events
from his or her own life experiences.
Carefully explore the factors associated with the twelfth house— the
sign occupying it, any planets located there, and the planet that rules it.
Ask your “client” if he or she has experienced any difficulties, losses, or suffering with regard to the significations of these planets or to the
psychological qualities of the sign. Does a discussion of the woundedhealer archetype offer any solace or guidance to the healing of these
issues? EPILOGUE: THE ASTROLOGER AS COUNSELOR
The quandary for astrological counselors is that they must straddle the gap
between science and art—between logical analysis and compassionate
healing. For astrologers dedicated to mastering the discipline of accurately
discerning the celestial signatures for a nativity, it is a point of honor to be
competent and to recognize the truth of what the chart reveals. But
counselors understand that a dispassionate recitation of the stark
unadorned facts may not always serve the best interests of the client. How
can you be true to what the astrological symbols in the chart indicate, yet
convey hope rather than despair if they point to problematic outcomes?
How can you acknowledge the operation of karma or fate as an
explanation for what may otherwise be untenable circumstances, yet give a
redemptive meaning to a person's suffering? The ultimate challenge for
astrological counselors is to be truthful to the objective reality of the birth
chart and, at the same time, give the client a positive and spiritually
uplifting vision for living a life that has purpose and meaning for
themselves and also benefits others.
Occasionally, this is a relatively easy task, since some charts show
mostly good fortune. It is a joy to communicate glowing information to
those who have had the fortune to be born under a chart that, according to
classical guidelines, is easy, positive, and designed for success and
happiness. Here, you can feel confident and secure in waxing eloquent
about your client's life and future, knowing that you stand on firm ground.
You have a blissful client who will love you as the bearer of good news.
But often, those with easy lives are less likely to seek counseling and
guidance; it is generally when things are going badly that people reach out
for help. Most people who come to astrologers for insight and advice are
driven by some kind of malaise, either temporary or chronic, about which
they may be more or less aware. Few of us are without our own particular
kind of suffering in the deep places of our hearts. As Homer tells us in the Iliad, only gods have been given all good lots
in life; most mortals receive a mixture of good and bad, and some end up
with only bad as their allotted portion. The real test of an astrological
counselor is to know what to say when the chart indicators point to
problematic outcomes that describe difficulties the client has already
experienced or is concerned about for the future. What is your
responsibility when you see a pattern in the birth chart that does not bode
well for individuals and for their hopes for their lives? What do you say
when the chart indicates that it is unlikely that they will get what they
want, or the things that many others take for granted—and if they do, that
it may not turn out to be in their best interests? How can you be truthful
and not negate or dismiss the reality of the problems in their lives, but at
the same time reframe the situation so you do not leave clients in a state of
despair?
We can speculate about the extent to which people are capable of
transforming the bad into the good, and, indeed, most religions, spiritual
practices and psychological therapies are predicated on the premise that
this is within the realm of human potential. We may never really know the
absolute truth of this matter. But it is apparent that we must live our lives
as if it were true; the alternative leads us into resignation and hopelessness.
As astrologers, we must confront our own beliefs about what the natal
chart actually represents and to what extent the patterns depicting character
and destiny are fixed or flexible. If we consider the possibility that
individuals can take conscious action to alter the indications of the chart
significators or express the energies at the more skillful range of their
manifestations, we give guidance as to the strength of human will to
overcome obstacles. Reliance on higher powers, belief in the capacity of
focused thought to create reality, positive thinking, psychological therapy
to release blocked energies, spiritual practice and intercession, the
implementation of right action, and remedial measures to counteract
otherwise destructive forces are all ways to bring this about.
However, if we suspect that the arrangement of the stars at the birth
moment is an accurate depiction of the seed imprint that determines the
shape and timing of who we are over the entire span of our lives, then it
may become a matter of changing our perspective on how we view the
reality of the objective condition of our lives. The Western astrological
tradition developed under the umbrella of Stoic philosophy, which held that everything in nature proceeds according to a natural law that connects,
orders, and determines all things. Happiness and freedom arise out of a
willingness to accept the wisdom of this natural law and live in conformity
with it. Suffering is the result of a futile struggle to obtain something that
was not meant to be.
While some may take this to imply a strict determinism that denies our
free will to make choices and consciously direct our lives, that begs the
following questions: Given that these are the circumstances of my life,
what is the best expression for the greatest good that I can give to them?
How can I make the best use of this situation for the realization of what my
chart supports rather than what I desire or imagine will make me happy?
This is a very different approach than one that attempts to change what is
or create what we may want. It does not mean resignation to the adversity
of fate, but rather raises the question: If the chart is denying the realization
of some topic, why? And what is being asked of the person instead?
When it seems impossible to change, transform, and re-create a client's
reality, there are several alternatives you can suggest. One involves
spinning and reframing the situation to gain a different perspective that
makes sense and that the client can accept. A second is to make peace with
what is unlikely to occur and focus instead on what else the chart supports
for the realization of success and good fortune, and develop the life
energies there. A third is to allow the pain to open the heart to compassion
and, from that place, take action to alleviate the suffering of others. None
of these possibilities is mutually exclusive.
Throughout this book, I have emphasized the importance of knowing
what a chart indicates before deciding on how and when to “spin” the
reading. Metaphorically, the work of the Moirai, the Three Fates, was to
spin and weave the fabric of a person's life. In this context, “spinning”
does not mean saying something other than or opposite to what actually is,
but rather giving an alternate perspective that reframes the situation in a
manner that both is reasonable and offers a path of positive action.
Say a man arrives in your office concerned about an ongoing crisis in
his marriage. He has a Libra Ascendant, with Venus the ruler of the
Ascendant as steersman in Aries in the seventh house of marriage guiding
his life. The seventh house is thus occupied by the sign Aries, and its ruler,
Mars, is located in Virgo in the twelfth house of afflictions conjoined to
Saturn; Mars rules the Scorpio second house of money earned from livelihood as well. The man has had three long-term relationships with
angry, domineering women who constantly criticized and berated him,
focusing on his meager earnings despite the fact that he is a hard worker
and skillful craftsman. And yet he remained committed to the marriages
until forced to leave by his partners.
You may think it unlikely that this person will find happiness and peace
with a partner who is gentle, kind, and appreciative. Yet it is the topic of
relationship that guides his life, and the thought of not being in a
relationship is untenable to him. How can you reframe these chart
indicators to make sense of his predicament? The counselor in you might
speculate that he may have taken on a karmic commitment (ruler of
seventh in the twelfth) to women who are filled with inner rage toward
men due to their own previous circumstances (his Venus in Aries in the
seventh). Because he is secure enough in his own inner strength, he is able
to withstand their tirades and give them unconditional love, commitment,
continual help, and emotional support to bring some healing into their
lives. Everyone can benefit from and heal by being loved, and it may be
that he is able and willing to extend this compassion to a type of woman
who needs it very much. The question here is how to find peace with a
situation a person is unable or unwilling to change by viewing it in a way
that affirms the higher impulses of the individual. Had the client been open
to the possibility of leaving the relationship, the discussion might have
taken a different turn.
Or say a chart denies you what you want. What may it be asking you to
do instead? A man has had a lifelong unfulfilled yearning for his own
children, but his wife did not want to give birth or raise a family. He has
Mars, the ruler of his Ascendant, placed in the fifth house of children; the
Sun, ruler of the tenth house of profession or what we do, is also located
there. Mars closely conjoins the Sun, and both are opposed by Saturn,
indicating some of the problems. In addition, the planet Pluto and the
asteroid Ceres are partile (exact to the degree) conjunct one another at the
degree of his MC. His only child died before birth. However, the partners
of two of his close friends died, leaving teenage children behind. He has
joyfully taken on the responsibilities of befriending, mentoring, and
helping to raise them. In addition, he has written several books relating to
the emotional healing of children (the Sun, ruler of the tenth of profession in the fifth of children and the ruler of the fifth in the third house of
writing). The books have been his creative children.
You can point out that, had he had children of his own, his energies
might not have been available to help these other children as he has done.
In addition, the natural impulse toward children as indicated in his chart is
being asked to reach a larger audience through his writings. Through
helping the children of others, he not only redeems his own suffering, but
actualizes the essential meaning and purpose of his own life.
Let's look at the chart of artist Frida Kahlo, who demonstrates the
channeling of suffering into other endeavors, and thereby finds redemptive
meaning. Her Sun, ruler of the Ascendant, is located in Cancer in the
twelfth house opposed by an exalted Mars in Capricorn in its joy in the
sixth house. Mars signified a great illness, accidents, and countless
surgeries that brought her life-long physical pain and subsequent emotional
suffering from an inability to bear children. You clearly see that poor
health is one of the outstanding circumstances of her life. You also see that
both of these planets are configured by sextile and trine to a tenth-house
exalted Taurus Moon that rules the twelfth. You can affirm that her basic
life purpose is expressed through the transfiguration of her own emotional
and physical suffering, which she actualizes through a successful
profession in the creative arts; her pain was the content of her artistic
expression and gift to the world, from which she received much
recognition and honor.
In the above examples, I am not trying to whitewash the reality of
painful situations or to deny and ignore the difficulties of these people's
lives. Nor am I telling them to employ a variety of methods to change and
transform their lives according to their wishes. I am acknowledging the
truth of the chart, but offering another point of view that makes sense of
the facts in a way that allows them to live life with a positive sense of
meaning. When you stop struggling to be other than who you are, or to
obtain a life other than your own, you enter a peaceful state of mind, as
described in the Serenity Prayer of Alcoholics Anonymous: God grant me
the serenity to accept the things I cannot change, the courage to change the
things I can, and the wisdom to know the difference. Focusing on what you
can control liberates great energy to actualize fully the best possible
expression of the potentialities inherent in your chart. Ultimately, the quest is to discover your authentic self so that you can willingly embrace your
destiny.
Your job as an astrological counselor is to benefit your clients with an
honest and compassionate appraisal of the circumstances of their lives. The
celestial arrangement of the astrological symbols in the birth chart reflects
the intersection of a person's karma from the past, their fate in the present,
and their destiny that yearns to be fulfilled in the future. Your technical
proficiency as an astrologer allows you to assemble and read the symbols
in a way that illuminates the celestial configuration that expresses your
clients' authentic self. Your wisdom as a counselor enables you to convey
this vision in a manner that makes sense of your clients' suffering and
inspires them to live out that purpose for the greater good. When you
integrate your skill as an astrologer with your wisdom as a counselor—
when you hold your clients with compassion—you place the analytical
power of astrology in the service of your clients’ personal healing in a way
that radiates it outward to benefit the larger whole. APPENDIX A: HOW TO DETERMINE YOUR NATAL AND
PROGRESSED LUNATION PHASES
The following set of instructions will guide you through the process of
determining your natal lunation phase and the dates of your progressed
lunation phases. You will need a copy of your natal birth chart and a
computer report giving your progressed lunation phases for a 100-year
period. These documents can be ordered through ASTROLABE at 1-800THE NOVA. Tell them you want to use them in connection with this book.
Alternately, many computer software programs can generate the dates for the
progressed lunation phases; the report illustrated here is from the Solar Fire
Program. NATAL LUNATION PHASE
To determine your natal lunation phase, calculate the number of degrees
between the Sun and the Moon in your birth chart. Using the Sun as a
reference point, count the degrees from the Sun to the Moon in the order of
the signs (in a counterclockwise direction). Each sign contains 30 degrees
and each degree contains 60 minutes. Add the total number of degrees and
minutes between the Sun and the Moon and use Table 7 on page 292 to find
your lunation phase.
Bill's Sun is at 24 degrees Scorpio 23 minutes. His Moon is at Mercúrio degrees
Aquarius 51 minutes. So the distance from the Sun to the Moon in Bill's
chart is calculated by adding:
5°. 37″ remaining in Scorpio
30°. 00″ Sagittarius
30°. 00″ Capricorn Mercúrio °. 51″ Aquarius
75°. 98″ = 76°. 38″ between the Sun and Moon Table 7. Lunation Phases by Degrees and Minutes between the
Sun and Moon Remember, there are 30 degrees in each sign and 60 minutes in each degree.
Do not carry over the sums between the degree and minute columns, but
tally each one separately. In the above example, 98 minutes is equal to 1
degree (60 minutes) and 38 minutes. Thus we add one degree (equal to 60
minutes) to 75 degrees for a result of 76 degrees and 38 minutes.
According to this calculation, Bill's natal lunation phase is Crescent
Moon. PROGRESSED LUNATION PHASE
I will illustrate how to determine the dates of your progressed lunation
phases using a computer report generated by the Solar Fire software program
in the Dynamic Menu (see figure 16). If you do not have access to this
astrological software, you can order a report from Astrolabe at 1-800-THE
NOVA. Tell them that you want to use it in connection with this book.
In the second column from the left are glyphs for various aspects between
the position of the progressed Moon (first column) and the progressed Sun
(third column). Run your finger down this column until you come to the first entry for
the glyph that represents the conjunction aspect . In the space to the
left, write the words “New Moon.”
Immediately beneath the glyph for the conjunction aspect is the glyph
that represents the semi-square aspect . Opposite this glyph, write the
words “Crescent Moon.”
Beneath the glyph for the semi-square aspect is the glyph that represents
the square aspect . Opposite this glyph, write the words “First Quarter
Moon.”
Beneath the glyph for the square aspect is the glyph that represents the
sesi-quadrate aspect . Opposite this glyph, write the words “Gibbous
Moon.”
Beneath the glyph for the sesi-quadrate aspect is the glyph that
represents the opposition aspect . Opposite this glyph, write the words
“Full Moon.”
Beneath the glyph for the opposition aspect is the glyph that represents
the sesi-quadrate aspect . (This is the same glyph as that for the
Gibbous Moon). Opposite this glyph, write the words “Disseminating
Moon.”
Beneath the glyph for the sesi-quadrate aspect is the glyph that
represents the square aspect . (This is the same glyph as that for the
First Quarter Moon.) Opposite this glyph, write the words “Last Quarter
Moon.”
Beneath the glyph for the square aspect is the glyph that represents the
semi-square aspect . (This is the same glyph as that for the Crescent
Moon.) Opposite this glyph, write the words “Balsamic Moon.”
The next glyph is that of the conjunction . Repeat this sequence until
you reach the end of the column at the bottom of the page.
Now return to your starting point, but this time move up the column
toward the top of the page and enter the words for the lunation phases in
reverse order next to each glyph: Balsamic, Last Quarter, Disseminating,
Full, Gibbous, First Quarter, and Crescent.
When you reach the top of the column, enter the next lunation phase in
the sequence, even though there is no glyph next to it. This is your natal
lunation phase.
The dates to the right of the progressed Sun are the dates on which each of
these lunation phases began. Progressed Lunation Phases FIGURE 16. Bill's progressed lunation phase report. Calculations
courtesy of Solar Fire. APPENDIX B: RESOURCES FOR THE STUDY OF ASTEROIDS
A Selection of Mythic and Concept Asteroids
(See pages 296–97 for a list of Bill's Asteroids) BOOKS
George, Demetra and Douglas Bloch. Asteroid Goddesses. Berwick,
ME: Ibis, 2003.
George, Demetra. Finding Our Way through the Dark. Tempe, AZ:
AFA, 2008.
Guttman, Ariel and Kenneth Johnson. Mythic Astrology Applied, Part
III. St. Paul, MN: Llewellyn, 2004.
Larousse Encyclopedia of Mythology. London & New York: Hamlyn,
1978.
Schmadel, Lutz D. Dictionary of Minor Planet Names. Berlin & New
York: Springer-Verlag, 2006.
Tripp, Edward. The Meridian Handbook of Classical Mythology. New
York: Meridian, 1974. WEB SITES
www.theoi.com for Greek mythology.
www.entheos1.com/Asteroid.htm for THE MUSE—personal asteroid
positions and ephemerides order forms for 12,000 asteroids.
www.astro.com/swisseph/astlist.htm for the name and numbers of all
the asteroids and the positions for individual asteroids on a given
date. SOFTWARE Mark Pottenger, CCRS Asteroid Program, an ephemerides of all named
asteroids with a Windows program to display positions for a date
and time. (markpott@pacbell.net).
Fei Cochrane, Kepler Astrology Software, Cosmic Patterns Software,
for an asteroid add-on module that calculates all named asteroids
(kepler@AstroSoftware.com).
Asteroid Report Asteroid calculations compiled in CCRS software by Mark
Pottenger
George, Demetra and Douglas Bloch. The Asteroid Goddess Report
Writer. Brewster, MA: Astrolabe, Inc., 1995 (astrolabe@alabe.com). Jacob Schwartz, Asteroid Signatures, indexes and annotates all asteroid
citations, www.AstroSoftware.com/Asteroid Signatures.htm. PUBLICATIONS
Dobyns,
Zipporah.
www.ccrsdodona.org. Mutable Dilemna/Asteroid World, Gaia (Gathering Information by Astrologers), contact National Council
of Geocosmic Research Asteroid Special Interest Group,
www.geocosmic.org. ENDOTES
Introduction
1James Hillman, The Soul's Code (New York: Warner Books, 1996), p. 6.
2Plato, Timeaus, 30 c. Chapter One
1In the Whole Sign house system, the MC degree can appear in either the ninth, tenth, or eleventh houses; it is not the cusp of the tenth house as in
quadrant-house systems like Placidus or Koch. Likewise the Ascendant
degree falls somewhere in the first house; it is not the cusp between the
twelfth and first houses although it does mark the horizon.
2See
Douglas Bloch and Demetra George, Astrology For
Yourself(Berwick, ME: Ibis Press, 2006), pp. 153–174 for a template for
beginning-level interpretation of planetary aspects. Chapter 2
1In Elements of Hellenistic Astrology(forthcoming), I give an exhaustive treatment of this inquiry from the Hellenistic perspective.
2Each planet is a general significator of certain topics in everyone's chart
(e. Vênus ., the Moon for the mother. In addition, each planet is a particular
significator for a certain topic based upon the house or houses it rules in
any particular chart, and this varies from one chart to another. For
example, the Moon also governs the particular topic of marriage if
Cancer, the sign it rules, happens to occupy the seventh house of
marriage.
3 Tetrabiblos, I, Júpiter .
4You can easily tell a morning-star Mercury because it has a lesser
zodiacal degree than the Sun, while an evening-star Mercury has one
greater than the Sun.
5In Hellenistic astrology, the rulership categories trigon, bound, and
decan are equivalent to the medieval usage of dignities as triplicity, term,
and face, respectively.
6 Mathesis, 3; 1, 10.
7Antiochus, Introduction, I, 19.
8Robert Schmidt, PHASE Conclave 2006 Lecture, Cumberland, MD.
9Valens, Anthology, IV, 11.
10Paulus Alexandrinus, Introductory Matters, 10.
11Porphyry, Introduction to Ptolemy, 28.
12A planet is enclosed when it is located between two other planets.
When two malefics enclose a planet, the medieval tradition said the
enclosed planet was besieged; the Vedic astrologers said it was
“scissored.” Traditions vary in far away in terms of zodiacal degrees the
malefic or benefic planets had to be from the enclosed planet.
13Paulus Alexandrinus, Introductory Matters, 14; Porphyry, Introduction
to Ptolemy, 2.
14Antiochus, Thesaurus, I, 1.
15Ptolemy, Tetrabiblos, I, 24. 16Antiochus, Thesaurus, 1.1; Paulus Alexandrinus, Introductory Matters, 14).
17An applying aspect occurs when a faster-moving planet approaches a
slower-moving planet (Venus at 5° Aries applying to a sextile of Saturn
at 8° Gemini). A separating aspect occurs when a faster-moving planet
moves away from a slower-moving planet (Venus at 10° Leo separating
from a sextile to Saturn at 8° Gemini). Chapter 3
1For information on chart patterns, see Marc Edmund Jones, Guide to Horoscope Interpretation; Dane Rudhyar, Person-Centered Astrology. Chapter 5
1Paulus Alexandrinus, Introductory Matters, 3.
2Vettius Valens, Anthology, I. 1.
3Vettius Valens, Anthology, I.1. Chapter 6
1See Demetra George, Finding Our Way through the Dark, Tempe, AZ: AFA,
2008 for a complete exposition of the lunation cycle, natal and
progressed.
2If you do not know what a transit is, how to read an ephemeris to
determine the positions of the transiting planets, or how to identify the
aspects that transiting planets make to natal planets, see “Astrological
Timing” in Bloch and George, Astrology For Yourself.
3Adapted from Bloch and George, Astrology For Yourself.
4Brian Clark, Secondary Progressions (Australia: AstroSynthesis, 1994). Chapter 7
1Vettius Valens, Anthology, Gêmeos .36.
2Paulus Alexandrinus, Introductory Matters, 16.
3Dane Rudhyar, The Lunation Cycle (Santa Fe, NM: Aurora Press, 1967).
4Adapted from Demetra George, Finding Our Way Through the Dark, AFA 2008. This source gives a more comprehensive discussion of the
natal lunation phases and the progressed lunation cycle, and contains a
workbook to help you chart out your lifetime lunar progressions. Chapter 8
1The calculation of the Lot of Spirit belonging to the Sun is the reverse of this formula—in a day chart from the Moon to the Sun and in a night
chart from the Sun to the Moon.
2Vettius Valens, Anthology, I, 15; V, 2.
3Ariel Guttman and Kenneth Johnson, Mythic Astrology(St. Paul, MN:
Llewellyn Publications, 1993), p. 74.
4Dane Rudhyar, The Astrology of Personality(New York: Doubleday,
1970), p. 296. Chapter Mercúrio 1For a full treatment of major asteroids and a selection of minor ones, see Demetra George and Douglas Bloch, Asteroid Goddesses (Berwick, ME:
Ibis, 2003). Chapter 11
1Vettius Valens, Anthology, Gêmeos , 38.
2Ptolemy, Tetrabiblos, IV, Júpiter .
3Paulus Alexandrinus, Introductory Matters, 26.
4In the Olympidorus Commentary to Paulus Alexandrinus, several
formulas are given for the Lot of Action (Praxis): 1. From Mercury to the
Moon, projected from the Ascendant (reverse for nocturnal births); 2.
From Mercury to Mars, projected from the Ascendant (reverse for a
nocturnal birth). Chapter 12
1Hephaisto, Apotelesmatics, Gêmeos , 27. Chapter 15
1Robert A. Segal, Myth: A Very Short Introduction(New York: Oxford University Press, 2004).
2Edward Edinger, The Eternal Drama(Boston & London: Shambhala,
1994), p. 3.
3Carl Jung, “Commentary on ‘The Secret of the Golden Flower,’” in
Collected Works, vol. 13. (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1967),
paragraph 54.
4Carl Jung, “The Psychology of the Child Archetype,” in Collected
Works, vol. Mercúrio , part 1. (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1990,
paragraph 266.
5Murray Stein, In Midlife(Dallas, TX: Spring Publications, 1983), pp. 6465.
6Stein, In Midlife, p. 65. BIBLIOGRAPHY
GENERAL BIBLIOGRAPHY
Bloch, Douglas and Demetra George. Astrology for Yourself. Lake
Worth, FL: Ibis Press, 2006.
Clark, Brian. Secondary Progressions. Australia: AstroSynthesis, 1994.
Costello, Priscilla and James Wasserman. The Weiser Concise Guide to
Practical Astrology. San Francisco, CA: Red Wheel/Weiser, 2008.
Edinger, Edward. The Eternal Drama. Boston & London: Shambhala,
1994.
George, Demetra and Douglas Bloch. Asteroid Goddesses. Lake Worth,
FL: Ibis Press, 2003.
George, Demetra. Finding Our Way through the Dark. Tempe, AZ:
American Federation of Astrologers, 2008.
————————. Mysteries of the Dark Moon. San Francisco:
Harper Collins, 1992.
———————. Elements of Hellenistic Astrology. Forthcoming.
Guttman, Ariel and Kenneth Johnson. Mythic Astrology Applied, Part
III. St. Paul, MN: Llewellyn, 2004.
Hillman, James. The Soul's Code. New York: Warner Books, 1996.
Jung, Carl. Collected Works. Princeton: Princeton University Press,
1967 - 1990.
Rudhyar, Dane. The Lunation Cycle. Santa Fe, NM: Aurora Press, 1967.
—————————. The Astrology of Personality. Santa Fe, NM:
Aurora Press, 1987.
—————————. Person Centered Astrology. Santa Fe, NM:
Aurora Press, 1990. Schmidt, Robert. PHASE Conclave 2006 Lectures CD set, Cumberland,
MD: Project Hindsight, 2006.
Segal, Robert A. Myth: A Very Short Introduction. New York: Oxford
University Press, 2004.
Stein, Murray. In Midlife. Dallas, TX: Spring Publications, 1983. PRIMARY SOURCES FOR A STUDY OF HELLENISTIC
ASTROLOGY
Cumont, Franz, Alexander Oliveri, et. al., eds. Catalogus Codicum
Astrologorum Graecorum (CCAG), 12 vols. Brussels: 1898-1953.
Goold, G. Plutão ., trans. Marcus Manilius, Astronomica. Cambridge, MA:
Harvard University Press, 1977.
Greenbaum. Dorian, trans. Late Classical Astrology: Paulus
Alexandrinus and Olympidorus. Reston, VA: ARHAT, 2001.
Lopilato, Robert, trans. Manetho, Apotelesmatika. Providence, RI, 1998.
Ph.D. dissertation.
Maternus, Julius Firmicus. Mathesis, translated as Ancient Astrology:
Theory and Practice, Jean Rhys Bram. Park Ridge, NJ: Noyes
Press, 1975.
Pingree, David, ed. and trans. Dorotheus of Sidon, Carmen
Astrologicum. Leipzig: BSG B.G. Teubner Verlagsgesellschaft,
1976.
——————————, trans. and commentary. The Yavanajataka of
Sphujidhvaja. Cambridge: Harvard University Press, vols. 1 &2,
1978.
Robbins, F. E., trans. Claudius Ptolemy, Tetrabiblos. Cambridge, MA:
Harvard University Press, 1930.
Schmidt, Robert, trans. Antiochus of Athens. The Thesaurus. Berkeley
Springs, WV: Golden Hind Press, 1993.
————————————, trans. Claudius Ptolemy, Tetrabiblos.
Berkeley Springs, WV: Golden Hind Press, Books 1, 3, & Júpiter , 1994,
1996, 1998. ———————————, trans. Claudius Ptolemy, The Phases of the
Fixed Stars. Berkeley Springs, WV: Golden Hind Press, 1993.
————————————, trans. and commentary. Definitions and
Foundations: Antiochus, with Porphyry, Rhetorius, Serapio, and
Antigonus. Cumberland, MD: Golden Hind Press, 2008.
——————————, trans. Dorotheus, Orpheus, Anubio, &
Pseudo-Valens, Teachings on Transits. Berkeley Springs, WV:
Golden Hind Press, 1995.
——————————, trans. Hephaistio of Thebes, Apotelesmatics.
Berkeley Springs, WV: Golden Hind Press, Books 1 & 2, 1994,
1998.
——————————, trans. Paulus Alexandrinus, Introductory
Matters. Berkeley Springs, WV: Golden Hind Press, 1993.
—————————-, trans. Vettius Valens, The Anthology. Berkeley
Springs, WV: Golden Hind Press, Books 1-7, 1993-2001
——————————, trans. Companion to the Greek Track.
Berkeley Springs, WV: Golden Hind Press, 1994.
——————————, trans. The Treatise of the Fixed Stars.
Berkeley Springs, WV: Golden Hind Press, 1993.
Schmidt, Robert. Sourcebook of Hellenistic Astrological Texts:
Translations and Commentary. Cumberland, MD: Phaser
Foundation, 2005.
Schmidt, Robert and Robert Hand, eds. and trans. Astrological Record
of Early Greek Sages. Berkeley Springs, WV: Golden Hind Press,
1995.
Zoller, Robert, trans. Hermes, Liber Hermetis. Berkeley Springs, WV:
Golden Hind Press, Books 1 & 2, 1993. GLOSSARY
angle
Term used to refer to any one of the four cardinal points in a horoscope
relative to the Sun's motion, as observed in the Northern Hemisphere
facing south. They are the Ascendant (sunrise point on the eastern
horizon), the Midheaven, also called Medium Coeli and abbreviated MC
(the Sun's highest elevation overhead in the southern sky), the Descendant
(sunset point on the western horizon), and the Imum Coeli, abbreviated IC
(Sun's lowest passage under the Earth). In Greek, the angles are called
horoskopos, mesouranema, dusis, and hupogeion respectively. angular house
The first, fourth, seventh, and tenth houses. Traditional astrology holds that
planets are the strongest when located in the angular houses. In Greek, an
angular house is called a kentron. annual profections
Symbolic timing procedure where each sign moves around the chart at a
fixed rate. Annual profections move one sign per year; monthly
profections move one sign per month; daily profections move one sign
every 2 ½ days. The matters of the house occupied by the profected sign
are emphasized for that period of time and the planet that rules that sign
plays a role in the determination of the outcome of the matters of the
house. The annual profected time lord is the planet that rules the annual
profected sign, and this planet governs the life for the duration of one year.
During that year, it has the opportunity to bring about its significations as
indicated in the natal chart. annual lord of the year
A planet that assumes governance of the chart for the duration of one year
based upon a time-lord procedure. applying aspect
A term used to describe a faster-moving planet approaching, or applying
to, the forming of an aspect to a slower-moving planet. Aspects are
considered more powerful when forming/applying rather than when
separating. Arabic part
A mathematical analog calculated by taking the distance between two
planets or between a planet and a house degree, and then projecting this
distance as an arc from the Ascendant. Originally known as a Greek lot,
the best-known Arabic part is the Lot of Fortune. Hellenistic and Medieval
astrology utilized hundreds of various lots such as the Lot of Spirit, the Lot
of Marriage, the Lot of the Father, and the Lot of Death. The Latin terms
for part is pars. Ascendant
The exact degree of the zodiacal sign that is rising above the eastern
horizon at the moment of the birth. The sign in which the Ascendant
degree is located is known as the rising sign and is generally used as a
descriptor of appearance and character. The Greek term is horoskopos,
from which the word horoscope is derived. ascending node
The point where the plane of the Moon or a planet in its orbital motion
crosses the ecliptic from a southerly to northerly direction. The Greek term
is anabibazo, which means “to go up.” Also known as the north node, it is
called the north lunar node when referring to the orbit of the Moon. ascensional time
The amount of time it takes for a sign to ascend fully over the eastern
horizon. It is also known as oblique ascension. The ascensional time of a
sign varies according to geographical latitude. aspect The angular relationship between two planets or other celestial bodies.
Ancient astrologers understood this relationship as the configuration made
by two planets occupying signs in conformity to the sides of regular
polygons, such as a sextile from the sides of a hexagon, a square from the
sides of a square, and a trine from the sides of a triangle. Modern
astrologers define this relationship as planets separated by an arc of a
certain number of degrees that are derived from the division of the circle
by whole numbers, regardless of the signs these planets occupy. Both
approaches agree that planets linked in this manner influence each others’
significations in harmonious or unharmonious ways. The closer the planets
are to the exact arcs of separation specified by 0 (conjunction), 60
(sextile), 90 (square), 120 (trine), or 180 (opposition) degrees, the more
active the influence. Traditional astrologers use only these five aspect
configurations; modern astrologers employ a host of additional aspects. aspect pattern
Geometrical configuration made by three or more planets in aspect to one
another, such as a grand trine, where three planets that are trine one
another form an equilateral triangle, or a Grand Cross, where four planets
square each other form a square. aversion
A term used by ancient astrologers to refer to planets occupying signs that
are unconnected to one another, specifically the semi-sextile (30 degrees)
and the inconjunct (150 degrees). The Greek term is apostrophe, which
means “to turn away” or “avert.” benefic
A planet that is literally a “doer of good,” usually ascribed to Venus and
Jupiter. The Greek term is agathopoios. bi-wheel chart
Arranges one set of planetary positions (for instance progressions, transits,
or Solar Returns) in an outer wheel relative to another chart (for instance a
natal chart) in the inner wheel. bonification
Enhanced favorable significations or lessened unfavorable significations
resulting from certain relationships with the benefic planets Venus and
Jupiter, such as conjunction, sextile, and trine configurations, as well as
other conditions. bound/term
The five unequal divisions of each sign where each segment is under the
rulership of a different planet—Mercury, Venus, Mars, Jupiter, or Saturn,
but not the Sun and Moon. Called “terms” in Medieval astrology. When a
planet occupies the bound degrees of another planet, the bound ruler planet
sets the rules of operation for whichever planets occupy its territory; when
a planet occupies its own bounds it is autonomous, subject only to its own
rules. There are several different systems of bounds recorded in the ancient
astrological literature. The Greek word is horion. cadent house
The third, sixth, ninth, and twelfth houses. Traditional astrology considers
that planets are weak when located in the cadent houses. In Greek, a cadent
house is called apoklima. celestial latitude
Measures the distance of a planet north or south of the ecliptic. celestial longitude
Measures the distance of a planet along the ecliptic. circumambulation
A term used in traditional timing techniques for advancing a planet around
the chart at some fixed rate. Literally meaning “to walk around,” this term
is used to establish a series of time lords that govern the life for various
periods of time, as well as in length-of-life determinations. Circumambulations are similar conceptually to primary directions; the
Greek term is peripatesis. combust
When the Sun conjuncts a planet, usually within 5-8 degrees. This is a
term used in Medieval astrology to describe a condition that is thought to
burn up and weaken the planet's significations. configuration
A term in traditional astrology that refers to sextile, square, trine and
opposition aspects envisioned as planets standing in conformity to the
sides of regular polygons. Planets can be configured either by whole sign
or by degree. corruption
The condition of a planet that is corrupted, harmed, or damaged in its
capacity to bring forth its positive significations as a result of certain
configurations with the malefic planets Mars and Saturn, such as
conjunction, square, and opposition, as well as other conditions.
Corruption may also be referred to as maltreatment. decan/face
Sub-division of a sign into three equal portions where each 10-degree
decanate is ruled by a different planet and influences how a planet that
occupies that decan functions. Decans, originally thirty-six star sets
associated with a divinity, are the indigenous Egyptian contribution to
Hellenistic astrology; they are called faces in Medieval astrology. The
Greek word is dekanos. decennial
Timing system used in Hellenistic and Medieval astrology where the life is
divided into equal 10-year- Mercúrio -month intervals, each under the rulership of a
certain planet that has governance over the life during that period. descending node
The point where the plane of the Moon or a planet in its orbital motion
crosses the ecliptic from a northerly to southerly direction. Also known as
the south node; the Greek term is katabibazo, which means “to go down.”
When referring to the orbit of the Moon, this is also called the south lunar
node. detriment
The condition of a planet that occupies the sign opposite that of its
domicile rulership. Generally speaking, a planet in detriment has difficulty
bringing forth or sustaining the matters it represents. Aquarius is the
detriment of the Sun, Capricorn of the Moon, Sagittarius and Pisces of
Mercury, Aries and Scorpio of Venus, Taurus and Libra of Mars, Gemini
and Virgo of Jupiter, and Cancer and Leo of Saturn. direct motion
A planet that is moving in a forward motion, as opposed to retrograde,
when a planet is moving in apparent backward motion. disjunct
See aversion. dispositor
The planet that rules the sign in which a planet is located and adds its
influence to how the planet operates. For example, when Venus is in
Cancer, the Moon is the dispositor of Venus since the Moon rules the sign
Cancer. In Hellenistic astrology, the dispositor is referred to as the
domicile lord. diurnal chart
A chart in which the Sun is above the horizon, as defined by the
Ascendant/Descendant axis. The diurnal sect is composed of the Sun (as sect leader), Jupiter, Saturn, and morning-star Mercury (rises before the
Sun). domicile
The sign in which a planet resides or, in modern terminology, the sign a
planet rules. Translation of the Greek word oikos. The domicile of the Sun
is Leo; the domicile of the Moon is Cancer; the domiciles of Mercury are
Gemini and Virgo; the domiciles of Venus are Taurus and Libra; the
domiciles of Mars are Aries and Scorpio; the domiciles of Jupiter are
Sagittarius and Pisces; the domiciles of Saturn are Capricorn and Aquarius.
In traditional astrology, planets are thought to have the greatest power in
terms of self-sufficiency when located in their own domiciles. ecliptic
The apparent path of the Sun as seen from Earth. Sometimes called the
zodiacal circle, as this path can be seen against the backdrop of the
zodiacal constellations. electional chart
A chart that is “elected” or deliberately chosen for an auspicious outcome
for the initiation of a certain event, such as a surgery, marriage, or business
opening. enclosure
A planet that is hemmed in by other planets on both sides. In Medieval
astrology, when a planet was enclosed by two malefics, it was said to be
besieged and this was considered an unfortunate condition. A planet can
also be enclosed by two benefics, in which case it is thought to be
protected. exaltation
The condition of a planet whose matters of life are raised high, honored,
and respected. The Sun is exalted in Aries, the Moon in Taurus, Mercury in Virgo, Venus in Pisces, Mars in Capricorn, Jupiter in Cancer, and Saturn
in Libra. The Greek term is hupsoma. fall
The condition of a planet in the sign opposite its exaltation sign.
Traditional astrology posits that the matters the planet represents are
brought down low, dishonored, and not respected. The Sun is in its fall in
Libra, the Moon in Scorpio, Mercury in Pisces, Venus in Virgo, Mars in
Cancer, Jupiter in Capricorn, and Saturn in Aries. The Greek term is
tapeinoma. gender
A classification of planets and signs in accordance with masculine or
feminine energies as active or receptive. Events signified by planets
occupying masculine signs are more active and thus come about at an
earlier age; events signified by planets in feminine signs move more
slowly and thus occur at a later age. Masculine gender signs are Aries,
Gemini, Leo, Libra, Sagittarius, and Aquarius; feminine gender signs are
Taurus, Cancer, Virgo, Scorpio, Capricorn, and Pisces. Masculine gender
planets are the Sun, Mercury, Mars, Jupiter, and Saturn; feminine gender
planets are the Moon and Venus. heliacal rising
When a star or planet first appears in the predawn hours, rising before the
Sun in the eastern sky, after its period of invisibility due to its prior
conjunction with the Sun. heliacal setting
When a star or planet can be seen setting on the western horizon just after
sunset, right before its period of invisibility due to its forthcoming
conjunction with the Sun. imum coeli
See angle. inconjunct
See aversion. joy
A condition in which a planet rejoices and finds delight when located in a
particular house. Mercury has its joy in the first house, the Moon in the
third, Venus in the fifth, Mars in the sixth, the Sun in the ninth, Jupiter in
the eleventh, and Saturn in the twelfth. When a planet is happy, it tends to
bring about more favorable outcomes. line of the horizon
The axis formed by the Ascendant and Descendant depicting the sunrise
and sunset points on the horizon. Lot of Fortune
The kind and amount of accidental good fortune that a person may expect
in life. Also known as the Part of Fortune in Medieval and modern
astrology. Many traditional astrologers calculate this and other lots
differently in diurnal and nocturnal charts by taking the arc from the Sun to
the Moon in a diurnal chart or the arc from the Moon to the Sun in a
nocturnal chart, in the order of the signs and projecting this arc from the
degree of the Ascendant. The Greek term is kleros tuche. lot
The Greek term equivalent to Arabic part. lunar node
See ascending and descending node. Lunar Return
A chart that can be set up each month when the Moon returns to the same
degree it was at at birth. The chart can be interpreted as a snapshot of the
current month's opportunities and challenges. lunation phase
The phase, or arc of separation, between the Sun and the Moon. malefic
A planet that is literally a “doer of bad,” usually ascribed to Mars and
Saturn. The Greek term is kakopoios. modality
Categories that describe signs as cardinal, fixed, and mutable in modern
astrology. In traditional astrology, this term is “quadruplicity” and the three
categories are called tropical, fixed, and bi-corporeal. mutual reception
Occurs when two planets receive one another when they occupy each
others' domiciles, or signs of rulership, such as the Sun in Scorpio and
Mars in Leo. It is thought to give more power to each planet than it would
otherwise have. nadir
The point directly underneath the zenith. The zenith is the point
immediately overhead in the sky; the nadir is the lowest point underneath
the Earth. Technically, these two points together are referred to as the Pole
of the Horizon and should not be confused with the MC and IC degrees, or
with the tenth and fourth houses. nativity
A term used in traditional astrology to refer to a birth chart. From the Latin
natus, meaning “birth.” nocturnal chart
A chart in which the Sun is below the horizon, defined by the Ascendant/
Descendant axis. The nocturnal sect is composed of the Moon as sect leader, Venus, Mars, and evening-star Mercury (Mercury rises after the
Sun). node
See ascending and descending node. node non-precessed Solar Return
A chart calculated each year around the birthday, when the Sun returns to
the exact degree and minute that it was at in the birth chart. north node
See ascending node. orb
The range of degrees on either side of exactitude. This term is commonly
found in discussions of aspects. For instance, a 90-degree square aspect
may have an orb of 0 to 8 degrees on either side of 90. partile apect
An aspect that is exact to the same degree of longitude in each of the
planet's respective signs, such as a partile sextile aspect between the Moon
at 8 Leo and Venus at 8 Gemini. phasis
A condition in which a planet makes a helical rising or setting (with an
exact 15-degree separation from the Sun) or is making a station, either
direct or retrograde. From the word meaning “phase,” Hellenistic astrology
considers this condition an intensification of the planet's energy. planetary condition
The evaluation of a planet according to sect, sign, house, aspect, and solar
and lunar considerations to determine how effective it is in bringing about its significations and to what extent the outcome of its matters will be
favorable or unfavorable. planetary node
See ascending and descending node. precessed Solar Return
A chart calculated each year around the time of the birthday, when the Sun
passes over the degree of the precessed Sun in the current year, as
determined by its position relative to the sidereal rather than tropical
zodiac. Because of the Earth's precessional motion, this will be different
from the natal degree of the Sun by about 50 seconds of arc for each year
of life, and thus will yield a different Ascendant than the non-precessed
Solar Return. precession
A gyrating motion resulting from the ellipsoid shape of the Earth. The
effect of this is that the intersection of the vernal equinox point with that of
the celestial equator drifts backward through the zodiacal signs at the rate
of approximately 50 seconds per year, one degree every 72 years, and a
complete cycle in 25, 695 years. In recent literature, this phenomenon has
been discussed in terms of the precession of the equinoxes and historical
ages, such as the Age of Aquarius put forth in a popular song. pre-natal lunation
The New Moon or Full Moon seen previous to birth. The degree of this
lunation remains as a sensitive point throughout the life. primary directions
A symbolic timing system used to investigate future events where planets
are moved ahead to the exact aspects made to other planets or angles based
on the measure of right Ascension as the amount of time it takes for one
degree to pass across the Midheaven. profection
See annual profections. progressions
A symbolic timing procedure of directions used in both traditional and
modern astrology. In secondary progressions, the positions of the planets
and nodes are moved forward from birth at the rate of one day for one year
and then compared to the natal positions of the planets and angles. In
tertiary progressions, planets and nodes are moved forward at the rate of
one day for one month, and then compared to the natal positions of the
planets and angles. progressed lunation cycle
The cycle of the progressed Moon relative to that of the progressed Sun,
which has a period of approximately 30 years. reception
A relationship between two planets in which a planet that occupies a sign it
does not rule is received by the planet that is the ruler (or domicile lord) of
that sign. For example, Mercury in Scorpio is received by Mars, the
traditional ruler of Scorpio. Also see mutual reception. rejoicing conditions
Conditions that increase the happiness of a planet. When a planet occupies
the house of its joy, it takes delight in the matters of that house. There are
also several rejoicing conditions according to sect status that contribute to
more favorable planetary outcomes: a planet being located in the preferred
hemisphere (diurnal hemisphere for diurnal planets and nocturnal
hemisphere for nocturnal planets), occupying the preferred sign (diurnal
signs for diurnal planets and nocturnal signs for nocturnal planets), and a
planet's rising relative to the Sun (diurnal planets rising before the Sun and
nocturnal planets rising after the Sun). relocated return A solar, lunar, or planetary return chart in which the latitude and longitude
coordinates of the geographical location at the time of the return are used
to calculate the chart instead of the coordinates of the birth location. retrograde motion/retrogression
A planet's apparent backward motion along the zodiacal path as seen in the
sky. Since retrograde planets move extremely slowly, this was seen by
traditional astrologers as a weakening of a planet's energy and hence its
significations. rising sign
See Ascendant. Sabian symbol
Symbolic images given to each of the 360 degrees of the zodiac. While
there is a tradition of planetary rulers for each single degree, the current
Sabian symbols originated through psychic insight in 1925, and have been
interpreted by Marc Edmond Jones, Dane Rudhyar, Lynda Hill, and others. secondary progression
See progressions. sect
A division of planets into two separate groups or factions in traditional
astrology. The diurnal sect includes the Sun, Jupiter, and Saturn; the
nocturnal sect includes the Moon, Venus, and Mars. Mercury can belong to
either sect, depending on whether it rises before or after the Sun. Planets
that belong to the favored sect are more likely to act on behalf of the
individual's best interests. The Greek term is hairesis. sidereal zodiac
A zodiac based on the fixed stars of the zodiacal constellations. significator
A planet's association with certain people, things, and events. General
significators are associated with fixed topics; particular significators are
associated with the topics of the house a planet rules and can vary from
one chart to another. For example, Mercury is a general significator of
students, books, and business transactions in every chart, as well the
particular significator of the topics associated with whatever houses are
occupied by the signs Gemini and Virgo. Solar Return
A chart cast every year around the birthday, when the Sun returns to its
natal position that provides a view of the coming year. In traditional
astrology, the term Solar Revolution is sometimes used instead. solar-arc directions
A symbolic timing procedure used in traditional and modern astrology in
which all the planets are advanced at the same rate as the Sun's motion,
where one day is equated to one year. solar-phase cycle
Depicts the cycle of a planet relative to the Sun and the critical points in
that cycle in terms of a planet's visibility, heliacal rising and setting, speed,
and direction of motion. Also called the synodic cycle. south node
See descending node. station
The stationary position of a planet that lasts for several days as it changes
from direct to retrograde or retrograde to direct motion. succedent house The second, fifth, eighth, and eleventh houses. Traditional astrology holds
that planets have moderate strength when located in the succedent houses.
In Greek, a succedent house is called an epanaphora. synastry
The comparison of the charts of two or more people or events to assess
compatibility and outcome. synodic cycle
See solar-phase cycle. tertiary progression
See progressions. time lord
The planet that governs the affairs of the life for a certain period of time,
as established by various time-lord procedures. Whatever the planet
represents in the natal chart, for better or worse, is more likely to eventuate
when it is a time lord. transit
A timing system that looks at the current zodiacal positions of the planets
relative to the natal chart. trigon/triplicity
A category of zodiacal signs based on triangular relationships. Known as
triplicities in Medieval astrology, they were originally associated with the
winds from the four cardinal directions rather than the four elements of
fire, earth, air, and water. The trigons are composed of the signs Aries,
Leo, and Sagittarius; Taurus, Virgo, and Capricorn; Gemini, Libra, and
Aquarius; Cancer, Scorpio, and Pisces. In traditional astrology, trigons
provide another system of rulerships for planets in which each trigon has a diurnal lord, a nocturnal lord, and a participating lord. There are some
variants in the assignment of planetary rulers to trigon groupings. tropical zodiac
A seasonal zodiac based on the Sun's apparent path north and south of the
equator, as demarcated by the equinoxes and solstices, which define the
first degrees of the signs Aries, Cancer, Libra, and Capricorn. under the Sun's beams (USB)
A planet within a standardized distance of 15 degrees either before or after
the Sun. In this position, the planet is obscured by the Sun's glare and said
to be “under the Sun's beams.” In traditional astrology, this was considered
to weaken the planet's significations unless the planet was “in its chariot”
—in its own domicile, exaltation, or bound. This is similar to the Medieval
term “combustion.” void-of-course
A modern term generally used in connection with the Moon. The Moon is
said to be void-of-course during the interval between its last aspect in a
sign until it enters the next sign. The Hellenistic definition extends this
period to the Moon making no applying aspect to a planet for a day and a
night, which is 13 degrees; some authors specify 30 degrees. In the
traditional definition, the range of the Moon's application extends across
sign boundaries, and is a much rarer condition than the modern
specification. Whole Sign house system
The house system of choice in Hellenistic and early Arabic astrology, in
which signs are co-incident with houses. Each house contains all 30
degrees of one and only one sign. zodiacal releasing
A time-lord system generated by a sequence of signs and their planetary
rulers that is based on the Lot of Fortune as describing matters connected with the body and material affairs and the Lot of Spirit as describing
matters connected with profession. ABOUT THE AUTHOR
DEMETRA GEORGE, M.A. Classics, received the 2002 Regulus Award for
Theory and Understanding. A practitioner of astrology for more than
thirty-five years specializing in archetypal mythology and ancient
astrology, she has authored numerous books and articles, including
Astrology For Yourself, Asteroid Goddesses, and Mysteries of the Dark
Moon. She lives in Oregon, lectures internationally, and leads pilgrimages
to the sacred sites in the Mediterranean and India with Ancient Oracle
Tours. As director of Thema: Foundations in Astrology—An Integrated
Program of Studies, she mentors private students in Hellenistic astrology,
modern chart delineation, and asteroids. She has taught at Kepler College
and the University of Oregon.
Contact the author for information about individual and small group
instruction, mentoring, and feedback in mastering the program set forth in
Astrology and the Authentic Self, as well as other courses in astrological
studies. She can be reached at dgeorge@orednet.org.
Please visit:
www.demetra-george.com from Your gateway to knowledge and culture. Accessible for everyone. z-library.se singlelogin.re go-to-zlibrary.se O cial Telegram channel Z-Access ffi https://wikipedia.org/wiki/Z-Library single-login.ru