__ .LAN LfiO‘S A5TROLOG1CAL MANUAüS. o Sol '
^ - , rjr‘"£, / CV' \ ^ -':L >«r# / / Áries ^LAL m
HtC^7
: : ; ., Júpiter —í W\\ yd-f2/V77
: Urano a, .. ^
V,>0^âs< Júpiter $V
‘■f?/
■ •
. s*i« . 'wmmmmm ÉÉÍ MEDI CAL Hl 'Mrfmmmkí
mWm
ytmzWÍÍ mm .* '>.-- • WÊ$ÊM
- ■•;->! .■ ;-m-” r. i SShE’ !-* -1' t ■ ■■: ■ ■■: '
-- -«MEsá AH INTRODUCTÍON TO THE STUDY OF ASTRQ10GY
IK RELATiOH TO PHYSICAL HEALTH
:. • • : :-:• 'M &£íy>> ASTROLOGY
Thl word liter.dly tneans a knowludge of íhe stars, a
discoursc concerning the stars, or the Science of lhe stars.
Asler, star; fogos, reason.
...
,
, .
Aslrology is uot ouly a Science, it is a plulosoptiy and to
some a religion. It lias many braachcs and may be studied
utider seven of these lo advantage.
(t) Astro-Meteorologv, the study of the influence of the
heavenly bodies upon weather ehanges, storms ano
earthquakes,
*
(2) Mündase Astrology, also called National, State» or Civic
Aslrology* which studies lhe influence of New Mooos,
Eclipses, Ingressei, Planeiary Conjuuetions and GomcU
upon the late of nations, countries and peoples.
(3) Horary Astrology, lhe answering of questions and the
solving of doubts arising in the miod upon any subject
from a study of a map of the heavens for the moment
when the question is asked.
b
( Júpiter ) Genethliacal or Natal Astrology, the Science of the
infiuence of the heavenly bodies upon lhe individual man»
based upon his horoscope of birlh.
(5) Mbdical Astrology, the relation of planetary influence to
bodily heahh and diseáse,
(6) Esoteric Astrology, the more religious and phUosophical
side of the subject, generally stadied now-a-days in lhe
iight of the law oí Karma and the evolulion of the soul
through reincarnalion,
(7) Occult Astrology deals with the higher mysteries and with
the bearing of Astrology upon practical occultism.
Astrology is the Science tfaat investígates the aclion and
reaction constantly going on between the celestial bodies and
the rest of manifested nature, including man, and reveals the
laws under which Íbis takes place* Its antiquity is such as to
place it among the very earliest records of human learning,
It was for long ages a secret science in tbe East, and m its
final eirpression remains so to this d ay» Alas Lko's Astrolocical Manuals. IX. Medicai Astrology
B¥ HEINRICH DÀATH “ AH is ihrough consteílación
Whereof that some man hath Üie wele,
And some meo havc diseses fele."
Gowen
SECOND EDITÍQN PRICE ONE SHILLING NET Londoní
L. N. Fowler & Co.
7i IMPERIAL ÁRCADE, LU DG ATE CÍRCUS, E.G
igi4 TABLE OF CONTENTS. PAGE Introductory ix CHAP. L
IL
HL
IV,
V. Basic Elements
Anatomical Sign-rulership
...
...
...
Planetary Powers and Principies
Biodynamic Action of Flanets
How the Planeis CrystalUse m Grganic and Inorganic
Life ...
VI, Tonicity. Atonicity» and Ferversion
VII, Zodiaco-Planelary Synopsis of Typical Diseases
VIIL The Sixth and Eighth Houses
IX. The Tríplicities and QuadrupHcities
X, Planetary Sympathy and Antip&thy
XI. Gauging Planetary Strenglh in the Specifie Horoscope
XII. Application
XIII. Examples
XIV. Indications of Short Life Júpiter r4
23
29 3»
40 47 51 57 Lua 76
82
9S Example Hqrgscqpe, p. 7S.
Tablks and DiAGKAUã*—Sigits of the Zatliae, p. ücíí. í Kidneys and Bladder,
p. to; Sun, p, 23 ; Moont Mercury, Píjihí. Uranus, p. 24 ; Man, Satura„
26;
Planetary Quattties, pp* 30 to 37, ateo 39; Effict 0/ Man and Sntnrn* pp, í*3. <H :
Aspects. p. Có; Planetary and Çlimactcnc Pcrióds, p, to6. London ;
Wombn's Prínting Societv, Ltp.,
Brjck St., Piccadilly. INTRODUCTORY*
The morbid dísorganisation of process and function
m the body, known as disease, provides a constant
problem that must ever loom large on the mental
horizon of mankind. Yet although disease is always
more or less definitely associated with certaín physiologícal departures from the normal, its real significance
is rarely or never wholly understood. And still less is
the fact appreciated that specific forms of pathological
derangement co-exist with equally distinctive types of
cbaracter and temperament.
^
It is only when an explauation is souglit in the stars
that the true State of affairs is revealed.
Medicai
Science, setting oui originally with a knowledge of
stellar rule and depending for the most part, in the hrst
ínstance, on an understandíng of stellar laws, has, with
the Progressive materialism of the ages, gradually ceased
to take interest in the matter, until in our day even the
very tradition seems to have been lost.1 The ancient
Egyptians, however, had their astro-medícal Science in
Jatromathematics; and in more recent times Paracelsus
termed that branch of knowledge which deals with
disorders of the human organism as produced by
celestial agency, medicina adepta■
It may be admitted that much and perbaps valuable
astrological Jore has been lost during these past ages, so
that at the present time what reniains is but a mere
fragment of the whole, Nevertheless, of late years redis- 1 Practically the sole remai ning relic is now the Symbol I|#
originally
an invocation to the planet Jupittr, X ÍNTRODUCTORY covery has gone on apace and methods are becomíng
more sure and dependabJe. Moreover, tf it be desirable
to know in advance—years, if necessary—the time when
some disease will grow active, its true nature, and the
probability of its proving fatal or the reversa, recourse to
astrology beeomes an imperativa necessity,
The position taken by rnodern science in its
hypotheses of the consíitution of matter to-day is far
more conipatibJe with astrológica! practice than heretofore, A few years ago the speculations of the boldest
thinker were called to a halt at the atom, but now even
this line of demarcation is long overpassed and we are
face to face with the faseinating features presented by
the (appareotly indefinite) further divisibility of the
atom into yet more minute and component particles—
the iont corpitsciCj electrott*l These little bodies, which
charge the atom with negative electricity, and are in
some sense the animating intelligence of matter as the
mind or sou! is of sentient creatures, will in the future
help us to a closer perception and realisation of stellar
laws- Astrology, after all, is not such an occult subject
as many suppose* It should be regarded as the higher
physics and chemistry,*
Its claims will have to be
considered and its qucesita met along those lines ; and
any day may see us in possession of the key of the law
which until the present has been withheld. 1 Indeed' there are not wantf& Vênus those who contcnd for the
probability of the atom being a complete solar System in miniature
—or even a cosmos* Mercúrio See Mr G. E. SutdiflVs interesting series of ar lides on the
roondationa of Physical Astrology ” in Modem Astrofoêy, in
which it is shown that the fundamental tenets of astrological
traditton are deducible as mero corollaries of the latest developments
of the electron theory. INTRODUCTORY xj The writer has already dealt ín Astro Physiology and
Pathology somewhat exbaustively with the theoretical
aspects of the matter, and in this manual, therefore, he
proposes to offer only a practical outline ; and, since
there is not room for a full exhibition of evidence, if he
frequently appears arbitrary and dogmatic it must be
pnt down to that cause alone. The book is, of course,
primarily intended for tbose who are already more or
less acquainted with astrological procedure,1 as an aid
to the comprehension of a difficult and involved branch
of their study. 1 Those to whom the whole subject is new will find the elementary
details they need in the Introductory Manual of the present series,
entitJed What do tve mton by Astrofogy ? xii TADLE OF THE ZODIACAL SIGNS THE SIGNS OF THE ZODIAC. Northern opposite to Spring F.) (A. c. *f) Libra E ) (W./. —) Scorpio 7m 8. 3. n Gemini ( Júpiter - m. A.) (F, m. + ) Sagittarius/ Mercúrio ' Júpiter . © Câncer (— f. W.) (E. c. —) Capricom vy 10- 5. Sl Leo {- Saturno / F.) (A./. + ) Aquarius zs ii 6. np Virgo (- m. E.) (W. m. —} Fisces M 12, F. j Fiery E-, Earthy A.T Airy W., Watery c f cardinal /., fixed positive íH., mutable
- negative i( 2t 5-JntclUctual Trinity 7, Júpiter , 5, 8=Maternal io, ir, i2 = Sr r v íng Trinity Winter Summtr (+ c. 2. d Taurus (— /. A uttimn i* t Aries Southern S, Vênus = Rfproductive Trinity
Trinity Parts of ihf Body ruhd hy thc Signs.
T Aries
d Tavrus
D Gemini head
neck and thrqat
ar ms and lungs Libra
loins and kidnevs
\l\ Scorpia
GE N ER ATI VE SYSTEM
/ Sagittarius tklghs 05 Cílflfíí^
tfL Leo *
WR Virgo stomach
HEART
BOWELS V3 Capricom
zs Aquarius Urano Pisces knees
legs and ankles
FE ET Fiery
Signs
Earthy
Airy
,,
IVatery „ vitality
bokes and flesh
BREATH
blood Cardinal Signs
Fixtd
1t
Mntable „ head
TRÜNK
limbs CHAPTER L
Basic Elements,
The basis of all our investigations lies in the circle of
tbe zodiac and the planetary bodies:
T Aries Netuno Taurus
O Gemini as Câncer
Sl Leo
n Virgo ^ Libra
m Srorpio
l Sagittarius W Capricorn
s A^uarius
m Pisces These are sub-divided into:
(íí) Cardinal : T
ttFixed : w Jimss*
Cominon : o itr / *
(ft} Fiery : r Si / ■ Earthy : tf m >3 , Airy : n ^ =. Watery : ©ni Saturno The planeta are Symbolised thus :
Sun
Moon
Mercury 0
D
? Venus
Mars
Júpiter ¥
é
U Satum
Uranus
Neptnne •?
itf
V Primarily there is an analogy, a sympathy, a communication, an adelphixis between each zodiacaJ dívisíon
and some definite zone of the body.
The location of
these is broadly but closely defined.
The ehild in the
vvomb is an epitome of the zodiacal duodenary.
At
birth the impressions of the celestial divisions are made,
Hereafter it comprises within the flesh all the attributes
of such divisions, and becomes an exponent of them.
This zodiac, the macrocosmos, is concentrated in the
microcosmos of humanity, Through the knowledge that
such con-association exists, astrology is able to relate the
efl^cts of the one in terms of lhe other, or vice versa ; to
deduce laws and make presumptions; akhougb these
latter need find no place in the scheme when so many
weíl-proven facts are ready to hand.
i 2 ME DICA L ASTROLOGY The areas of the body mentioned are, ia brief, circumscribed thus: Aries, the head ; TAURUS, the neck and
throat; Gemini, the arms and lungs; CÂNCER, the
chest cavity and breasts; Leo, the heart and’ back;
VíRGO, the abdômen and umbilical region ; Libra, the
kidneys and lumbar region; ScORPio, the genitais;
Sagittarius, the hips and thighs; Capricorn, the
knees; Aquarius, the calves and ankles ; PlSCES the
feet and toes.
It will be noticed that the rulership of these zones
follows the sign-progression of the zodiac.
If the joints
of the body were sufficiently flexible to allow the feet to
be bent round until they touched the head, the analogy
'vou^
perfect. Or, on the other hand, if we suppose
the zodiac as somethíng we might snip across at one of
the divisions and flatten out, it wouíd imitate its actual
form in the human organism.
The head in eacli case
is the commencernent of the series, and the feet the
conclusion. In the Kalapumsha, or Grand Man of the
Universe, these are Aries and Pisces, and, of course,
they immediately follow one another because of the'
circular arrangement.
The planetary bodies travei through the signs of the
zodiac, and by the changes and disturbances they there
produce, institute sympathetic changes and disturbances
m the human equivalent.
Each planet, too, is intimately espoused with some division or divisions of our
zodiac, arguing a natural affinity between them. Thus,
THE Sun is in accord with Leo, THE Moon with
Câncer, Mercury with Gemini and Virgo, VE\’us with
Taurus and Libra, Ma rs with Aries and Scorpio,
JuriTER with Sagittarius, Saturn with Capricorn!
Uranus with Aquarius, and Neptune with Pisces ;
these being the respective swakshetras orsheaths of the
planets named. But they also have specific attributes. BASIC ELEMENTS 3 Those which concern us for the moment may be detailed
in tha following nianner :
0 Vital
? Lymphatic
Tj Chioníc d Nutritive
Inflamonatory
l£l Spasmodic $ Neural
Plethoric
Comatic Athough in the foregoing \ve ha ve little more than
the alphabet of Medical Astrologv, it will appear at
onee how some words may be formed therefrom, and
perhaps even a little phrase.
For tf we postuiate an example, say Ma rs in Aries» we
may readily deduce this mueb of the person ín whose
horoscope it occurs: Highly exciíable temperament;
ovcr-activity of brain ; liability to brain fever. Or let
us suppose Uranus in Câncer, then cramp in sfomach
would be a judgment requiring a few moments" decision.
Cognísant of the presence of Mercury in Aries we may
diagnose facial neuralgia; of Venus in Àquarius,
varicose vetns.
And so on,
That diagnosis is not buílt upon a piau which promises tobe soeasy and straightforward mu st be admitted
right here, and will be demonstrated in the ensuing
pages, but this need deter no one from pursuing the
subject i ti a niethodical and impartíal manner. CHAPTER Gêmeos . Anatomical Sígn-Ruleeship,
I. Aries. I. THIS sign represents the head, and will always act
and react upon that portion of the anatomy. It is
a rough division only, inasmueh as the brain, skull
and face are equally etnbraced in the riUership. It
ty pi fies energy, the thrusting forth of mental or bodily
activity through actual excessof life force ; restlessness,
changeability. Its nature is hot and dry, sterile and
inflammatory.
The Principal Bonés dominated by this sign are those
of the cranium and face. The nasal bones, however,
are under the subsidtary rale of Scorpío.
TIte MusçTes include the fron tales, occipitais, attolens
and deprimens articular um, zygomaticus, temporal is,
buccinator, etc.
The Arteries.—Temporal, and internai carotids.
Ve ins — Cephal i c.
Morbid Action shows in epilepsy, headaches, various
kinds of eruptive maladies affecting the head and face,
alopecia, phrenitis, vertigo, neuralgia, cerebral congestíon,
encephalitis.
IL Taurus, Gêmeos . This sign ty pi fies support, connection, endumnee.
The portíons of the anatomy eomprised under its
government are the neck, tliroat, ears and pharynx, Júpiter A NATO MIC AL SIGN-ttüLERSHlP 5 mcluding the eustachian tubas, uvula, tonsils, upper
part of cesophagus, palate, thyroid gland, parotids and
vocal cords. The Taiirian zone commences behind at
the termination of the occipital portion of the cranium,
and in front under the lower maxillary. The cerebeilum
and base of brain are under Taurian rule,
The Principal Bonés dominated by th is sign are those
of the cervical vertebrae.
Muscles.—Sternohyoid, mastuid, trapézios, sternomastoids, cesopliagams, stylophaxiiigaeus, spíenms and conplexus, longos, scalenus, biventres, cervícís, spinales
cervicis.
Ârieriest*— Externai carotids and basilar artery*
Veins,—Occipitais, jugulars, veins of thyroid gland,
Morbid Action showsin diphtheria, sore-throat, goitre,
wens, quinsy, croop, glandular swellings in neck,
bronchocele, apoplexy, suffocation, angina gangrena,
scrofula, laryngitis, polypus, abscess, strangulation,
III. Geminl III, Tbis sign represents íiexibility, dispersai, sensation,
subtility and commonication,
It tinis comes to be
assoeíated with the hands, tbe nerves and the lungs
(including the trachea and bronchi).
Gernini people
are subject to nervous types of disease in very great
measure,
The externa! rulership commences at the
shoulders and embraces the wholeof the arrns and hands,
from the ciavicie to the phalanges of the fingers, It is
probable thatsome snb-ruleover lhese parts exístswhich
at present is not very well understood, The oxygenatjon of the blood is a prominent function of the third
sign,
Both the thymus gland and tbe capillaries are also
associated with Gernini, 6 MEDICAL ASTROLOGY Principal Bones,—'Clavicle, scapula, humerus, radius,
nina, carpa! and metacarpal bonés, upper ribs.
Muscles.—Deltotd^bicepSjSiipinaLor radii, subclavianst
tríceps, serratus anticus raínor, pectoralis, palniaris.
Arteries. — Subclavians, brachial, right and left
bronchials, intercostals and radiais, uínars.
Veins.—Pulmonary, basilíc, subclavians, azygos, veins
of thymus and mediastinum.
Morbni Action.-— Bronehitis, pulmonary consumption,
nervous diseases, pneumonia, pleurisy, fractures of
arms.
IV. Câncer. IV. The influence of tbis sign isof a nurturing, fructifying
character. It is moist in quality, receptive, transforming, concealing, and metamorphic, but with little real
vitality. The stomach and the process of chymification
are the chief organ and function of the fourth division of
the zodíac. The peristaltic motion of the stomach is
governed by Câncer, and the antí*peristaltic by the
opposite sign, Capricorn.
It was for th is reason
{akhough it may be presumed they did not know), the
ancient astrologers laid it down as an axiom that
medicine was not to be taken when the Moon occupied
this latter section of the duodenary. Nausea and
vomiting are very generally associated with Capricorn.
Câncer holds sway o ver the whole chest cavity in a
general sense, the breasts, axilla?, epigastric region,
lacteals, thoracic duct, pancreas, and to some extern
over the womb.
Principal Bonés*—Sternum, ensiform cartilage, part
of ribs.
A J uscl es.—D i aph r ag ra, i n terços tais.
Arteries.—Axillary, diaphragmatic, posterior media*
stines and cesophagian arleries. AN ATO MIC AL SIGN-RULERSHIP 7 Veins. — Diaphragmatic,
gastric, gastro epipioic,
mammary.
Morbid Action.— Digestive ailments, gastric catarrh,
dropsy, coughs, câncer, cardialgia, eructations, dipsomania, cachexia, chlorosís.
V. Leo, V* Leo represents the heart of the physical orgamsm, It
ís sígnificant of vital power, ardency, interchange and
generation. Sol et homo generant hominem, for this is
the solar stgn, and equivaient to tne fifth hoose of nativity,
whích latter ís concerned with ofFspring, The spinal
column with its marrow and nerves ís also under the
rule of this sign. The sphere of Leo ís thus a vital»
extensive and deep-seated one,
Principal Bonés,—Dorsal vertebrae.
Muscles.—Longissimus and latissimus dorsi, trans*
versalis, interspinalis,
Arteries, — Aorta, anterior and posterior coronary
arteries,
Veins.—Vena cavse, coronaries.
Morbid Action,—Heart diseaseof varlous forms,palpitation, syncope, íevers, spinal meningitis, locomotor
ataxy, aneurism, angina pectoris.
VI. Virgo. VL This, the second of the common signs, is nervous and
rather barren m quality, It is associated with the
bowels, and cbiefly with the duodenum, jejunum and
ileum, for Virgo ís concerned with chylification just as
Câncer is with chymification. Absorption and assinhiation, seíection and utihsation are the Virgo lunctions. 3 ME DICA L ASTRO LOGY The preparadon and absorption of the chyle is often
much interfered with in persons belonging \o this sign,
or having one of the lummaries afflicted therein. It is
greatly affinitised with hygiene, diet and sanitatíon*
Other parts of the body under this governnient are the
mesentery, peritoneum, spleen and sympathetic ncrvous
System,
Musctes.—Obliqmis, transversal is of abdômen, rectus
pyramidalis, diaphragm (with Câncer).
Artenes, Gastric, superior and inferior mesenteries,
Vcins.—Portal, hepatics, umbilical, intestinal.
Morhiâ Actíon.—Colic, dysentry, diarrhoea, enteric
fe\er, cholera, ailectioiis of the intestinal digestion,
enteralgia (neuralgta of tntesiine), peritonitis» constipation.
VIL Libra, VIL Tkis, the third cardinal sígn, reprêsents equipoise,
distulation, sublimation and hhration,
The parts
goyemed are the lumbar region in general, and the
kidneys in chieL The Greek word for reín or lcidney
(nephros) seems to ha ve been derived from a Hebrew
\ erb meaning fo shake out or spread abroad as rain,
Fhe kidneys shake out or distil the urine from the
papillae mto the renal pélvis. The old alcbemísts would
represent asubhmed substance byappending the Libran
Symbol, so : $ ^ sttblimed mercury. The sign ^ by
itself implied sublimare to sublime.
Principal Bonés
Lumbar vertebrae.
Mu seles. Quadrati lumborum, sacrolum bares, etc.
Arteries- Suprarenal, renal, lumbar,
Veins.—Renal, lumbar.
MorbidAction,—Nephritis, Brightfs disease, neuralgia
0 kidneys, suppression of urine, spuríous ischuria, etc. ANATOMICAL SIGN-RULERSHIP VIII. SCORPIO. ij VIII. Scorpio represents procreation, readaptation, and is
concerned in both the reproductive and destructive pro¬
cesses of Ufe, It therefore exercises special dominion
o ver the generatíve organs. The principal parts under
the care of Scorpio are the pélvis of kidney, bladder,
uretersj urethra, excretory vessels of testicle, Cowper^
glands, prostate, the iliac regions or groins, the gall,
rectum, sigmoid flexure (probably wholeof colon), mesacolon and meso-rectum.
Scorpio diseases frequently
ímplicate the back, heart or throat. Castration (itl)
afíects the voice (b), The parotid glands (S) wíll
often be affected synonymously with certain diseases of
Scorpio, such as buboes*
A chronic exanthematous
sore-throat, diseased nasal fossse, etc* (), commonly
accompany syphilis (lll),
We must carefully distinguish between the parts
ruled by Libra and those by Scorpio. An apparent
Libran disorder may be actually due to Scorpioníc
intiuence* For instance, suppression of urine and retention of urine are different things: the former is a true
Libran complaint, occurring when the kidneys for some
reason or other do not secrete the urine ; the latter is
Scorpioníc, the urine being duly secreted by the kidneys,
but retaíned for some reason in the bladder.
The
author has found the disposition of mlership in the
allied parts of Libra and Scorpio to be as in the
diagrammatic representai ton given in Fíg. 1, on p. 10.
This will show why gravei or stone ín the kidney wíll
be signified by Scorpio ratber thau Libra, since it is in
the pélvis of kidney tliat the stone is forined, a part
whích belongs to Scorpio government.
Principal Bonés.—Tuberosity of ischium, brim of
pélvis, symphysis púbis. 10 MEDICAL ÀSTRÜLOGY A A Fie», i.
A, A, thekídneys. The shaded portion represents themedullary
and cortical substance. This is toe part mled by Libra.
The white section is the sinus or pélvis, dominated by Scorpio.
The remavning organs shown are C, Ct lhe ureíers, B the bladder,
and D the urethra, all under Scorpio, too. ANATOMICÀL SIGN-RULERSHIP 11 MuseUs*—Creraasters, sphincter and levatores ani,
erectores penis and clitoridis, sphincter of bladder.
Arteries.—Internai iliac,
Veins.'—Spermatic, mesenleric, colic, liEemorrhoidah
Morbid Acíion. — Gravei, stone, ruptures, fistulas,
piles, priaptsm, scurvy, gonorrhcea, leucorrluea, cata*
menial disorders, vagmitís, uretritis, syphillis, injuries
to spermatic cord, groin, etc.
IX. Sagittarius. IX. Sagittarius represents extension of sensatory facuities
fay means of transference froni place to place. Gemini,
in comparison, only reaches out with the hands, and has
a relatively Jimited sphere of action and sensation* The
ninth sign is closely identified with the locomotor
muâcles of the bips and thigbs. Eeing one of the
common signs it possesses some rule o ver the lungs
and nerves.
A remarkable feature of Sagittarius ís
special activity in the production of gun-shot wounds,
and Falis írom, or injuries through, horses.
Prtítcipal Boncs—Ilium, fêmur, coccygeal and sacra!
bones.
Museles, — Iliopsoas, iliaeus, pectinaeus, sartorius,
rectus, quadriceps ex tensor» glutaeus rauscles (formíng
the buttocks).
Arteries.—Externai iliae, femoral, sacral
Veins.—Vena sacra, iliacs.
Morbid Action,—Scíatica, enteric, rheumatism coxalgta» dislocations of hip-joint, gout.
X. CapriCORK. X. Capricorn signifies limitation, induration, nucleolation, servitude, and husbanding of resource. Its nature 12 MEDI CAL ASTROLOGY is cold, dry and barren. Just as Câncer governs in a
general way internai mueous surfaces, so Capricorn
does tbe outer and com parati vely dry epidermis. The
joints are also under th3 dominion of this sign, and
particuJarfy those of the knees.
Principal Bonés,—Fatella.
Muscles*—'Patellar ligament, popliteus, etc.
Arteries.—Part ext. ili&c, popliteal.
Veins.-—Popliteal, ext. saphenous.
Morbid Action,—Skin diseases, articular rheumatism,
gout, hysteria, dislocation of head of tíbia, urticaria,
ímpetigo, pruri tus, eczema, leprosy, sy no vi tis.
XI. Aquarius. XL The last of lhe hxed signs regulates the elimination
from the body of carbonic acid gas and its producls;
has considerable influence over the blood and its círciL
lation, especíally where morbid changes are concerned,
blood-poisoning, incompleta oxygenation, etc.; and
governs the lower leg, cal ves and ankles.
Principal Bonés,—Tibia and fibula, inner and outer
ankles.
Muscles.—Tibialis anticus, peronasus tertius, ‘tendo
Achillis»’ gastroenemíus, soleiis.
Ar l cries,—Tibia).
Veim*— Internai saphenous.
Morbid Aclion,—Sprained and broken ankles, heart
dropsy, anemia, swollen ankles, cramp, heart weakness,
spasmodic and nervous diseases, blood poisoning,
caisson disease.
XII. Pisces. XIL Pisces is a humid, lymphatic, plastic, torpid and
cold-blooded sign, having a peculiar relaxing and soften- ANATÔMICAL SIGN-RULERSHIP 13 ing actíon upon the iíssues, and produdng much phlegm
and mucus. It aflfects the lungs, many consumptives
being bom when the Sun occupies ihis sign. Those
having the Moon posited in Písees iisually find colds
and chilis inclined tofly to the lungs. The feet and toes
are under the govermnent of this division of the zodiac,
The matrix and secrets are also embraced, but more
particolarly where sypbilitic contagion is involved.
Principal Bonés*—Tarsus, metatarsus and phalanges.
MuscleS'—Short extensor of toes, short flexor ditto,
ab dueto rs of great and little toes, short flexor great toe,
accessory flexors toes,
Arteries.—Internai and externai plantars, tarsal and
metatarsal.
Vci/ís,—Gf the feet*
Morbid Action, — Mucous discharges, gonorrhoea,
gout, bunions, deformities of feet and toes, colds and
colic taken through feet, dropsy, softeníng of glandular
tíssue, alcoholism, defluxíon of humours, CHAPTER III. Planetàry Powers and Principles.
AltHOUGH we have made another step forward it has
not brought a solution oí our difficulties. The list of
disorders in the foregoing ehapter is merely in the
nature of an inferential zonal arrangement. Ne ver the*
less it is a trutkful representation ; but because the
inceptive agencies which create morbid disturbance are
of various degrees of power and efTect, we must look to
other factors to aid us in the analysis* For it is quite
evident that an inflammatory and congestive type of
disease may attack one and the same organ at different
times; that a nervous condition might be equally
possible as a plethoric, and still our list wonld not assist
the diagnosis. The requisite data are fornished by
the planetary bodies, and as it is of the greatest import¬
ante rightly to understand exactly how they operate,
and what they accomplish, it will be necessary to devote
the next few pages to an interpretation of their influenee
from a point of view especial Jy related to our present
study.
First, let us consider the Sun, “the Leader, Chief
and Governor of the other lights, the mind of the world,
and the organising principie," as Cicero writes in his
Sottmium Scipionis. This represents the great vitalising
force throughout nature, it rules the fifth sign Leo,
which is concerned with the birth of things. Its qualities are therefore vivifying and supporting*
In the
extreme form a hypenemic diathesis will be indicated. PLANETARY PÜWERS AND PRINCIPLES 15 Hot, dry, constmetive, muscular, life-giving, mueh
depends upon its position and condition in the horoscope,
and in greaí measure we look to this luminary to pro
vide us with the stmctural, hereditary and vital physiological history, The character oí its impressions on the
organism partakes of the ardent, feverish, inflammatory
and cardiac.
Indeed, the heart is directíy under the
govemment of Leo and the Sun. just what the latter
is to the solar System, the heart is to the body. It is
cor coeli and sol corpons. The íess afflicted Sol may
happen to be in a chart at birth, the greater the vitality,
the more magnificent the recuperative powers, the
larger certamty of warding off disease and attainíng length
of years. It is the lebensgetst, correspoods to the Hindu
Jiva% to the Monadt to the theosophic Pmna, and to the
Àrchceits or Sfitritus Vitce of Paracelsus.
It may be objected that all thís is merely Symbolical,
and that while most people would readily admit the
life-giving powers of the Sun under the guise of heat
and light, yet as a dírect agency over the actual life no
such rule could be concede d.
Let it be stated here once for all that we
ARE NOT DEALING WITH SYMBOLS BUT ÀCTIVITIES,
ARE NOT INSTITUTING METAPHORICAL ALLUSIONS BUT
COMMENTING UPON URGENT FORCES, QUITE CAPABLE
OF PRACTICAL DEMONSTRATION, THE CLUES TO WHICH
WILL APPEAR AS WE CONTINUE OUR INVESTIGATIONS, The SUN then, who in Sanskrit is Dwadasatma, the
twelve-souled one (alluding to the twelve sígns of the
zodiac), Grahapathi, Lord of the Planets, and Bharta
Amara Joytisham, Lord of all the Devatas, or good
forces, is the essential factor in our conscíous life.
Its
energy is but poorly represented by electrieity, because
this at best is a refíection through Uranus.
Sol is the 16 MEDICAL A STROLOGV sou! of physical being, containing in itseif every form
of manifestation of pbenomena ; the represeníative of
unseen force, aod the dírecting and motive centre of the
uni verse.
lt is satwa gutia, vital energy, caliâutn
innatumí vital heat. Complex in the quality of its rays,
it specialises through the circling planets by reflection
and refractton. And just as the whole spectrum of
colours is concealed in white, so the rays of the planets
are combined in the solar orb. The attnbutes comprised
are therefore observed to be the interchange and renewal
of force, the conservation of matter, circulation.
The
Sun in the
Solar system : concerns itseif with the radiation of force
and lhe indratvittg to its sphere of worn*Otít residues,
SiMFLE Animal OR Vegetable Cell : with the nucleus*
Hum AN Frame : with the heart, blooá-circulation, vitaiity.
World of Humanity : withcirculation&f money ; commerce.
Beyond th is the greater luminary is comieeted with
lhe eyes. Chaksu (Eyes) was a synonyjn for the Sun
ajnong the ~5anskrit writers. With the Hindus it is
karma sakshi, the great witness who sees all actions.
/ Both luminaries in fact sway certain diseases and
malformations of the ** Windows of the soul," but the
Sun is chiefly concerned with the graver structural
defects, and the Moon with the lachrymal apparatus
and such defective powers of adaptation as myopia,
presbyopia, etc.
The Moon is the médium of relationship, the conveyor and distributor, and because of its brisk passage
through the círcle of the zodiac it rapidly takes up
magnetic force from the other bodies as aspects are
forme d and dissolved, and as quickly lets go, thus
producing change, and acting as an expulsive, alterative PLANETARY POWER5 AND PTUNC1PLES 17 and eleansing agency. It is the múmia evestrum of
Pamcelsus. The lunar person is ever a rover, restless,
variable, mobile, inconstant Our satellite» then, becomes chemically convertive, mtegrative, secretmg,
metamorphic and assim i lati ve in actíon*
It is the
receiver and preparer, and is therefore intimately allied
to the stomach, uterus and hreasts, and so of peculíarly
powerful import in a woman^ nativíty. As Leo and
the Sun are ídentified vvith the masculine, electríc,
positive or active, so Câncer and the Moon are with the
femínine, magnetic, negative or passive. The one is
vital heat, the other radical moísture ; the one thesperm,
the other the matrix of natnre, Serous and niucous
surfaces are dominated by Luna, too; also the
lymphatics and lacteals,
Taken in the abstract the luminaries together are
0 Spirit and D Matter, One is the reality—noumenal,
essential, eternally existent; the other illusion, tnáyâ,
transitory experience, organic decay. From themrésult
two series of planetary expressíon : a solar and a lunar :
the former always claniouring for deliverance from the
latter, whích implies bondage to matter, thraldom of
flesh, fate.
The Moon then may figuratively be regarded as a
sort of alembic in whiçb the processes of íernientation
and decomposition are carried on. Those substances
under lunar sway are extremely liable to fermentation
and putrefaction: cabbage, fimgi, etc., for example ;
these grow with astonishing celerity (mostly by níght),
have mucli consístency but littíe vitality or staoiina,
and ferment and putrefy with the utmost rapidity,
They may be accounted the lymphattc temperanient of
the vegetable world,
Luna has a special rule o ver the stomach and alimen*
tary canal, the brain substance, the breasts, lymphatic
B 18 MEDI CAL A5TROLOGY and lacteal systems, and the lachrymal apparatus ; also
a general one over the fiuids of the body,
MERCURY, the spiritns of Paracelsus, is some wh a t of
a Protean artist» takíng various for ms according to the
manner in whiçh il is aspected. This body is a conneetor and medi ator, a transi ator and reflector, a
distribotor and co-ordinator, The speeialised Mercurian
function is in connection with the nerves, Geroini,
whose lord Mercury is, indicates this trait. For since
this sign and its associated house hold sway in the
world over means of transit and communicatíon, i*e,f
rail, road, telegraph, correspondence, etc., so in the
physical body these are represented by the ramifications
of nerve tissue, ínsignihcant as the body of the planet
appears, yet its influence is of the most important
character from a physiological standpoint.
And although movement and muscular force are denoted by
Mars, the excitement is evidently due to nerve force,
On the motor nerves depends not only the nutrítion of
muscle, but also the aetual controh The intensified
form of muscular contraction termed spasm is directly
the resuít of the nervous System, and dominated by the
octave of Mercury—'Uranus. Under Mercury we find
the nervous System, mental faculties, breath, hands and
tongue.
Together, the Moon and Mercury govem the brain
substance and function; and thelr affllction in any
scBeme of nativity is a powerful argunientof unbalanced
mentaUty, amounting to aetual madness íf the malefies
are dominant It is perhaps one of the easiest conditions to detect in a horoscope, and one of the questions
most readily yielding a solution.
VENUS, the adech and AdanVs Essence of Paracelsus,
is of a warm, moist and relaxing quality, soothing, FLANETARY POVVERS AND FRINCIPLES 19 fertile, niitritive and nurturíog*
But its evil aspects
and conassociations with otber bodies have power to
affect the organism adversei Netuno . Jt will produce general
relaxation, loss of stimulus, the emission of vital fluids,
etc. The planet holds dominion over the venous systetn.
the kidneys, throat, and in women the ovaries, Its
tendency, too, is in the direction of glandular swellings
and malacostic action.
Mars, the “ planete bataillous," the Hindu Rudhira
(blood red), Lohitanga (ruddy complexioned), Bhumipaira {son of the earth), comes next in order, He ís
“the red sphere terrible to the earth" {Gicero), the
Hor Tos (brmsing planet) of the Egyptians, and the
representative of animal strength and eourage. Tension,
heat, emptive action are assodated with this body« It
is the proceleusmatic, augmenting and exciting agency,
the great pathognomic symptom being inflam matioQ.
The house and sign occupied by Mars are always centres
of energy, activity and uugmentation, and th tis become
bighly important in every respect. Mars representa
focussed heat in_cont.radistinction to ~3istríbuted (®)f
His speeific government is over the muscular tíssues,
the generative organs, the bile, nose and blood fibrin. JüPITER, “ that spíendid star, salutary and fortunate
to the human race," as Cicero terms it, is, like Vemis, a
supportmg and aphetic agent Its attributes are the
conservation, elaboration and preservation of life,
the ensurance of temperateness and fruitfulness. Some '
years ago a writer in the Journal of the Statistical
Society demonstrated a connection between the fluctua*
tions of the annual death-rate and the position of Júpiter
in its orbit, This agrees well with the astrological
sígnificance of the planet.
But when afflicting, this
stella erra as can exert a powerful influence by creating 20 MEDICAL ASTROLOGY morbid changes in the blood, and causing aecumulations
either in the fluids themselves, or in the form of general
plethora or localísed swellings, adi pose sarcoma, and
under certain circumstances even the pancréatic,
mammary, lardaceous and solanoid forms of câncer.
To it are specially referable those disorders whtch are
charaeterised by excess of sugar or albumen in the
urine, The..great .centre of Jupiterian activity is the
li ver (stõrage of glycogeti), but the arterial system is
marfcedly domínated also, just as the venous is by Vénus,
Similarly the deposition of fat is regulated to a considerable extent by the Jovian star, Fat excites the liver to
increased secretíon,
Frequently it acts through its
oppositional sign Gemíni, tipon the lungs, as the latter
will operate through Sagittarius : the excessive use, as a
drug of Tuercury ( £ ) causing torpidity of the liver (lí),
The formation of waste substances from used-up tissues,
is exemplihed by the production of urea, and uric acid,
both of which are forme d in the liver; but the deposition
thereof is due to Saturn,
Saturn, the corpus Umbus of Paracelsus, is by
nature dry, frigid and intropulsive, The action of this
planet lies in the contraction, hardening, suppression,
obstruction and atropby of tissue and functíon, It is the
negation of Mars,
The tendency exhibited is to the
retention, crystallisation and deposition of such sub¬
stances as would otberwise pass out of the body by the
emunctories, etc, When this crystallisation and retention
take place we ha ve urinary sand, gravei, stone, among
other things; or in another manner we get the tophi or
chalk stones of gout, thickening and deformity of local
parts, atrophy of the muscles of afTected limbs as in
rheumatoid arthritis, thickening of the synovialmembrane,
etc. Because the principie of Saturn is Hmitation, its PLANETARY PGWERS AND PRINCIPLES 21 rule comprises the skin and bony framework, as these
li mil and define the corporatnre. The articuiations, and
especial ly the knees, are controiled, wliile the government
also extends to ihe^amUlory organs and the spleen.
Saturn predisposes to chronie and deep-seated diseases.
Maladies oí the spinaí cord are a frequent outcome when
lhe planet rnuch oppresses the solar orb.
Of URANUS and Neptune less can be sai d, although
various sidelights will be thrown tipon their action in
subsequent pages.
Tliey are responsíble for the more
obscure morbid manifestations, and such as are not
anienable to strict classificatíon, The following tabulation will serve to give a slight
general idea of planetary types of disease:
Sun»—Fevers, heart, spinal and dorsal troubles, bilious
afleetions, eye disorders—choroidilís, ophthahma, glaucoma
keralitis, cataract, iritis, etc.—swoonings,
MoOK.—Dropsy, ch lorosis, çedema, vom Hing, Saturno ydrocephal us,
scrofula, lumours and abscesses, defects of eyesight—myopia,
etc. (in Aries, conjmictivitis), feminine eomplabts, colds,
catarrhs, mucous, serons and menstrual discharges and
effusions, fluidic derangernents, lunacy, stomachic affectbns,
vertigo, epilepsy, periodic complalnts.
MekcURV.—-Nervoua dísorders, mental and respiratory
complalnts, impediments in speech, headaches, worry.
Venüs.—Neck and Ihroat complaints, enlarged tonsils,
cysts, relaxed throat, sweilmgs, diphüieria, renal disorders,
sypbilid, maladies arismg from free living, laxity of muscular
tissne.
Màrs,—Inflammation and acute fevers, operations, wounds,
burns, nasal, muscnlar and genital disorders, híeniorrhage,
fistula, rupture of blood vessels, infectíous and contagious
diseases in general.
Júpiter.—Disorders of blood» Hver deraugements, plethoric
state of body or part, dental maladies, pleurisy, boilâ
abscesses. 22 MEDICA L ASTROLOGV Saturn.—Obstinate and chronic complamts, rheumatisro,
gmit, bronchitis, paralysis, deafness, hypoehoíidria, cutaneous
dtsorders, ague, palsy, colds, consumption, gangrene, mortifi*
cation, atrophy, caries, spinal maladies.
Uranüs.—Sp^smodic disorders, rupturcs, stnctures, clonic
spasm, cramp, shock, biccough, subsultus.
Nepture.—Obscure diseases having a psychic rather than
a physical opgin ; bnt also corna, lethargy, catapbora, canis,
eatalepsy, poisoníng obsesskm, somnambuHsm, ecstasy,
Deaths and ill habits of body through the use of dnigs—
opium, toorpbia, etc. Stupor, typhomania, eoufusion of ideas,
somooleucy, hallücutation, trance.
Briedy, the salient pathognumic signs attendant upon
rnorbid planetary aetion (aceording as it is píits or
mi nus) are, in the case of the
Sun,—Augmented vitalíty, byperaemia.
Mqon.—Chi oro sis, profluvial effusions, cederna, diluted
blood, transuding of fltiids through walls of vessels, vomiting,
infiltraíion of serutn, defective red partides of blood,
Mercüby — Refiex aetion, sympatbetie irritation, neurasIhenia, mental excítement, hurried respiratlon, restlessness,
trembling, deliriam.
Venus.—Laxity of fibre, inechanical displacement, cbanges
in the process of textural nutrition, eystie and hoHow-tumoiir
formation, escape of vital fluids, asthenic plethora.
Mars,—Inflammation, augmented sensibility and mobility,
excitalion, distension, expansion, determination of blood to
pari.
Júpiter.—DisordereddrculatioOjChangesin blood particles,
plethoric distension, fatty degeneration, vascular fulness,
leading to increased beating of carotid arteries, hzemorrhage,
epistaxis, apoplexy, sugar in blood, stbenic plethora, etc*
Saturn.—Depression, dinsinished secretion, contraction of
tissue, deposits, ioduration, thickening of cuticle, cell-walls,
etc., diminished sensibility, iowered vitalíty,
Uranus,—Spasm, stricture, paroxysm, contortion, intus* susception, rupture, perverled nutrition.
Neptune,—Catalepsy, coma, analgesia. CHAPTER IV.
Biodynamic Action of Planets. The biodynamic action of the several planets may in
some rneasure be expressed díagrammatically, “ When
the Concealed of the Concealed wished to reveal
Himself,1* says the Sohar, “ He first rnade a single
point; the Infinite was entirely kndwn, and diífused no
light beyond this luminous point, and violentíy broke
througb into Vision/1 Lei ussuppose primordial matter,
the Phcenician moot, to be represented by this dot or
point, ultimately animated by the wvtvpa into the
surrounding circle—the Symbol we use for the Sun ©«
If we take this Symbol to represent the sphere of each
planetary force in turn we shall realise the folio wing
conceptions.
The solar action is expansíve, expanding and drcumferential.
From the potential vigour concealed
in the dot the force radiates concentrically in everwidening ctreles of iniluence*
We can exhibit this
diagrammatically as in Fig, 2, HG, 2- n 24 MEDICAL ASTROLOGY 1 Fjg. 3, Flíi Júpiter - It is expressive of life, infinity, continuity and enlargement
of experience,
The lunar action is of the fiuidic, ebb and dow order»
mutational, periodic. It is the tide-swing as it exists
tbroughout all nature, alfbougb for the most part only
traceable arnong the fluids.
Let us accord it graphic
presentation as shown in Fig. 3,
Mercury is the tremolo, the vibrant, the unresting,
the leading note or sub-tonic of the musical seale which
demands that haven of rest, the tonic, St is nervous*
quivering, excitable, subtle, in ceaseless raotion as the
cilíated disc of a rotifer. We may picture it as in Fig. Júpiter * v BIODYNAMIC ACTION OF PLAKETS 25 Venus aflords us rotational or vortex-motion; and it
is worth noting that H^eefeel himself strongly insisted
that lhis motion existed among the molecules of the egg.
Then, too, ít presents the phenomenon of gemmation as
witnessed in many low forms of animal and vegetable
life» where reproductíon of the speeies is carried on by a
process of budding from the side of a símple cell, the
bud ultimately becoming detached and constituting in
itself an organism complete in every respect as the
parent. It wili not seem strange then to record that
Venus is specially indentified with the ovary and ovum.
The spbere of the pianefs influence extends to those
disorders attended by cysts, glandular and other swelüngs
at fixed points.
Such non-malignant growths as
acephalocysts are quite detached from the structures in
whích tbey occur, and have a power of reproductíon by
gemmation, the young beíng developed between the
layers of the parent cyst. The Venusian action may be
portrayed as in Fig. 5*
This figure illustrates the
progression of biodynamic vórtices from one end of the
cell to the other, ultimately issuing without as a separate
gemma.
After the energy comes the reaction.
This
is relaxation, and will be represented by the oval (also
the typicai egg form). Venus is a notorious* factor in
lhe relaxation of tissue.
The action of Mars is centrifugai (Mars vicissitn ad
çirçumferentiam a çentro protettdit)f from a centre
outwards ; but although there is an affinity between it
and the Sun, the martial force is not circumferential, not
a steady process of concentric expansion such as may be
exemplified by the widening rings which foliow the act
of throwmg a stone into a pond, but a violent expulsion
along the Hnes of the radii, as indicated in Fig. 6, p. 26.
It is rubefacient, brínging blood to the surface and so
reddening and inflaming. As we have gathered» it is of 26 MEDICAL ASTROLOGV an acute, positive, excessíve, inflammatory, energetic,
destructive and antagonistic quality, and is indeed one of
the mo st potent forces we ha ve to reclcon with; while
of course it wíil be understood as symptomatic of acute
fevers and inflammatory complaints, violent shocks and
injuries to the system, surgical operations and the like,
With Jupiter we shall couple in some degree Vénus,
for both are concerned with the nourishing, conserving
and aphetic processes. To thern belong the storing of
various cell substances. the reservation, filtration, selection, transformation. The particular cell-reproductive
form with Venus is that of gemmation. In jupiter the
process of eelbreproductíon by division is exhibited*
From the simple cell, by the contínued interposition of
septa and the Progressive growth of each individual cell
thus constructed, a gradual enlargement of the whole
ccenobium takes place, until ímally the rupture of the
common integument results, In the hurnan body Jupiter
gives rise to conditions of plethora and adiposíty.
Next in order comes Saturn. Here we have a force
the diametric opposite of Mars: that is to say a
centripetal one which continually draws from a circum*
ference to a centre along lines of radii— virtuie potitts BIÜDYNÀMIC ACTION OF PLANETS 27 ú circtímferentici ad ccntrinn omnia redigente.” (See
Fig- 7.)
The action is contracting, crystallising,
binding, restricting, eonsolidating, driving the blood
inwards and so producíng colds, mortifieation, etc.
What Mais allows Satum negatives.
The one is
sudden, the ottaertardy ; Mars intense, Saturn restrained,
Togetber they are as acute and chronic, heat and cold.
The two diagrams shown in Figs. 6 and 7 very well
represent their several action s.
Besides being radio-acttve Uranus exhibits eccentric,
tangential and spasmodic action. As it is the octave
expression of Mercury the vibrations will foilow along
similar Hnes, but the waves will neíther be continuous
jior rounded. (Fig. 8, p. 24.) Its proviiice lies in the
neuralgic, shock-producing, electric, spasmodic and
explosíve.
Neptune shows distínct amaeboid and nebuloid
niotions, and while having affinity with Venus as its
octave, it is more relaxing, elusíve and protean. It
rapidly changes form, (not of course the planet itself),
and mayat times appear sbapeless and amorphic. Just
as Venus is concerned with the process of cell-reproduction by gemmation, and Júpiter by simple division, so
to Neptune belongs cell-development (independently of
other cells) in a píastic fluid—the cytoblastema.
If we look back and compare the various characteristics, it will be observed that the planets can be related
in groups:
Vital ENERGY
Natural 0 Vjtal <í Fluidic, Cleansing and expülsive
Mental
Nutritive
Retentive p
ff $ Mercúrio lí V
i? fíf J NeRVE-TIKSUE BUILDIKG
tl
Fjbrous
,,
t#
Cartilaginous again ' Cellular pt O
D
ff W
D ? Netuno v
s
b The Sun will represent the constructive energy, ardency 2S MB Dl CAL ASTKOLOGY and iife-force ; The Moon mutation, especially acting
through the bodily duíds; Mercury and Uramis the
nervous System; Vénus, J upiter and Nepfcune the
transforming, conserving and storing functions; Mars
the muscular and destructive energy; Saturn the
retracting, retentive and scybalous agency. CHAPTER V. How THE PlAMETS CRYSTALLISE IN OrGANIC AND
Inorganic Life.
The Sun is not only the life-force of the uni verse it
illummates, but contains in itself all the povvers and
qualities specialised in the other planets. Each of these
latter abstracts from the fountain-head certain properties,
transmitting them in modified forms to our eartli spbere,
and, without doubt, to the remaining bodies of the solar
system.
Solam namqne coslum est ignis: reliqua
dicuntur ignita.
With the method by whicb this is brought about \ve
ha ve nothing to do here, It must sufftce that we are in
possession of the ultimate facts resulting from this
selectton, forwarding and ínterchange of stellar currents,
Âccording to Sanskrit writers Graha Shakti or planetary
energy is principally sent to the earth in the form of
Vidyut Shakti or solar energy.
Given the indices of these nine centres (© D $ ?
b W W)—the individual and typal characters of
their intluence—it is really not a difficult raatter for the
philosophic mind to follow and trace them throughout
organic and inorganic life, For we must remember that
not only ourselves but the whole of animate and inanimate nature is acted upon.
Many forms of matter
and spirít are concerned, and reaction will assume
appearances both varied and diverse, but the essential
and intrinsic traits will never be effaced.
Each planet
will have to funetion in matéria crassa in media, and
in tenuíssima, and we must be prepared to recognise
the gem by the sparkle of the facet.
Let us take Mars. The basic forms of the martial , 20 30 ME DICA L ASTROLOGY action are centrifugai, inflammatory, intensive and
poignant. fn the human orgapism it will appear and
reappear under sucli guises as muscular energy, mental
combativeness, hot-headedness, anger, insistent will and
desire, action, increase of red corpuseles, fevers, wounds,
acute diseases, etc,
Medidnally ít is the tonic, aptly
represented by the martially governe d metal iron;
temperamentally it is choleríc; atmosphencally heat
and violent storms; mineralogically iron ; in coiouring
it is red; professionally ít is the soldier, surgeon,
butcher, and worker with edged tools ; geometrically the
angle.
Gr again, Saturn. This force crystallises mineralogi¬
cally as lead, coai, rock; physiologically as bone,
tendon, cartilage; temperamentally as melancholy,
selfishness ; pathognomically as depression, gloom, devitalisation ; atmospherically as frost, snow ; in coiouring
black; geometrically the cube.
Analyses more or less extended may be made in the
folio wing manner:
SUN (o).
Qimlitips PWVSiqLOClÇAL PhYSICAL PaTHOLO&IC AL ÀBSTRACT Hot Heat-generatíve Combusiion Vital Heart Gold Feverish
Artleni
/Syncope
|
Pas- Active
| ha?morrhage | sionate Expansion Circulation fDynamic
Commeree J Siperfluoo. [Gene
nutnmeni j
iPlethora
I rmis Sigrr.—Leo
MentaL—Firrtmess, sfability, will, perseverance.
Te mf>e ra m en ta/.—Bi I i o 11 s. Typicai Drugs.—Auriim» cbamomilla, heliantbus.
Typicai Planta,—Euphxasia ofticinalís, Anagalljs arvensis,
Sangim&rba officinalís, Ligusticum Scoticum* Angélica
sylvestris, Echium vulgare, Potentilla tormentilla, Hypericum
androssemum, Colchicum autumnale, Drosera rotundifolia, HOW THE FLANETS CRYSTALLISE 31 jumperus coinnumis, Centaurea nigra, Chélidonium majus,
Petasites vulgaris, Fraxínus excelsior, Sinapis nigra and albaT
Caleadula oflicinâlis,
Rosmarinus ofRcinalis, Anthemis
nobílis.
Thcrapentic Propertics.—Sudorific, eardiac, anticachectic.
Principie of. —Gonstructiveness.
Metais atuí Minerais.—Gold, earbnnele, byacinth, chrysolite.
MOON
Ql-autifs Moí si
SecreHng
Receptive
Generaiing
Mutational Phvsiological (X£ Saturno ) (Sedative i
Atonidty Relaxing
Pacific Phvmcal 1 Tears, muta-v í Water | Pluídic
1 tion of fluids, [ J Dehiges * ■ secreüons - Emotional
etc
) 1 Dilution 1 1 Dropsy
Easdy
Womb (recep-j | Sèed]
Flaccid
tion of semen) j.
1 earth j j
Stomach
j
[ Transuda-1 Instinctive
Impregnation Huimis
| tion
|
i
ílnspirstjon | fTides Fer. j Criticai
.epochs
J Animal in- N meatation
1 Sequêntial
J Disso lution
I
(Movement ) Inertia Motber Apathy j and sleep- \ Night
(inducing j Sign*—Câncer
Mental.—Timorous, imaginative.
Tempera m entaL—Ly m ph atic,
Typictil Drugs.—Argentam, colocyntb, pelUtory, agariciis.
7ypicai 'Plants<—Many of tbe Salices, Brassicíc, Lemn»,
Saxifrages and Lactucas, OpbioglosstJrn vnlgatum, Stellaria
media, Salvia verbenaca, Nasturtium ofiicinale, Gardamine
pratensts, Peplis portula, Utdctilaria vulgaris, Cheirantbus
clieiri, Cucumis sativus, Anthemis pyretbrum, Portulãea
oleraceas, Cucurbito pepo, Mercurialis annua, Àcanthus
mollis, Convolvulus cceruleu?» Geranium triste,
Therapeuftc PropertUs.—Einétic, altera tive, attenuant.
Principie of.—Change, harmonyf receptivity. 31 ME DICA L ASTRÔLDGY Metals and minerais.—Silver, moonstcme, aluminium, selenite,
marcassite, emerald*
MERCURY (ç).
Quauties Connectiv-e Subtle Relative Physjologjgal PBYStCAL Pathological Abstiíact í Motion | f Neurasthenic } SensaNerves
"lYolition j 1 Restiess ness í tion
jj Entellij Bron chiai
J Respiratíon [
Asthmatic
gent
Air
J
{Breath
Stertürous
r Compre\ breathmg J\ hensive
Keflected ex- 1 IrritaTouch
Texture
j
citement J
bílity Sigas,—Geminj n . Virgo nj£*
Ti mpc ra men ta l, — N er vou s. Mental.—Subtle, intelligeot, iogenious, witty, persuasiva,
restiess.
Typical Drugs,—Merctiry, petroselimim, avena, caiomd,
podophyllm, Typical Plants,—Scabíosa succisa, Apium graveolens,
Artemísia abrotamim, Pet rosei iniim saüvum, Pastinaca
saüva, Parietaria offidnalis, Saturem hortensis, Origanum
vulgare, Cynoglossum oflicinale, Lavandula vera, Convallaria
majalis, Glycerrhiza glabra and eebinata, Anethum graveolens,
Imila helenium, Fceniculum vulgare, Teucrium scorodonia,
Gorylus avellana, Mamibium vulgare, Daucus carota,
Calamintha oflicinalis, Cartun earui, Nephrodium filix mas*
Therapeutic Propcrtics,—Nervine, alterative, cephalic*
Principie of.—Reason*
Meta l.'— M erc ury,
VENUS ( Mercúrio ).
Quauties Physiological Relaxiíig Renal papillse Redundant Res venerei Phvsical Pathological Ãhstract j Filtra liou
| 1“”|E^
l Exosmosis
| Excessive
ISwelhogs, j
-1 atmcspberic
cysts
I Fecund
{moisuire
Erotic
J Signs.—Taurns , Libra t=t*
MoitaL~-ArUstic, convivtal, amorous. HOW THE PLANETS CRVSTALLISE 33 Temperamental.—Lymphatic.
Typtcal Drugs*—Coprum, pnl&atilla.
Typicai Plants.—Bunium flexuosum, Achijlea ptarmica,
Verbena offieinalis, Saponaria officinalis, Oxalis acetosella,
Sonchus arvensis, Me um athamanticum, Dipsacus sylvestris,
Sanicula Europasa, Prunella vulgaris, Senecio Jacobsea’
Secale cereale, Prímula veris, Ligustrum vulgare, Obione
portujacoides, Planlago majorT Nepeta cataria, Mentha
pulegium, Galiiun eruciatum, Leonurus cardíaca, Sibihorpia
Europasa, Althsea officinalis, Litbospermum arvense, Nepeta
glecfaoma, Alnus glutinosa, Rubus truticosus, Ajuga reptans,
Arctium lappa, Prunus cerasus, Tussilago farfara, Eellis
perennis, Eryngitim maritimum, Matncaria Parthenium,
Scrophularia nodosa and aquatica*
Therapeuiic properties,—Demulcent, antinepbritlc, emetic
diuretic.
Principie 0/.—Sex, loves desire, j\fr/fiA“Copper.
MARS (#}.
Qualities Phvsiolooical Phvsical f Action through
Enlarging { Muscular the demauds of
n ° | binewy
suste naacetevot Jution, etc. Heating Caloric J Trap-rocks
{Lombusnon Turbulent Head /Fulminaliou
)
j Explosives/War l
[ Volcaaíc action J Erurgising Irou A BSTRACT Pa T HO LOGIC AL JHypertro- \
I Excesf si ve pbied
Incremen' titious
Emptive
Febrile
Infla mm aCholeric
tory
fViolent
Temperature increaslng
Exãltattan
Ereihism
Frenzied
Overbraced
Contentonic fibres
tional
Hysterical
Toüíc Forceful Signs.—Áries T, Scorpio >n.
Tempera men ta
C holer ic.
C 34 ME DICA L ASTROLOGY Mental. — Courageous, qtiarrelsome,
rasb, energetic,
impetuous, an tagonistic.
Typicat Drugs.—Preparations of iron and steel, tonies,
arsenic, cinchona, nux vamica, arnica, bryonia, sarsaparilla,
sulphur, strychnine, cantbarides,
Typica! Picints — Artemísia absinthmm, Lapidum Iberis and
latifolium, Ajuga Chain sepítys, Cochlearia armoracia, Kheum
rhaponticum and undulatum, Juniperus sabina, Centaurea
calcipitra, Cratíegus oxyacantha, Gratiola offieinalis, Humulus
lupulus, Rubia tiuctorum, Bryonia dioica", Peucedanmn
Ostmthíum, Arum maculatum, Urtica urens, dioíca and
pilulifera, Allium sativum, Carduus benedictus, Raminculus
aquatilis, Geraninm Rôbertianmn,t and columblnum, various
specíes o! Linmn, Sisymbrium Sophia, Ulex Europseus,
Gentiana lutea, Vaicríana offieinalis, Berberis vnlgaris,
Ocymuni basilicum.
fherapcutic Properties.—Stimulailt, tonic, rufoefacient,
escharotic, caustic, vesicant, aphrodisiac, resolvent.
Principie of,—Energy, anger, expansion, inflammatioo.
Metals and minerais.— Iron, sulphur, trap-rock, cinnabar.
JÚPITER ().
Qualitíes Physiqlogical Molecular
nutrition
Supportmg Vis couscr\ vatrix
Sanguine
Aggregative Physical j HyJro-carbonates
■
Sugar Pathological f Vascular
fulness \ Alteration
f Blood en- ) í Fluviatile )
. red partil richment f \ overflowing f
cies blood
Apoplecdc
(Cell-de\ r Thunder
\ ■ Sthenic
j velopment j \ clouds
f
plethora Abstract - Generosíty Buoyancy j Gluttony * ExternaVIy the fresh root of B, dioíca is particularly useíul in
cataplasms as a resolvent and discutient against hard and cedeniatous tumours, blood congestion from externai injuries, íschiadic
and otber rheumatic pains, etc,
f " Our host ;.t Carlisle told us that he used to be troubled with
the stone, and thebest remedy he «ver had experienced to give him
ease was the decoction of Gemoium Robertianum.”—Ra/s Remains,
published by Scott, 1760. HOW THE PLANETS CEYSTALLISE 35 Sign.—Sagittarius
MtnlãL —Tcmperate, just.
TcmpíramentaL— Sangiii ne.
Ty picai Drugs.—Stanmim, eupatonum, mentha, gioseng,
iridin,
Ty picai Plants.—Ftiniitoria. officmalis, Salvia officmalis,
Crithmum maritimum, Cochkaria officicalis and anglica,
Hyssopns officmalis, Setnpervivum tectorum, Lichen caoinus
and islandícus, Marcham ia polymorpha, Acer campestre,
Seolopendriinn vulgare, Dianthus caryapbylltis, Ficus cariea,
MelUotus officinalisT Ciehorium endivia, Tríticurn repens,
Lapsaua coinmiiuís, Taraxacum densleonis, Tanacetum
vulgare, Potentilla reptans, Castaoea vesca, Chxropbyllum
satmnn, Borago ofhciualis, Vaceinium rayrtillus, Betonica
officinalis, Beta vulgaris, Agrimonia eupatoria, Asparagus
officinalis, Smyrmum olusatrum, Saccharum officinanmi,
Asclepias Netuno ince toxicam, Puimonana officinaiis, Melissa
officmalis, Ge um urbammi.
Thcrapcutic
Proptrius. — Alexipharmic,
aatispasmodic,
analeptic, balsa mie, anthelmintic, emollieut.
Principie o/,—Preservation.
Metal.—Tio,
SATURN ( Saturno ).
QuALITIKS PiIYSIOLOOÍCAL Cold Low calorie PHVSICAt Ice PaTHOLOGICAL AbSTRACT circulai ion
Congestion
Adynamic Drossof me-1
tais, Ash, l Calces. Car- bon, Soot, !
Cloaca
,
Tubercle
| Bernes
1 Tendons
1 Ligamen S tones
Roclts, Pet¬
rifica tions
Mines Ossification )
Miserly 36 MEDICAL ASTROLOGY Qualíties PhVSIOLOGICAL / Mal nutriDepriva- ) | tíon
tive
f 1 Starved
[ condition Phvsical Bligbts
Solitudes
Desert 1 Pathological Austhact i Atrophy v
- Mortifica* l Foverty
t íion
/ Sigih—Capricorn Vy\
Temperamental*—Nervous, melancholic.
Mental.—Antip&tbetic, gloomy, stubborn, laborious, reserved.
Typicai Drttgs.—Lead, aconite, belladonna, antimooy,
saíicylate of soda, belleborus, hyoscyamus, comum, rhus
toxicodendron, verba seu m, Indian hemp, faydrocyanic acid.
Ty picai Plants*—Symphytura officinale, Taxus baccata,
Polygonatum multiflonim, Isatistinctoria* Aspleniumceterach,
Tamarix anglica, Carduus heteropbyllus, Prunus spinosa,
Polypodium Dryopteris, Populus nigra, Cydonia vulgaris»
Pyrus forminalis, Capsella b ursa-pastoris, Illecebrum verticillatum, Mespilus germanica, Verbascum thapsus, A tropa
belladonna, Hyoscyamus niger, Cannabis saliva, Helleborus
niger, Equisetuni vulgaris, Gêmeos ex aquÜolium, Hedera helix,
Centaurea ntgra, A£gopodium podagraria, Coniiun maculatum,
Lolmm perenne, Ulmus campestris, Plautago psyUium, Plutão .
coronopus, Ornithopus perpuâillus, Pagus aylvatica, Hordeum
specíes, Amarantbus RHtnm.
Therapeutk Propertks. — Sryptic, sedative, refrigerant,
astringent, antipblogístic, antipyretic» febrifuge.
Principie o/.—Limitatioti, crystalüsalion, eudurance.
Metals and minerais,— Lead, grapbite, piumbago, lower
strata.
URANUS (m).
Quamties Vibram Physiological Aura Phvsical f Radio-activity r Ter*
*
resirial magnetism
l Ideoelectric Sign,—Aqnarius sz.
Me w/a/.—Ec cen t ri c, uti c o n vent i ôn al.
T empe ra m en ta L— N er v ou s. Pathological Abstract \
Telepathic
* Intui tive HOW THE PLÀNETS CRYSTALLISE 37 Typical Drugs.—Ether, croton oil; also compressed air and
gases.
TherapâiUic Propcrties.—Electric, vibrational. Principie of.—Intuition,
Metals and mm traís-—Uranium, pitch-blende, thorium,
radiam, polonium, actinium, manite, chalcolite, lodestone,
amber, shdlac.
NEPTUNE (f).
QlAUTIES Sedusive FISIOLÓGICA!. PhVSICAL íVermiform I
Odic force
i appeodix (?) J P4THOLOGICAL âflSTRACT Analgesia
Atrophy of
process thro"
Semi-spiricessation of
tual, occuk
fimction, lack
■ Supra-ma¬
of cohesion of f
terial, Illaparis,
queadve
tion of íunctional eraergy
Clairvoyance i Sign.—Pisces X*
Temperamental.—Lymphatic.
MentaL^Psychic, * inspirational, imagiaative, romantic.
(R. L. Stevenson was a typical Neptunian, lhat planet in his
horoscope being conjoined with the Mooti tu Pisces.)
Typical Drugs,—Opiates, narcotics, papa ver. ctc.
Thirapeutic Propcrties.—Analgesic, anodyne, suggestive,
bypnotic, soporific.
Principie of,—Involiition.
Metals and minerais.—Potassium, and sucb substances as meersebaum, ambergns, etc. CHÀPTER VI. Tonicity, AtonicitYj and Perversiqn, A NORMAL horoscope would be the outcome of a due
and proper balance between the planets—that is* sueh
a balance as would not admit the preponderance of one
o ver another.
Each would exercise íts activity to the
detriment of nane of the rest But th is is never the
case. There is always some fighting going om Each
planetary.body may be satd to function in three different
ways. It may through position and aspect be urged
above the normal: this is its íonic síde, It may be
suppressed below : atonic action, Or it may suffer, in a
sense, an unnatural change—-perversion. In other words,
in an individual scheme of natívity there may be too
much of some particular planefs energy, an msufficiency,
or a permutation,
Suppose, for instance, a man has a weak Mars. This
will show as a want of spirity lack of muscular power,
lack of controí over muscles, flacfcídity, involuntary
evacuatíons. If Mars is too much in evidence, fevers,
agues, haeniorrhage ensue, inflammatory action is set
up, vãrioloid disorders occur and a high temperature
exists. If its nature is partiy overlaid and intermixed
wíth certain other bodies, but partícularly Uranus,
Saturn and Neptime, fistulas, morbid growths, fíbrous
degeneration, hyémorrhoids, priapisms, etc., are induced.
Again, the tonic action of Venus will manifest on one
side in venereal excess, the atonic in sterility : the
38 ' T0NIC1TY, ATONICITY, AND PERVERSIGN 39 perverted in moral folly» And similarly with the
remaining bodies.
But apart from this, each planet is intrinsically tonic
or atonic, electric or magnetic, positive or negative,
The positive are Sun, Mars, Júpiter and Uranus. The
negative, Moon, Venus, Saturo and Neptune, Mercury
is interchangeable.
ATONIC. TONIC.
^ G Sun O
Hyperíemic Moon j
Ansemíc i
Mars £
Hypertrophied, acute, íncreraentitiouSp excessive, enlarging Saturno Saturn
Atrophied, paralytic, cachecttc*
tabefactive, reducing Netuno . Júpiter Netuno Sthenic plethora Asthenic plethora 1$ Uranus rçi Perversion, stricmre, disniption S ty Venus Neptune ? ty Atrophy oi process, dissipaUon 5 Mekcury 5
Receiver, reflector, amalgamator Now ao a tonic or negative body may ha ve its nature
partially transmuted by configuration with a tonic or
positive body. In a lesser degree a tonic body may
have some of its positive force destroyed by the
proximity of an atonic one, but eannot wholly become
subaervient to it. Each planet imparts a special
of disease to an organ, but becomes modified, changed
or disguised by reception of cross aspects from other
planets. From the combinaiion of planet, sign, aspect
and house \ve may infer structural and functional
d i sor der. CHAPER VIL
Zodiaco-Planetary Synopsis of Typical
Diseases. This synopsis is only an aid to diagnosis,
The
difficuky of framíng invaríable and universally applicable
laws consists in the numberless combinations of planets
and signs which are possible* Some disorders will be
found repeated under two or more heads for reasons
easily com prebende d, But the list as it is here presented
will afford clues; the working out of combinations, and
the deduction of probable results must remaín a matter
of individual judgmenL There are also proximate and
ultimate causes and effects, which consideration opens
tip a wide field for speculation and investigation. In
these astrology is at present defective ; that is to say,
we regard the results of disease more than the cansa
pratgumena, the proximate seat rather than the efficient
exciting facton
Diseases, in the main, ought to be
distinguished by their causes, not their effects* For
instance in such cases as síone in the bladder, caused by
the deposition of uríc acid, the condition of the blood
ought to Qccupy first attention ; similarly in diabetes:
in this way we should ha ve our observation drawn to
Júpiter before Scorpio or Libra. Then too, it must be
remembered that the graver diseases will be consequent
upon the severer for ms of planetary afffiction. Not
everyone whose Mars is located in Câncer will suffer
gastritis; the intensity of the complaint will depend
40 SYNOPSIS OF TYPICAL DlSEASES +1 upon the power of aspecting bodíes, aspect configurations
and other impressions of celestial influenee. SUN IN
Aries,—Hypersemic and organic headache, apoplexy,
aphasia, cerebral meníngitis, brain fever.
T a u r us> —QiiinsyT diphtheria, nasal catarrh, polypus.
Gemini*—Scurvy, bronchitis, nervous disorders, pleurisy,
bypersemia of lungs.
Câncer.—Dyspepsía, dropsy, chest disorders.
Leo,— Heart, back, and spinal complaints, acute fevers.
Virgo,—Diarrhcea, complaints arising from inabassimiiation.
Libra,—Kidney diseases,skin emptions,
Scorpio,-—Calculus, fistula, diseases of generativo organs,
nose and throat, appendiciiis.
Sagittarius.—Sciatica, paralysis, Jung and nerve troubles,
hyperaesthesia.
Càfricgrn.—Rbeumatism, cutaneous disorders.
Aquarhjs,—Blood disorders, poor eirculation, heart dropsy,
asphyxia, poisoning from carbonic-acid gas,cardiac dilatation,
(slak-quarry miturs), caisson disease.
PisceS. — Urinary, nlerine,
pulmonary and nervous
disorders.
MGON IN
Aries,—Weak sight, eye straín, beadacbe, migraine
iusomma, catarrh, alopecia,
TaurüS,—Qtiinsy, swelltngs in throat, relaxed tbroat,
aphthous u Ice rs, eye disorders.
Gemini.—CBdema of lungs* catarrbal pneumonia, varicose
aneurism.
OANCER.“DropsÍcal tendeucy, iuclination rapidly to put on
flesb, sickness, tyrnpany, carcinoma.
Leo.—Swoonings, convulsions, beart aftections,
Vtroo.—Looseness of bowels, abdominal swclüiigs and
tumours, typhous pneumonia, hydrotborax.
LiBRA.—Various kidney disorders. 42 MEDÍCAL ASTROLOGY Scorfio.—Hydrocele, genito-urinary complaiüts, hcrnial
aneurism.
Sagittabius.— Gout, nerve disorders, ischiatic affections.
Capricorn.—Skin eruptions, synovial troubles.
AguARius»—Varicose veins* ulcers, lower extemilies, blood
poisoning, eye affections.
PiacÈs*—Alcoholism, dropsy, relaxed tissues, colds, weak
lungs, labes. MERCURY IN
Aries.— Headaches proceeding from nervous straiu, verfigo,
brain disorder, astigmatism, neuralgia, pbrenitic deliriam.
Taurus*—Hoarseness, croup, diiheu!ty ín swallowing
througb loss of nervous control, laryngismus.
Gemiki.—Goaty pains in head and arnis, bronchitis, intercostal neuralgia, asthnia, pleurisy.
Câncer.. — Indigestion, gas (stomach)^ síomaeh eramps»
dipsomania, flatuleuce, neuroses of stomach,
LEO.—Convulsiotis, swoonings, pains in back. paipitation of
heart, neuralgia of heart
ViRGo.—BorborigmuSj colic, diarrboea, nervous debility,
hiülonncMcnt*
Libra.—Uriiiary obstructions, nepbritic colic, neuralgia of
kidoeys,
Scorfio.—-Pains and disorders of generativo organs, dysxneiiorrhcea, diseascs of pudic nerves, neuralgia of neck of
matrix and bladder.
Sagittakiüs.—Pains ín region of hips and tbighs, sciaíica,
paralysis, nervousness.
Capricorn.—Kheumatisin, gout, pruritus, psoriasis. Aqüarius.—Laroeness in ankles, disordered drculation.
Pisces. — Cramp in feet,
coldness of extremities,
forgetfulness, phthisis, ailmeuts proceeding from worry.
VENUS IN
Aries.—Cold in head, lachrymal humours, musci volantes,
eczema bead and face, toxaemic headacbe.
Taurus.—Swellings in neck, uiumps, quinsy; relaxed tbroat, SYNOPSIS OF TYPICAL DISEÁSES 43 salivation, bronchocelc, exoplithalmic goitre, thrush, raniila,
retr oph aryn ge al abscess, headacbe in amative iract. Gemini.'—Wbitlow, ganglian, papilloma.
Câncer.—Vomitiug, dilatation of stomach, nausea, cyst
and oedenoma of breasts,
Leü*—Hearf affecdons, díseases of spinal marrow, aortic
discase,
Virgo.—Irregular bowel action, diarrhcea.
Libra.'—Kidney disorders, high coloured urine, ursmia.
Scorpio.—Yenereal diseases, weakness of bladder, womb
disorders, maladies connected with vaginal passa ge, ovaries,
etc», Jeucorrhcea, prolapso, varicocele.
Sagittarius.—Gout and ttimours in hips and Ihighs.
Capkicorn.—Nausea, bursitis (of Urano ««), gout in knees
{gonagra), slrin diseases,
Aqüarips.—Blood disorders, varicose veios, swellings in
ankle,
PiscEs.“Gout (podagra), bmiions, chilblains, tendernçss of
ícet, gonorrlitea. MA RS IN
Aries.— Violent pains in head, ruptures of blood-vessels in
brain, extreme restlessness, blows, cuts and wounds to head
and face, insomnia, cerebral coogestion, encephaUtis, delirium,
insensate acts, nenralgia, ringworm, S. Anthonys fire, smalb
pox, porrigo. Taurüs.—Laryngitis, angina, ainygdalitjs, enlarged toomls,
diphtberia, epithèUoma, pharyngitis, tonsilitis, rhiniüâ, acne
rosacea, polypus, adeuoids, epistaxis, muscular rhcumatism
in neck, parotitis.
r
,
,
Ge mini.—Disordered nervous system, cuts, fiactuies and
wounds of anus, hauds and collar-bone, bronchitis, bilious
diarrhcea, pneumonia, inflammation of lungs, hamoptysis,
neuralgia, neuritis.
.
Câncer.—Dry cough, irritable stomach walls, Saturno ^morrhage
of stomach, gastritis, dipsomania, dyspepsia, sclurrus ot
broasts or axill*, bilious vomiting, hamatemesis.
Leo.—Hcart affections, palpitation, ancurism, hypertropliy 44 MEDICAL ASTROLOGY dilatado cordis, angina, pericarditis, endocarditis, sunstroke,
shinglês (herpts zostcr) Lua muscular rbeumatism in back.
Virgo,—Diarrhcea, dysentery, worras, infiammatiou of
bowels, entedtis, gastro-enteritis, peritonitis, cfaolera, venlral
hérnia, typhoid*
Libra.—Nephritis, pyelitis.
ScoRPtOi—Hot urine, incontinence of urine, inguinal and
scrotal liernia, híemorrhoids, venereal ulcers, particularly ín
nose, tbroat and parts ruled hy Scorpio, pains in bladder,
stone and gravei of kidney and bladder, immoderate
catamenial discharge (menorrhagia), ovaritis, soaria ti na,
diabetes, neuralgia of neck of wornb, vagiuitis, bypertrophy
of prostate, uretritis, perityphlitis (appendicitU).
Sagjttarius.—Sciatica, ulcers of hips and thighs, enteric
fever, peívic operations.
Cafricorn.—FJying gout* rheumatic fever, contusions,
sniallpox, and other varioloid diseases, urticaria, pruritus,
anthrax, psoriasis, scabies.
Aquários.—Overbeated blood, intermiüeot fever, erysipelas
of extreniities, blood poisoning,
PiscES.—Bnnions, corns, pectoral affectioos; sweating of
lower extremities,—bromidrosis, hyperidrosis,dysidrosis, etc,;
diseases arising from exessive drinking, balanitis. JÚPITER IN
Aries,-—Determination of blood to head, congestion o£
brain, giddiness.
1 aurus.—Quinsy, gout, plethora from high living, apoplexy,
coryza, epistaxis.
Gemini. — Pleurisy, blood and íung disorders, fatty
ti ansformatíon of Iiver, apoplexy of lungs.
Câncer.—Dropsy, dígestive disorders, overloaded stomacb,
dilatation of stomach.
Lko.—Fevers, apoplexy, fatty dcgeneration of hearL
palpitation.
VirGo. Consuinptive tendency, iiver affections, intestinal
maladies, abscess of Iiver, jaundice, fatty degeneratioii of SV NO PS IS OF TVPICAL DISEASES 45 Libra*'— Chaugesinblood çircu1ation,úbstnictions,pleurisy,
tmuours in kídney*
SeoRPlo*—Venereal disorders, piles, urinai and seminal
complaints, dropsy, strangury» fistula, urethral abscess, over
secretion of urates.
Sagittarius.—Pains and swellingsin hips and tbighs, gout,
rbeumatism.
Cafricúrn,—Eczema, and varioiis othcr forms of cutaneous
disorder*
Aquarius*—Lumbago, blood-poisoning, swollen ankles,
heart dropsy.
Pisces.—Hydrothorax, hydalid rysts, li ver and lung
complica tions* SÀTURM IN Aries,—Catarrb, deafness, toothache, colds and chilis,
cerebral anaemia, apathy, paralysis, rheumatic headache,
cerebral syncope.
Taurus.—Laryngeal consumption, scurvy(phlegm In tbroat,
coryza, loss of voice, suffocation, angina, gangrena, putrid
gums, diphtheria.
Gemini.—Rbeumatísm of arms, bands and shoulders,
consumption of lungs, black jaundice, dislocation of ara; and
shoulder, chronic bronchitis, nervous tremhling, fibrosis of
lungs, dyspncea.
Cànckr,—Asthrna, consumption, bruises in breast, ague,
loss of appetite, dyspepsia, nausea, chronic gastritis, ansemia,
câncer of breasts and axillse, emctations,cblorosis, dipsomania*
Leo.—Àtrophy and weak muscular action of heart, weak
back, malformed spine, syncope, jaundice, locomotor ataxy,
gout in beart,
#
. .
_
Virgo.—Abdominal phthisis, costiveness, gnping, derangements of intestinal digestion, mabnutrition, sloggish liver.
Libra.—BrighFs disease, corrupted blood, renal colicf
sterility, suppression of urine,
Scürpio.—Strangury, retention of urine, gout, fistula, palsy,
piles, gravei, stone, suppression of catamenia, caries of
cartilage of no se* 46 M E DICA L A5TROLOGY Sagittariits.—Goiit, sciatica, hip jomt disease, dislocatíon
of hip-joint. Capkicürn.—Rhcumatism {cbieflv articular), skira diseases,
knee injuries.
Aquarius*—Crarop, anemia, weak and sprained ankles,
club-foot frora contraction of lhe tendo Achillis, asthenia,
spinal curvature, caries of spine, compression and sclerosis of
spinal cord, arterial sclerosis.
PisceSé—Scrofula, ulcers of feet, goiit, consumption,
rachitis.
üRANDS
is responsible for sudden attacks of disease—eram ps. spasms,
ruptures» exptosions. electric and other shocks, exaggerated
action,
Wlien in Acues or the first house it brings acuté
neuralgic, tlartitig and shooting pains in the head ; in Geminí
spasmodic asthma; in Câncer cramp of stomach; in Leo
suspension of hearfs action; in Scorpio spasm of the
bladder; and so with other signs. NEPTUNE
has dominion oyer certain vague and obscure diseases, mostly
naving a psychie rather than a physical origin as explaitied
before. \\ hen afflicting it vvill induce the habit nf fakine:
drugs, such as narcotics. hypnotics, opiates, etc. it is also
symptomatic of poisoning. CHAPTER VIII. The Sixth and Eighth Houses.
The sixth house of the scheme has ahvays been held
to govern disease in a broad sense, and the eighth the
manner of death» This is quite true. But tbey are only
wõrth considering in that light when planetarily tenanted.
To atternpt diagnosis by taking the lords of these houses
isT fu.tile.
Wilson writes; “The cause wliy the
ascendant operates tipon the human constitution is
imknown, but experience proves it has some efíect. It
does not so clearly appear that the west angle has any
such influence, and stili less that the sixth house can be
the place from whence we can judge of diseases."
To a certain extent each of the four cadent houses of
the horoscope is indentified with disease, those portions
of the figure signifying a falíing away from a fixed or
normal point. The common signs, which are equivaJent
to these divisions, are constitutionally among the weakest of the zodiac. But we shall ignore the third and
ninth because the interpretation of diseases belonging to
these departments is outside the scope of a manual such
as the present.
The house chiefly regarded is the sixth, and the sign
Virgo* This brings home one great fact—the power of
the mind over the body, and vice versa* For the mental
ruler, Mercury, is proprietor of this sign.
The diseases
of the body act through the vital principie upoo the
mind, and on the other liand, the diseases of the mind
act through the same médium upon the body. These
are the only instances we are cognisaot of in which
47 48 MED KCAL ASTROLOGY matter and spirit meet and act upon each other; in all
other cases, so far as we knovv, matter acts only upon
matter, and spirit upon spirit"*
When the luminaries occupy this part of the geniture,
tbe vitality and stamina are reduced, chronic íll-health
and poor recuperative powers coincide,
Of course,
should tliere be malefic rays thrown to the bodíes named
the evil is so much the more intensified* In many cases
mcurable disease is signified, or structural defect. And
although congênita! defects must depend upon an epoch
prior to the actual birth, or upon some arrest of foetal
development, yet eertain agreements exist between that
which is born and tbestars at the time. The indicatíons
are not always satisfactory, but it may be mentioned
that the sixth and twelfth houses are often strongly in
evidence, by reason of one or both lights being there
conjoined with other planets. In deformities of body,
such as hunchbacks, dwarfs, etc,, especially where
attended by undeveloped or retarded mental powers,
the following positions wül frequently be observed:
íl> Taurus, Scorpio or Capricorn on ascendant;
(21 luminaries in sixth or twelfth; (3) dose association
of the malefics, Mars, Saturo, and Uranus, especially by
conjunction or opposition and in fixed signs ; ( Júpiter ) their
budies or rays in or directed upon fiftb, sixth or twelfth
houses or cusps; (5) ditto to ascendmg degree; (6)
many planets !n Vírgo and the sixth or twelfth.
A few
examples may be adduced.
Mate : 9h, p,m., August llth, ] 874, Lat, 53° N, Long.
lim. \ Áries „— Mental ly deficient; Potfs curvature of spine ;
cy anos is (arising from the partitíon between right and
left sides of heart being incomplete); distorted features ;
* Estays on Medicine.—Dr. Sharp. THE SIXTH AND EIGHTH HO USES 49 almost a Cyclops. Here \ve have no less than seven
bodies in fixed signs; the luminaries in sixth heavily
pressed by the rays from Mars, Saturn, Uranus, Venus
and Júpiter.
Mercury is injured by the proximity of
Mars and the par. dee. with Saturn. Two malefics are
conjoined in the fifth and opposed by~a third, Saturn.
Leo and Aquarius, the heart and spinal signs, are
prominent and account for the cyanosts and spinal
curvature.
Female ; August 27th, 1889, 9h. p.mVf Lat. 5G°44N.,
Long. l°50rW.'—Dwarf, hunchback, no hair or teeth,
cannot talk or be taught anything, has little or no
memory. Large moutb, coar se features, very animai*
like, Several brothers and sisters, all norma). In this
case Taurus is on the ascendant* Sun, Moon, Mercury
and Uranus occupy the sixth, the first three being in
Virgo. Mars and Saturn are conjoined in the fifth.
Female ;~Dctaber 19th, 1875, 6b, p.m., Lat. and Long.
as before,—A dwarf about four feet in heigbt, not
hunchbaek, but her mind is that of a child of seven or
eight years.
Has had an illegitimate child which is
normal m size. Taurusagain rises* The Sun, Mercury,
Venus and Júpiter are in sixth. Uranus is in the fifth
opposed by Saturn, both bodies tnrowing quartíles to
Mercury. Five planets are stationed in fixed signs.
Female : September 4th, 1880, 7b* 30m, p.m., Lat.
51°28' N., Long. O^IS1 W* — Idiot from birth, tbe
posterior portion of tbe brain never liaving been
developed. No fewer than six bodies, íncluding the
luminaries, are in the twelfth bouse of this scbeme, and
all occupy the sign Virgo.
These figures will repay study and comparison. A
whole series of strikingly similar ones migbt be given
here, but the subjectsof teratology, achondroplasia, etc.f
are entirely subsidiary ones in our present scbeme. The
D 50 MEDICAL ASTROLOGY foregoing instaoces are introduced inercly to Ulustrate
Such assoeiatíons,
howcver, as Mars conjunction or opposition Satinrn,
Satura opposition Uranus, etc., in whatever part of the
scheme, have a tendency to produce deformity, either
congênita! or acquired,
The twelfth house should be particukrly noted for
those diseases which demand isolation, or hospital or
asylum detention. Planets in the eighth will usual] Netuno pomt out the character of the death, Mars and Uranus
will indicate sudden and violent death. Saturn lingering, wasting, suftbcation, drowning, etc. But much
will depend upon the sign occupied, as we have learnt
previously.
one pbase of síxth house influence. CHÀPTER IX.
The Trifucities and Quaduuplicities.
The zodíac splits up naturally into four iripartite
divisions whtch are akin in quality or constítution, viz,,
a Fiery trígon composed of Áries, Leo and Sagittarius;
an Earthy trígon embracing Taurus, Virgo and Capricorn ; an Airy trígon, Gemini, Libra and Aquarius; and
a Waiery, Câncer, Scorpio and Fisces. They ha ve been
loosely terrned elemental, but th is is not correcl: eartb,
air, and water being of coirrse compound substances.
Together \ve may relate and consider th em somewhat as
follows:
Fire. Individual. The spiritual aspirations, Earth. PhysicaL Temporal. Air, Reíative.
Cormective.
Mutational. Terminal. Transia tive. Water. Propagative. Fiery Signs are connected with the vital heat and
spirit.
Earthy Signs with the osseous structure, the salts,
earths, minerais, concretions, etc., of the system.
Airy Signs with the gases, in tercei lular spaces, aír*
cells, arteries, veins and eapillaries.
Waíery Signs with the fluids: (©J milk, digestive
juices, ferments, such as gastric juice, ptyalin, pancreatic diastase, saliva; niedulJary juices, chyme,
albumen, etc,;
(ui) excrementitious fluids—urine,
sweat, menses; (K) mueus, pleural, peritoneal and
synovial ser li ms, intestinal mueus, etc.
51 52 MEDI CAL ÀSTROLOGY Tbese are general consideratíons; but it ntust be
understood that the particular character of a fiuid will
depeod upon the planetary government. Thus, although
the Moon dominates all fitlids, yet its real dominion is
over the neutral solution, the bland and basic humour
that constitütes a médium through which certain substances can act and react, and by which they can be
transported to various parts of the body, dissolved,
resolved and expulsed ú iieeds be* For instance, there
is milk* Here we have one of the highest fornis of
nutrimeuL First there is the watery basis (?), then
the fatty constituents (U)f the caseine and extractive
matters (O), and lastly the saits {*?). The futility of
placing a compound fiuid like this under purely lunar
rule is apparent. But when we do so we realise that
the constitutjonal fluidic quality is the point of view
from which we regard it, and not íts specialised form
as an agent or reagent.
The four celestial trigons crystallise in humanity also
as the four temperaments. The SangUIHE temperament is represented by the airy trigon and the planet
Júpiter; the Choleric or bilious by the fiery, and the
planeis Sun and Mars; the NeRYOUS by the earthy,
and the planeis Mercury, Uranus and Saturn ; and the
LymphàTIC by the aqueous, and the planets Moon,
Yenus and Neptune. And every physician knows the
type of disease likely to eventuate in each class, and
also bas some sinall ability to recognise the physieal
types of form, the physiological habit, and the mental
capacity,
One cannot easily mistake the restless,
neurasthenic, hurried, agitated and alert manner of the
ííercons temperament, its disposition to nervous disorders, etc,; nor the excited, rash, feverish nature of the
choleric, witli its bilious and inflarmuatory afTections;
nor the pallid, anaemic, languid, weak-pulsed, lethargíc THE TKIPLICIT1ES AND QUADRUFLIC1TIES 53 pituitaryf with its tendency to dropsy, its deficiency of
red corpuscles in the biood, its want of Lua 'ascular action,
tone, and the inherent dispositíon to serous diseases;
nor final! Netuno , the sanguine with its active circulation,
jovial nature, plomp body, fine complexion, cheerful
anticipation, and its haemorrhagic diathesis.
But an explanation can only be obtained from a study
of the trigons as previously outlined. The teniperament
is defined at the birth* and with it all that it implies, not
only physiologically but in every department of life*
For instance, from a vocational standpoint the tempera*
ments wiü fali into broad divisions such as below:
Sanguine.—Active, industrial. Biliom*—-Active, poli*
t ical, m ili t ary. Nervo us.—A r t i stic, t maginati ve, s t ud i ou s.
Lymphatic.—Sc íenti fic, con tem plative, emotional, plastíc.
The sanguine and bilious act, the nervous and lymphatic think and feeh
We faave yet to make one final division of the
duodenary, by which we obtain the series of three
quadrates usually denominated CARDINAL, or moveable
(r°è^V$); FiXEDor stable (b ÍIH1-); andMüTABLE,
or cotnmon (nttjcí í
The Hindu Trinity corresponds to this distribution.
Aries is the Brahtna, mover, evolver, creator, head;
then succeeds Taurus, Vishttu, the protector, something
fixed and made permanent; then Gernini, Iswara, the
destroyer, that is, change from a previous State of fixedness. We arrive next at Câncer, the second cardinal
sign and the commencenient of a new trinity. It thus
appears that all the Charã, nioving or^ Cardinal signs
are Brahmíc ; the Fixed ones (StJura) Vishnuic, and the
* The termsCardiHot, Fixaíznd Mutabie are preferred throughout
this series of mamials, partly for the sake of tmlformity and paniy
for Gther reasuns. 54 MEDICAL ASTROLOGV common or Mutable (DwiswabhaviT—dQuble+n&tureã—
Ubhaya) Iswaric,
The Cardinal signs mark the 3un’s equinoxes and
soistices, They are equivalent to the 11 angular" houses
of the scheme of nativity, 1, Júpiter , 7, and 10, and imply
prominence, power, height,
The Fixed signs are
equivalent to the succedent houses, and imply support,
conservation, solidarity. The Mutable are indentified
with the cadent houses and signify submission, mediation, mutation* Ás we recede or fali from the angles
there comes a secession from power and prominence.
And so we find tbat those people born under cardinal
signs, or having many planets therein, possess a craving
for publicity, and incline to poli ti cal and publíc offkes,
Those under fixed signs somewbat less so, having, too,
more gravity, ballast and placidity, and gravitating to
those positions where firmness, stabííity, authority, are
requisite. While those under common signs are least
desirous of prominence, or if desirous, find it difficult to
acquire the realisation of sncli ambition, love the quiet
ways, serving, acting as mediator betvveen the two
others, and generally oheying rather than commandmg*
It niust not be assumed from th is that the power and
degree of morbid action will show a falling off from
cardinal to common ; that the intensity of disease will
be associated with the moveable, and its remission with
the mutational signs, Briefiy, the necessity of considering th is particular sign arrangement lies in the fact that
a mutual influence prevails among the members of each
of these three divísions, They are Mental {cardinal).
Vital (fixed)) and Motive (mutable), The mutable or
common series of sympathetic co-ordinates is seen to
include the cliief limb signs, and the fixed the heart and
generative ones.
The temperamental trigons are so
constituted that a representativo of each quatemion is THE TRIPLieiTIES AND QUADRUPUCITIES 55 included. In the fiery trigon for example, Aries belongs
to the mental, Leo to the vital, and Sagittarius to the
motive, We ha ve to meet the efíects of th is sympathy
so frequently in the horoscopieal deduction of disease
tendencies, that we cannot do better than obtain early
an appreciation of the inter-agency,
The three great aspects of especial pathologic effect
are the conjunction (d), quartile { Quadratura ), and opposition
{8).
These are related to each other as:—the sign
itself; the immediate proxímate and ultimate positional
signs (that is the nearest sign of its own name—cardinal,
fixed or mutable— preceding and succeeding); and the
sign diametrically opposite, which also will be of the
same name, In tbis wise the four signs of any one
series all beco me implieated. n ys < Mercúrio a
In illustration suppose we take the cardinal Áries,—
íhen lhe cardinal signs on either side will be Câncer 56 MEDICAL A3TR0L0GY (succeeding), and Capricorn (preceding), while the
oppõsítional division will be Libra, They were related
to Aries (d), as dexter (b1) and sinister
) squares
(o), and opposition ( Vênus )• The four signs are thus held
in a sort of mutual bondage,
The Hindu astrologer speaks of this oppositional
aspect as a 44 full sight," because the points coneerned,
beíng 180 degrees apart, are en rega rd, the rays of two
bodies so posited falling fully on each other; the quartüe is
the “ three-quarter~sight/,::: The conjunction, of courge,
is not an aspect in reality, but a position, or as often
expressed 14 the body,”
From this relatíonship there
ensue a coanimity of parts and an interchange of forces.
It will therefore be remarked that in those cases where
cardinal sígns are welí tenanted, head, stomaeh, kidney
and skín disorders will show themseives, although
possibJy Aries contatas no planet; where fixed signs
are occupied, maladies of the heart, tfaroat, back and
generative organs will occur; and where mutable
signs, alTeetions of the respiratory system, nerves and
bowels. But while this is sot no sign loses altogether
its distinctive value. * For Ma rs, however, it is supposed to be a " full sight.“ CHÀPTER X.
Planetary Sympathy and ÀNTIPÀTHY.
ToWARDS the enudeaiion oí tbis matter we must
tuti over the fundamental properíies of the planets,
considering them frorri the vantage point of the primum
çalidutn.
Heat and cold are related as drought and moisture,
and though ít is customary to refer to them as elemental
qualíties, that is not a true definition. Each celestial
body difFers from its compeers io the commingling of
heat or cold with drought or moísture. The proportíons are disco% ered by observing the affinity shown
with sub-lunar matters, They may be expressed as
below, the plus ( + ) sign being employed to denote the
intense degree, and the minus { — ) the remiss.
+ ~ G Hot and dry
11 Hot and moist Saturno Cold and dry + p Cold ano moist
ç Cold and dry (roitvertibk by asgect)
? Warm and moist Júpiter Hot and dry Hh
+
l# Cold and dry
qj Warm and moist However, it is only fair to State that Ptolemy and
many others after him, accounted the Sun to possess
moderate warmth and dryness (perpím iroujriKi} $tpp.oTTjrro$t
etc,) ; the Moon to be moist with a little warmth
ttÀchttqi' jwríxÉt ^ÉTPllüS , Mercury indifFerent as to moist ure and drought,. sometimes
one, some times the other (í£ **rov ttótí
Çjfpaivet, wort
áe 'vypíwa) ; but yet on the whole rather dry (viro^pos) i 57 58 MEDÍ CAL ASTROLOGY Venus temperate, diífering from Júpiter ooly in this
respect: that while Júpiter inclines more to warmth
tban moisture, Venus is more ínoist th ao warm (W/r
àvTijv cxjet ívKpacriav, etc.) ; Mars, hot, dry and burning
(xaucrruror Sict TÒ wvpwStí aurov); Júpiter temperately
warm and moist fòip/xtvti*ap.a «ou 'vypaívtt, <lXXà tí> TrÀéot’
w«Xet ™ 'àtpfXòvr etc,); Saturn, cold and dry, but partaking more of the former than the latter quality (tò piv
if/vxpòv 7rÀ€oy%^et, ro Sè fyjpbv pírpaurepov)* Now heat will express itself as expansion, vitalisation ;
cold as eontraetion, crystallisation, and concretíon;
dryness as radiation, irritation ; moisture as relaxation,
mobility, plasticity. Admixtures will produce results in
accordance, For example, the coalition of Moon and
Mars will be equivalent to that of fire and waten Each
will strive to subdue the other, the outcome being
ebullítion, evaporation, sieam, conversion into an aèriform statef in the latter case; in the human organism,
effervescent mental activity, displays of angry feeling,
dispersai and dissipatíon of brain force, eruptive conditions, On the otber hand there is an aflfinity between
Mercury and Saturn, both possessing similar qualities,
although in contrary pioportions. Venus sympathtses
with Neptune for the same reason, and also with Júpiter
and the Moon,
The lunar coldness is not that of
Saturn,
It is a neutral condition, and may for ordinary
purposes be regarded as tem pera te,
Let us suppose Mars conjoinecl with some other body
and deduce the character of the resultant force in various
spheres of activity. First with Júpiter. Both have
points of agreement in being hot, but then Júpiter brings
some moisture and Mars some dryness, and the dryness
is seen by the table to be in greater degree than the
humidity. We may Ulustrate the action by likening it
to the operation of heat upon such substances as gums, PLANETARY SYMPATHY AND ANTIPATHY 59 balsams, resins, sugar and the like.
At first there is
the melting, accompanied by evaporation and ínspissation, until the whole of the moisture has been driven
off; the solid residue ultimately chars. But if Saturn
take the plaee of Júpiter we shal! represent the action
of the two by subjecting a piece of stone to the fixe. In
thís case melting does not occur; the stone íbes abroad
in a thousand particles. The saturnine cold and the
martial heat are the extremes of negative and positive*
Even if jDtherwise, their dynamic action is too mtich at
variance to reconcile one with the other. In the domain
of disease Mars with Jupiter will increase the consistency
of adipose tissue and the connecting fibre, Mars with
Saturn will produce compound fractures, rapid extremes
of temperatore, violent dispersais, etc*
The action
may be likened to contendingparties in a panic orcrush*
one striving against the other, the upshot being a
catastrophe,
The combination of two planetary bodies whose
distinguishing properties are heat—such as Sun and
Mars—will enlarge the scope of diseases in which inflammatory and febrile symptoms are impficated* Contrariwise, where the attributes are confítcting—as in
Sun and Saturn—some minimising of each other's action
will eventuate. The solar inflammatory action will be
of the chronic type. The saturnine force will tend to
the devi tal isation of the Sun’$ influence.
A pair of
planets whose nature is cold and dry—such as Mercury
and Saturn—will be responsible for nervousness and
mental sagacity; when the dry predominates o\er the
cold—as in Mercury and U ranus—rapidity of thought,
exuberance of ideas, tangential moods and methods of
expression follow. And so with others*
A typical contrast is that of Mars and Saturn, and as
these two bodies are such promíoent factors in the production of lesions and physiological derangements, a 60 ME DICA L ÀSTROLOGY further short reviaw may be made as an addition to
what has already been advanced*
just as surely as Mars enhances, Saturn depresses.
* Saturn,1’ says Cardan, “ causes long diseases, Mercury
various ones, the Moon such as return after a time, like
vertigo, epüepsy, etc,, Júpiter and Sun short diseases,
but Mars the acutest of al1,M
The two bodies here
particularised are anaretic or destructive to hfe, but in
far different ways,
They represent extreme heat,
(solar heat spedalised through Mars, and really the
more intensive, so far as we are coneerned here) ; and
extreme cold, The force of heat is the expansion or
life of matter; that of coid and gravity the eontraction
or death.
Their specific colours are red and blue
respectively.
Sensitive plants like the mimosa grow
ten or a dozen times higher under red glass than under
blue* Plants, in fact, nurtured under glass of the latter
colour are weak and stunted in growth* The melancholic man subjected to the same condi tions, feels* hís
spírits raised under the red rays, while the violent and
paroxysmic type is calmed and soothed under the blue*
lhe Mars Junatic will be violent, the Saturnine
hypochondriac*
Timídity and depression are Saturnine*
In this
manner the orb acts as a restrictor, quite the opposite
of the expansive, frank Mars, The latter does not
make philosophers but men of action and impulse.
1 imidity, or in another word Saturn, conduces to
meditation and analysis.
The temperament of the
philosopher and scientist is bathed in it as, per contra,
that of the energetic pioneer is in Mars. In the
sedentary, intellectual man there is usually a great deal
of Saturn and very little of Mars ; or to put the same thing
another way r much speculatíve hardihood but little
practical and physical courage ; wisdom, but want of PLANETARY SYMPATHY AND ANTIPATHY 61 tl snap,” mental perseverance and penetrativeness but
dread of the crowd-—agoraphobia—and díslike of
physieal activity.
In the saturnine individual the
mental consciousness is large, and takes precedence ; in
the martial the animal soul is dominant. The one has
a thin watery blood, the other a thick, rich, vital fluid,
neither couducive to meditation nor inspiration, but to
sensation and expiration. To onderstand this antithesis
and to bring the facts well horne it is only necesfiary to
compare a series of boros copes helonging to philosophers
and sdentists, with those of fighters and men of actiom
To Mars are referabíe cases of determination of blood
by the application of stimuli,
Heat will cause a flow
of blood to the surface, snufF to the nose and eyes,
spices, etc., to the salivary glands, food to lhe secernent
vessels, purgatives to those of the intestines, diuretics
to those of the kidneys. And this brings us to the
therapeutic treatment of disease by antipathetic reinedies~tbe contraria contrai is curantur principie,
In
exemplo, the typical medicinal tonic—iron— is a remedy
under Mars, something required by the blood ín cases of
want of tone, depression or flabbíness of the muscular
system. In weakjax habitstchronic disordersproceeding
from debility, cachexy, hypochondriasis, in a word
Saturnine complaints, ferrum is a stock remedy. It acts
by quickening the circulation, raising the pulse, mcreasmg
the red particles of the blood and promotmg the secretions, On the other hand antimony, a saturnine drug,
operates in reducing fevers and inflammations, that is
martial action. It is a contra-stimulant, dimimshing
the excitability of the vascular system, and so neutralising inflammatory conditions.
Again, mark what
happens upon the introduction of lead (':) (m the form
of salts) into the system. Exactly the opposite enects
ensue to the exhibition of iron (í ), constopatioo, colic, 62 ME DICA L ASTROLOGY tremors «uid resolutions of the nerves, contractious of
the limbs, paralysis, atrophy, gaut, etc., all representa*
tive saturnina disorders. But almost as a last resource
a preparation of Jead (Tuict* scttuffiitict) has been gtven
for restraining the coUiquative sweats in phthisis and
hectic fevers. Extemally sugar of lead is used as an
astrictive in collyria for inflammations of the eyes, as
principal ingredtent in imguents and liniments for
cntaneous eruptions, excoriations, ulcers, etc.; and in
lhe form of injections for restraining gonorrhceas.
Saturnine remedies are in a peculiar manner injurioiis
to the oervous System, over which Satura exercises
conslgerabLe influence. Then, too, the operation of cold
as a cause of disease by constricting the vessels of the
surface and extremities, throwing the blood inwards,
and producing internai congesíions by intropulsion is
diametrically opposed to the operations of Mars as illustrated by heat. The veins and cutis, which contract
v\ ith cold ( b ), are relaxcd wxth heat ( J ). A hamiorrhage
( J) will require a styptic (b).
Án inflammation or
vascular excitement of the nervous centres (J) an antiphlogistic (1? ). Deficiency of circulation in a part ( b )
demands stimulant appiications and friction, or perhaps
intemally strychnine or cantharides (d ). Such aftections
as neuralgia when depending on a weak circulation (b )
are removed by tonics (d ). Excessive voluntary power
(d) will require antimony, cold to the head, etc. (>?).
And similarly in other cases.
1 he therapeutic side of astrology is very much undeveloped, but the course to follow is plainly indicated.
As Paracelsus wrote: “ The sympathy between planet
and planet, so easy of observation, is a proof of the
diffusion of collateral elements throughout the various
channels of expression and of a constant stream of PLANETARY sympathy and ANTIPATHY 63 influences for ever interacting between those that stand
tbus related to each other. Every metal and every
piant possesses certain qualities that may attract corresponding planetary influences, and if we know the
influences of the stars, the conjunctions of the planets
and the qualities of drugs, we shall know what remedies
to give to attract such influence as may act beneficiaily
iipon the patient,” Some typical drugs and “simples”
will be fourid in Chapter V. together with the planetary
powers to which they are allied. This is the inost that
can be done in the way of matéria medica so far as the
present chapters are coocerned.
Hitherto, the aspects and combinatíons of planets
have been chiefly those in which the luminaries, the
ascendant and some other body have been concerned,
Yet aspects form between planets proper and exerdse
spectfic influences, These will have to be gauged by
the light of what information has been previously ímparted,
However, the effects of the two bodies to
which this chapter is mainly devoted may be briefly
summarised,
By beíng with a planet is here meant, either the actual
conjunction ítself, or some aspect based on the square
and not on the trine,
MA RS WITH
Sun,—luereases the susceptibiíity to feverish, inflammatory
and hyperamic action,
High temperature, rapid pulse,
excessiva voluntary power,
Moon*— Copious menstrual discharges,
Pyrosis, bilious
nausea and emctations*
Exanthematous fevers, emptive
action»
.
Mercurv,—Irritates the nervo us system—excitabmiy,
logorrhcea, etc,, as pathogenic signs.
Nerve inflammation, 64 MEDICAI. ASTROLOGY eretbism of nervous centres.
Bilious díarrhcea, neuroma,
tbirst.
Vénus.—Copicms urinai discharge, excessive secretions,
renal irntation, fibroma, plilebítis, nymphomania (in females),
Júpiter.—Lipoma, arthritis, fibrinous exudations, steatomatous tnmour, adiposa sarcoma, sthenic inflammation.
Saturn.—Biliaty calculi, inflanirnation
ín joints, malforma tions, íractures, achondroplasia, according to which is
the dominant planet.
Uranus.—Pains and cramps from exalted excitomotory
function, involuntary muscular exeiteinent, hyperkinetic
aclion, lacerations and niptures*
Neptune.—Phenomena referable to psycbic causes. SATURN WITH
Sun.—Locomotory and spiual defects, lowered vitality,
paralysis, beart and spinal centres aftected, rigor, diseased
voluntriry power, lesions of the motory cobimns witbin the
spine, structural diseases of beart, deep-seated complaints»
Môün,—Aiuemic, narrow chested, cachectic, impaired
sensória! futfctions, encephalic and intropnlsive congestíon,
maturatton and softening of tubercle.
Mercury.—Déficient secretion of miicus on respiratory
membrane, numbness of nerve,
Venus*—Highly loaded urine, urinary calculi, suppression
of urinei
MARS.^Biliary calculi, inflammation in joints, tnalformations, fractures, achondroplasia, according to which is the
dominant planet.
JuPiTEU.—Cbondroina (fibrocartilaginous tumourj, sluggish
liver, oongestive inflammation if Jnpiter the more dominant.
Uranus.—Contortion of rigid parts, compresskm of organs,
contractions and strictures.
Neptune.—Ohseure and psychic.
p Placidus gives an instance of retention oí urine, wbích was
probably a suppression, in the horoscope of the Duchess of Sfortia,
who is related to ha ve died from the íormer cause. Venus was in
the sixth house in par. dec with Saturn in Libra. CHAPTER XI, GaUGING PLANETARY SXRENGTH IN THE SPECIFIC Horoscope*
HoweVER mtimateJy we may be acquainted with the
intrinsic virtues of members of the solar System, the
knowledge will only avail us to a limited extent. We
have now to draw in the threads so as to fmally adjust
and tighten up the whole scheme. It remaíos for us to
consider in order what increase or surcease of vivific
and morblfic energy is induced by the aspects, and the
actoal planetary location in points of the natal chart.
Planetary influence ín the zodíaca! hierarchies has
aJready been eonsidered in Chapter VII.
In sloka (distich) 38 of the Jataka Pari jata six kinds
of strength are enumerated :
DHkbalam.—Sirengüi of aspect.
Sthanabatam.—Strength of position
isá rg ika bala m. —- N a l ural s t rengt Saturno .
Chcsh ta ba lam.—M ot ion al s t ren £ t Saturno .
Dikbalam.—Directional strength
Ka tabala m. —T e m pora 1 strength. As an instance of the application of these argunients,
let us take the positional strength {sthanabalam) of a
planet. The following locations have jointly to be
considered:
65 E ME DICA L ASTROLOGV 66
1.
2.
3. Júpiter .
5.
6.
7.
S. Mercúrio .
io.
o.
12. Átçhi Uc!nií or greatest exaUation, Ucha, or exaltation.
Mulatrikma, or special house of power.
Svühshiira, or own house.
A ti mitra, or very friendly house.
MHrat or friendly house.
Sama, or neutral house.
Saínt, or inimical house.
Atisatrn, or very inimical house¬
Muda, or combust.
Ntcha, or house of debiUty.
Atinicha, or house of greatest debilky. The conception is of too colossal proportions for our
Western ideas, yet it is very much akin to what will be
here advanced. For before we are able to arríve at a
judgment we shall have to consider (1) an aspect
strength, (2) a strength of mundane position, (3) à
natural strength, ( Júpiter ) a motional strength, and (5) a
directional strength*
(l) Aspect Strength* It is assumed that the reader is familiar with the
aspects, their number of degrees and constitutíonal
quality* We shall employ these :
Evil íttTEKDEPENDENT Opposii. Quincvnx Quãttííe Semiquartilc l8o°
8 150 o 7v 90o Quadratura Parece, 45o
i GOOD Conj, # 11 or Plutão . 6 Trine Sextilc 120° 6õü An The paralle! of declination and conjunction or u body "
are, general! Netuno speaking, good with good planets, evil
with the reverse. On the left are the “ goats " ; to the
right the “ lambs/*
At hrst sight it seems ineonceivable that evil factors
like Mars and Saturn, or benefic onas like Venus and PLANETARV STRENGTH 67
Júpiter, should have their qualities so modified through
beiníT
íif varinue
__ . [he heading’ of lou ti muu ra tuj-rpa he observes tliat
they [the planeis] are adjudged to chanfre their signifi¬
ca1011 by their change of course, and as they are located
in angles or cadent therefrom. But the most important
thmg they [the astrologers] say is that someamongthem
are benefic, others evil, yet nevfirtheless the latter often
perform as though endowed with the virtue of the
former, no less than the former sometimes acting as the
latter. They add that when the planets are in reciprocai
aspect they act ia one way, and when they do not
aspect each other they produce eflfects in another.
Lastly, a plane t aspected by a certain favourable one
bestows good, only to be suddenly changed when it
transfers its aspect to another. They affirm Hkewise
that they are changed in a certain manner according as
the figure of aspecting is changed, and that 'from the
body or mutual conjunction still another form of influence
is generated."
In reality, the stars do not change their nature by
change of position and configuration as asserted ; nor
are some good, others evil. In themselves they are
neither. What happens is a fresh polarisation, a re- 68 ME DICA L ASTKOLOGY arrangement of the energic rays. Mars is always Mars;
it never exliibits the qualities of Saturn, nor presents
itself in the forni of the latter—eoldness, gravity, co
cretion.
But it cannot be gainsaid that the human
organism is adverseiy affected when receiving rays
through the médium of any of the evil aspects, even
when the planetary bodies involved are otherwise bene¬
ficiai ; nuich more so when the combined forces are
malefic.
It thus becomes impera tive to accept a divíslon of
the stars into malefic and benefic, and to assume that
there is an inherent capability among them for mutual
mingling and transference of influence. Theoretically
the explanation is not so difftcult, but we are dealing
with facts here, Let us therefore think of each separate
infiuence as having a functioning potentiality of two
phases; (tf)an anabolismic or hfe-force producmg,and(6)
a kataboHsmic or life-force destroying. The former will
manifest under the series of aspects bused on the
triangle ; the latter under those based on the square,
Thus, Sun trine Mars (O A d ) will give the best, the
construe tive form oLniartial influence, and that which
is directly beneficiai to mankind. There will result
stamina of body, activity» great energy, will power,
force of character, ahilitv to lead and contm1r to upbuiid
and act wTth promptitude, courage and dispatch. Sun
quartile Mars (0Q í) however, will shoiv the other
side of the medâh Here we still have activity, energy,
force of character, etc., but the nature of the person
will possess the dark traits of the planet—anger,
passional violence, vindietiveness.
It will destroy
rather than build, inflame rather than produce a cherísHing warmthj and provide all the requisite condítions for
inflammatory and febrile actlom In both cases the
force of the plaoet is expressed through the Sun, and PLÀNETARY STRENGTH 6U as botb bodies are positive, electric and caloric-producicg,
il :s easily seen that sn the latter instance diseases will
be acutGj violeot, feverish, excessive, poignant and inflammatory. Sueli injuries and complaints will ensue
as cause loss of blood, surgical operations, wounds by
edged tools, gun-shots, burns, scalds. Injuries and dis*
orders will proeeed from rash and selFmotived acts,
and may vary according to the state of the horoscope
as a whúle, from hurts by accident to suicide or assassination. For these latter come within the purview of
astrology, being associated with the disorganisation
expresscd tbrough the stars just as rnuch as the actuai
morbific predisposition.
Tjie. Cvspecting angles which exert most power are
jj]e cynjunction, par, dec.* quartile and opposition.
The conjunction is not so unbalancíng as the square
and opposition; and whereas the previously mentioned
trine of Mas to the Sun is wholly construe ti ve, preí€ü%hig the very best attributes of Mars, and the square
or opposition on the other hand wholly destruetive, lhe
conjunction possesses in a large measure the capacities
of each and will function at different times m either
manner.
If well supported the worst need not be
feared, Still, the balance will always incline to the
wrong side.
It is evident that the greater the number of these evil
aspects recetved by the lumtnaries the more will the
organism be predisposeà to disorder; whíle the more
malehc the aspecting bodies and the completer the
angles of aspects themselves, the more profound will
such disorder be.
* The word Júpiter angles * Í$ here used in its usual geomelric sense.
but it may be wetl to remind the reader of its technical astrulogical
u^age as an abbreviatíon for ' angular houses,' namcl) houses
i, Júpiter , 7, io. 70 MEDICAI- ÁSTkOLOGY Also, we see, if we ha ve plaeed in our hands rnerely
the planetary dataf we are enabled at onee to cognise
tbe diathesis—on broad Unes, of course.
That is to
say, if we are told there is heavy saturnine affliction we
uoderstand there will be a suseeptibility to cold, chronic*
tedious, consumptive, corruptive, obstructive disorders*
If Uranus, nervous, spasmodic, neuralgie maladies. If
Mars, inflammatory, feverish, acute, contagioos, víolent
and sudden complatnís. And so with others.
But this definite expression of some dominant planet
is by no means an invariable circumsíance. It is readüy
conceivable that a mingíing of various forces may
prevail» and in the disentangHng of these the difficulty
lies, There is all the difference as between an elementary
atom and a compound molecule,
Now the explanation usually afforded by chemistry in
regard to the combination of atorns is based upon the
assumption that each atom has a certa in definite
number of bonds* or poles, analogons to those of the
raagnet This quality ís known as quantivalence, and
an atom may be univalent, bivalent, quinquivalènt, etc.
If we thiok of the planetary bodies in a similar senset
tand simply as an illustrative coneeption), we shall take
them as the ato ms and their quantivalence will be
represented by their aspects, And so if ín any horoscope
we were confronted with a scheme of solar aspects such
as the foliowing : O D [? , l ?, 6 tf , 3 d , we obtain a
quadrivalent quantivalence for tbe Sun, thus:—
V I
1
and if at the same time Mars aspects Saturn ; Mercury, PLANETARY STREXGTH 71 Mars and Saturn ; and Uranus, Neptune ; the further
complieations wíll be indicated by othervincult, thus:— (2) Mundane Strength This depends upon the character of that division of a
natal scheme wherein any planet-star happens to be
posited.
The angles are undoubtedly the pre-eminent points,
and the action of those bodies which oecnpy ascendant,
occident, médium cceli and ímum cceli is inereased in
a remarkable way, There are two other houses which
have speciai significanee in disease, viz., the sixth and
twelfth; but of their dominíon we shall see more in
Chapter VIII.
The tbird and nínth houses are also
important, since they are concerned with the mind,
and mental condítions are responsíble for a physieal
rellection, For the rest, a planet gains in strength-and
potency by Eeing elevated above its fellows.
Ft must be borne in mind that the tweíve mundane
divisions, the templai reg tones, or mansiones of the
geniture, commonly known as the Twelve Houses, are
the equi valeut of the celestial zodiac.
Th_ey are the
co-significa to rs of the signs."
* As this book is tikely to be read by many whohave no prevíous
accj uai n rance with the tecbnology of thí subject we trust we may
be excused for directing the readèr"s aítention specíally to this
paragrãpb,
The mutual correspondence of the houses and the
stgns, and the uufortunate use by many writersof tbe word M house ” 72 MEDICA L ASTROLOGY The first house (s<?£ the Exatuple Horoscope givett on
p. 78) has a similar meaning to the first sign Aries, the
second to Taurus, the third to Gemini, and so on,
Their powers from a physiological point of view,
however, are much less extensivo—except in the case
of angles; the Eastern corresponding to Aries, the
Northern to Câncer, the Western to Libra and the
Southern to Capricorn,
But of specíal monient m
the first named— the ascéndant—and evil planetary
ac ti vi ty here.is ahvays extremely liable to find a morbid
outlêt on the material plane through the liead itself. But
wítn the remaining houses no testímony must be accepted
unsupported by zodiacal endorsement, unless a stellium
of planeis gives more than ordinary importance to a
house. For example, suppose in a geníture the fifth
house were heavily tenanted, then the heart and back
would be likely to sufTer, although the actual cardíac
sign Leo might be unocccpied,
The determination
would be strengthened and accentuated if the sign
cootaining the affüction in the fifth were of fixed quality,
Similarly an over-cargo in the second house would react
upon the throat; in the third, upon the lungsand nerves,
arms or hands; in the fourth, upon the stomach, etc.
to signify a sign of the zodiac rather than a oneUwelfth-part of
the mundane sphere, is the cause of much confusion of thought
among those just commencing the study of astrology—a confüsion
whích need never aríse if suiheíent emphasis is lai d upon the
dístiraction at the start.
The complkations resulting from the
mterplay of these two series, house5 and sigtts, may be more easily
imagined than enumerated.
Tbus. if Libra ascend, and Mars be
píaced in Aries in the seventh house, then the natural Seventh
House is in the mundane position of the First House. while the
ruler of the natural First is in the actual Seventh.
This interrelationshíp is entered into more fully in the Introductory Manual
of this series, and the simile lhere made use of in reference to it
vvill perhaps be found helpful. PLANETARY STRENGTH
(3) 73 Natural strength. The natural strength arises from the sympathy or
antipathy which exists between the planet and the sign
it oecupies. It will be strongest in its own sign and in
those signs most conipatible with its nature. But from
our poiut of view it will work most havoc when occupying signs with which it has no affinity, thereby setting
up discord and producing dísorganisatíon. For instance»
a fiery planet will be out of its element in watery signs»
while a humid one sucli as the Moon will not be disposed
to associate favourably with fiery signs.
And liere may be íntroduced a doctrine not much
regarded by modern astrologers, but yet one which
exhibits a phase of planetary activity by interchange
that is of considerable ímportance in numbers of cases
which otherwise, i.e.t without the explanation it affords,
would be deemed irregular.
I allude to planetary
receptkm by sign. This happens when a couple of
bodies occupy signs each of which is the proper sign of
the other, If Mars is in Câncer and the Moon in Aries
reception takes place, In this instance it ís of very
evil aiigury,
Each is usurping the natural place
of the other and neither has affinity with the sign it
actually tenants. But the matter does not rest here. Its
utility lies in the individual application, and goes far to
explain many seeming irregularíties, Take the SoliSatumian influence,
Three allied fornis of this will be
manifest: the aspect iníluence (say 0d b); Sun in
Capricorn ; and Saturn in Leo. The adnfixtures will of
course vary in intensity, but there is a thread of coonectíon common to them all. A table as below will show
at a glance the receptions by house of the luminaries.
Tables for the other planets may easily be constructed
on the same piam 74 MEDICAL ASTROLOGY
Sü?í. Moon. /Twi— Júpiter ) Netuno ? T Hl— Júpiter \ Netuno Mercúrio ! D mí— s
I í23 — T> *
' / -5
w — Saturno 1 » -U.I ( Júpiter ) in fi n nu—5!
ji —o L
* í — n: d in - \ 1 n * —«
t K — Netuno * Motional Strength. Under this heading are induded (a) the actual rate
of longitudinal motion of any planet, (ô) its retrogradation, (c) its stationary attitude, The daily rate of
zodíaca! progression varies within certain limits, and
consequentiy when the ‘tempo * is slow the application
and resolution of aspects are more protracted and likely
to occasion a greater degree of disturbance in the
physical organism.
The mean daily motion of the
various planets is as follows : Neptune about $'* Uranus
slightly less thau T, Saturn 2\ Júpiter 5\ Mars 33'28",
Sun, Mercury and Vénus 59', Moon 13°1Ü'« Motion is
slow or quick as it falis short or exceeds th is mean»
Retrograde motion, although only an apparent phenomenon, may yet produce some amount of disorganisation even if only because a plane t retrograde is then
nearest the earth
It implies iiitemipted sequence,
solution of continuity, just as direct motion does continüíty and sequence of progression, The writer has
noticed tbat a retrograde Júpiter is robbed of mucb of
its supporting power and cannot be depended upon to
sustain life when evil direclions are formed.
The
stationary position of a planet indicates constancy and
duration Õf effects; bodíes therefore havé the sphere of
theif influence enlarged according as their inlrinsíc
nature warrants, i,e,t benefie or malefic. “ It would PLÀNETARY STRENGTH 75 not be easy,” says Wilson, “ to demonstrate why the
motion of a planet, wbether swíft or slow, direct or
retrograde, should alter its influence, which must wholly
proceed from attraction."
On the wttole, motíonal
strength is rather an uneertain factor, or at least we
bave not sufikíent data to go upon so far as the question
of disease is implicated,
(5) Dikectionàl Strength. Th is is tlie power of planets holding each other in
aspect at a period subsequent to birth.* The various
bodies have moved forward in the zodiac and through
the houses of the scheme, and as fresh arrangements and
admixtures of rays are eíTected a ready responsion is
made by the human organisrm The “ direction ” will
indicate both type and time of disease, but only that
will be consiimmated which is foreshadowed in the radix
(it is very important to remember th is)*
The directional strength must therefore depend upon
a combination of the foregoing, viz.t aspect, mundane
position, zodiacal locatiom
There is a hexis or permanent habit as well as a
diathesis or transient dísposition. The hexis isshown in
lhe radix t the diathesis in the direction. If the diathesis
agree with the hexis the disorder indicated Í$ more
certain and pronoimced: that is to say if there is evü
martial induence in the geniture the native will more
readily respond to martial directions, and suffer from or
succiimb to inflammatory, acute, or febrííe disease, be
subjected to vioíence or undergo surgical operations.
If Saturnine induence, then ehronic and cachectic types.
Similarly with others*
* For complete expôs itíon and methüd see the Manual DitíCtioHS anã Dimling, also The Progrcssed Horoscopt. CHÀPTER XII.
Application.
We have gathered that the planets under certain
circumstances are inimical to mankind, and that among
them some are more virulent than others. Indeed while
we regard one contingent as ‘aphetic’ or life protectíng
and cherishing, another is just as surely * anaretíc * or
life destroyíng.
And so it comes about that represéntatives of this
latter—Mars, Saturo, Uranus—are the more imperative
factors in the production oí disease and death« (Not
that the other bodies are tnnoxious when their vibrations
are disturbed by antipathetic eonfiiction with olhers,
but only that their malefic powers under such conditions
do not reach so higb a pitch as those of the bodies
mentioned). Also, we have realised that there are three vital
centres—SUN, MpON, and Asc&NDANT. Ptolemy, it is
true, prescríbed particular divisions of the ambient to be
prorogatory or aphetic places, and that the occupation of such by one of the lumínaries constítuted that
1 uminary the giver of life, death only ensuing under its
afflíction by direction. But his methods of decíding
this pomt are too arbitrary to enlist unquestioning
adherence, and ín actual practice^ do not prove of much
utility.
In every horoscope upon which judgment of disease
has to be gíven, the following series of investigations
must be instituted:
76 APPLICATION 77 (1) To consíder how and in what degree the three
aphetic points, Sttnf Moori, and Ascendant, ara afflicted
or presarved.
(2) The type of energy represented by the afflicdng
bodies.
(3) The strength of such bodíes*
( Júpiter ) The signífication of the houses and sígns oeeupied.
(5) The mutual affliction among planets, not involving
the three centres of Sun, Moon and Ascendant
It is obvious that there will be static polnts and
kinetic points for each planet, the former represented
by its longitudinal degree of location in a sign, the latter
by the points to which aspects are thrown.
But the
píace of the aspect must be met by a distributíng force
in the sfcape either of another planet or the cusp of the
Ascendant, otherwise the influence ís disseminated without any result upon the physical organism—that is, so
far as the aspect*sign is concerned. Às an example we
will take a nativity.1* (Page 73.) * The ordinary circular map block will be familiar to most
readers, doubtless, but for the sake of others it may be explained
that the double lincs represent the two great eircles of the Meridian
and Horizon respectivelv, the symbois and figures at their extremities showing the points of the zodiac (ecliptic) which they cot,
at the monient of birtb and in the latitude and longitude o the
birth-place : they determine the ■■ cusps M or boundary mes of the
f ur '■ angular houses,’1 or 11 angles,’* the ist, 4th, 7Ü1 and ioth
houses that is to say. The heavy numerais tndieate that the spaces
m which thev are found comprise the houses severally design ated
hv the numerais in question, The diagram represents the heavens
as thev would appear to an observer in lhe N. Hemisphere standing
with his face to the South, the Ascendant or Rising Sign appeanng
in the East on his leftt planeis setting m ihe^Uest towards his
rieht, and those culminating near the Xenith and towards the
South
Hence the poãtion of the Sun at once gives a clue to the
time of dav for which the figure was casL 78 MEDICAL ASTÍÍOLOGV
Horoscope OF a Male Cimld.
Bont July 4íAt 1906, 2A. 40m. p.m Lat. 52*30^1 Long gfE^ ^ S W Dtrfinations, O22 58 n
E 18 20 s
Ç 20 8 N í 17 40 n b ^23 35 n
V 22 58 H 7 40 s Iíl23 37 £
H' 22 Gêmeos n [Síf /oüí#fo/í 0» /. 77], APPLICATION
Distriuutory Scheme, 79 ME DICA L ASTROLQGY 80 Planeis tn Sfgiis*
0
<r
n D
tn / V 32 X T tí m oth ioih i tth I2th A sc and 2* U1 Mercúrio n Mercúrio ? qQ a njj A Júpiter th 5lh 6 th 7th 0 Mercúrio Planeis in Houses. Here, by reference to the tables immediately succeeding the thema eoeli, we first note (p. 79) a preponderante
of katabolismic activity, and next we observe that on the
other hand assistanee is tbrown from the opposite side
through the médium of Vénus, Júpiter and Satum.
By
the mstrumentality of these latter the life will gain in
length and the system ín recuperative power.
Yet,
although the native may appear robust, hís constitution
is delicate* for not only are the luminaries afflicted,
separatim, but they are unfavourably related by the
quincunxial aspeet.
Underneath we observe the tbree worst types of
destrucúve energy, and where they are functioning by
body, and also to what points they are ernpowered to
flash forth that energy. First we note Mars with a
static posítion in Câncer and kinetic katabolismic poles
in the same sign, Capricorn and Sagittarius, the distribution of the energy bdng among Sun and Neptune;
Uranus; and Moon, respectively in these signs* This
shows intense martial action.
Secondly, Saturn static APPLICATION 81 in Pisces* kinetic ertergy to Sagittarius (?) and Leo (?).
This is a coagulating, depressing, cachectic influence.
Finally, Uranus from Capricorn throws rays to Câncer
( 0 t ) and Leo (U )—a perverting, disruptive agency.
Thus while the Sun sufifers from the Martial and Uranian
radíations, the Moon receives the energies of Mars and
Saturn, the former being elevated above the latter.
Ihis implies that there is a lot of unbalanced force
and vigour in the constitution, and that the pull of the
actívities involved will periodically result in disruptures.
The organísm, in fact, will be required to endure perverted tonic disorders mostly,
The life-force will
bubble up with such dynamic intensity as to come
near effectíng its own destructíon.
The solar-martial action in Câncer will produce not
only great irritabiJity of stomach, with difficulty in
retaining food (Byron had Mars in Câncer), but also
haemorrhage and acute gastritis, Neptune and Uranus
being coneerned too, indicate complications and obscure
pratincipients, perverted activity resulting in rnorbid
growths* probably cancerous. Precautions should be
taken in rega rd to malarial and camp fevers.
The third table (p, 80) compares and contrasts the
planeis1 respective house- and sign-positions, and needs
no comment,
Nervous and pulmonary complaints are betokened :
(j) in t approaching opposition of U in n).
Pleurisy
and intercostal neuralgia will also be experienced.
The stomacb, lungs and nerves are all marked by overactivity, and are here the great centres of disease,
Death will be violent owing to the affliction of the
Inminaries by anareíic bodies. F CHAPTER XIII. Examples. Space can only be afforded for a iew examples—and
those of tbe more regular types, for unfortunately there
are cases which exhibit at first sight many seemingly
irregular features. The bare hints furnished in those
ensuing should be supplemented by a detailed stndy of
the figures themselves, erected from the elements given.
Diphtheria*—This is an acute* infectious disease
associated wkh a membranous exudation on a mucous
surface, vizthroat, tonsÜs or pharynx,
It is chiefly
identified with the fixed signs, but especially Taurus
and Scorpio.
Also, as isolation or detention in hospital
is implied, the twelfth house is likely to be prominent,
probably containing one of the luminaries or one of the
afflícting bodies.
The Moon is usually afflicted by
Satum and the Sun by Yenus.
(1) Female : November 4th. 1895, 7,30 a,m.t London,
Here we have Scorpio rising with Mars, Satum, Sun
and Uranus—a terrible affliction. Mercury is on the
cusp of twelfth, and Mars is well in same house. The
Sun is conjoined with Satum, Mars and Uranus, Moon
is afflicted by Mars. The ominous State of affairs can
be apprecíated by a glance at the subpended diagram
showing the twelfth and first houses;
82 EXAMPLES 83 XII The child díed November 4th, 1896.
(2) Mate: April 26th, 1894, 645 a.nv, Lat. 5I°30rN.,
Long. 0 40'E. The Sun is in Taums and the twelfth,
opposed by Uraniis and applying to a quartile of Mars
and a semi-quartile of \ enus, The Moon is ín the
eighth squared by Saturn and Mercury.
Three bodies
occupy fixed signs, three fixed houses.
(j) Mate : Octoher 12th, 1897, 8.45 a.m., Peckham.
1 he signs 1 auras and Scorpío are again involved. The
XIL Cusf 0/ Âsccndatit 10,14 o vii.
I $2t>
2 8^2 3' ITsv a 14o 84 MEDICAL ASTROLOGY Sun is on the twelfth house casp and the Moon heavily
oppressed on the seventh.
( Júpiter ) Fe inale: October 27th, 1891, 1 p.m., Lat. 40°0'
N., Long. 85°12'\W:í Here we still have Scorpio to
the fore, providing house room for the Sun, Mercury,
Vénus and Uranus, The Moon is in Virgo receíving
the square of Neptune and the opposition of Júpiter.
But we must note that the ascendant
l^O1) has the
squares from Sun, Mercury and Uranus, and that the
malefics Mars and Saturn occupy the eighth house-—a
house we have learnt to associate with the zodiacal sign
Seorpío. The chüd díed when the Sun and Mercury
completed their quartile aspects to the ascendíng poínt.
Some idea of the relationship can be gathered from the
appended tabulation, I1 J'? Ase. Sih = ,| m
1. © \ ); : HJ
It ís well to note that a predísposing cause of
diphtheria is scarlet fever, a com piai nt which is itself
identified with Taurus and Scorpio. * Note— In ah cases the Standard Time in use at the birthplace is to be presumed unless otherwise specified. For detaíls as
to Standards of Time ín use in various parts of the world, consult Ca&tittg the Horostopf. EXAMPLES 85 HíP-JoiJíT DiseaSH.—Satumine affiiction m Sagittanus, either by actual location of the planet itself, or
rays thrown to the Sun or oíher important body; Mars
usually fornis ati aspect. Two characteristie examples
follow:
(1) Male: December 3rd, 1868, 8.30 p.m., Lat 41°5
M„ Long. 87°35'W.
AscendL Sol / 12°i2 d Júpiter ‘r3r V * |1L26c5'r j v Jl29Q2ir Urano i# T / S°4i' ©i6°3# Ti4042í The Sun and Saturn are conjoined in Sagittarius, Mars
is applying to the quartile of the solar orb, and the
latter to the quinçunx of Uranus.
(2) Male: November 22nô, 1853, 5,40 p.itu, Lat.
53P23'N,t Long. IGm, 12s.W.
Ascendí. O J)
Sí 16*38' Sol í /2oJ3S' VJ I5'5i' Mercúrio *48' M tOr 56' Urano a 28* Mercúrio ' cf 2/
/28V V Sagittarius is tenanted by the Sun, Mercury and Júpiter,
these bodies being afflicted and in the sixth house of the
scbeme, The Sun receives the opposition of Saturn,
quartil es of Neptune and Mars, and semi-quartile of
Venus; Mercury and Júpiter have the quinçunx of
Saturn,
Thís was a case of spina bífida also, Observe Moon
in Leo badly aspected by Uranus and Vénus, and
applying to the square of Saturn.
CONVULSXOKS.—The factors in convulsions wül be
found to consist in (a) a preponderating nnmber of
planets in fixed signs; (6) the Moon, and generally S6 MEDICAL ASTROLOGY Mercury, receiving evil rays from Saturo and Uranus;
(c) the presence of the four bodies mentioned in Fíxed
signs* In serious cases resulting in death, of course,
the aspects are very pronounced.
(1) Femaie: January 16tb, 1896, 3*5 p.m.' (died
November 27 th, 1896),
Here vve ha ve five bodies in
fixed signs. The Moon and Mercury in Aquarius are
squared by Saturn and Uranus in Scorpio and opposed
by Júpiter in Leo. There were croup and diphtheria too*
(2) Mole: January 22nd, 1899, Mercúrio a.m.——{died
March 28th, 1899). This was a case of congestíon of the
longs attended by convulsions. Five bodies are in iung
signs. The Moon occupíes Gemíni and receives the
opposition of Saturn, Uranus and Venus, and the
conjunction of Neptune. The Sun is affllcted by a
sem i-quar tile of Saturn, a quartile of Júpiter and an
opposition of Mars*
(3) Femaie : November 25th, 1894, Mercúrio .45 a.m*———*
(died June, 1895.) Four bodies occupy the fíxed sign
Scorpio—Moon, Mercury, Saturn and Uranus — in
mutual affllction, and receiving the rays of Neptune by
a quincunx.
Diseàses of or Accidents to the Eyes.—'The
luminaries are generaily in mutual affliction, one of them
frequently risíng, while Mars or Saturn throws a malefic
ray. The worst signs for the luminaries in this respect
are Aries, Câncer, Taurus, Capricorn, Leo and Aquarius
—Taurus and Aquarius being especiaüy consíant ít
is almost a matter of certainty to find the eyes suflfering
when an afflicted Moon is located in eitherof theselatter.
* Here and elsewhere, where placa of birlh is not staled
by dasb) it has eittaer noi been comum nicated or is
withheld in deferenee to nalive's desire; it may be presumed as
within the British Isles in all cases*
(indicaied EXAMPLES 87 lf Uranus, Saturn, or Mars
and the Moon is in
the first, fourth or seventh decreasing in light, total
blindness oft*n occurs. Mars will cause blindness by
hre, expiosion gunshot, lightuing, wounds, smallpox;
Saturn by colds, cataracts, specks, etc,; Mercury from
eye-strain due to hard reading, mental exertion, etc.
The Sun affiicted in ascendant is liable to cause cataract.
(1) Female: July 9th, 1884, Júpiter .26 a.m., Lat, 52°28'N.,
Long. 7m. W.
Ascindt.
TO23^ Sol Tô iJclS' J) $ V3 2Õ°l' m I2C27' f
®2iD53f é n fiEi9027f L(ig° Vênus ' $
H18V Tijja4o40r tí 22í544, This sclieme shows the Sun rising, opposed by a
decreasing Moon in the seventh, the signs involved being
Câncer and Capricom, Four planets and the ascendant
are in these signs. Extreme myopia and astiginatism.
(2) Female: July 13th, 1853, noon. BirthpJace not
stated. (Modem Âstrology, Vol. Gêmeos ., Old Series, p. 43.)
B)ind. Here the Moon rises in Libra in quartile to a
culminating Sun in Câncer.
The Moon is heavily
aídicted by a sesquiquadrate of Saturn (ín Taurus), and
a quincunx of Uranus {also in Taurus),
(3) Bale: June 27th, 1887, 10.40 a.m,, Lat. 5QÜ44'N.,
Long, 1°50'W. The Moon rises in the end of Virgo
in square to Mars and Sun, and applying to the
conjunction of Uranus, Myopia.
( Júpiter ) Mole : September 12th, 1875, 5 p.m.f Lat. 45UN.,
Long. Sol °l2rE,
The Moon is rising conjoined with
Saturn and opposed by Uranus from Leo, The Sun is
in seventh. Blind from birth.
Cases in which one or both of the luminaries are
loca te d and afflicted in Taurus: Male: January 22nd, 88 MEDICAL ASTROLOGY 1888, Júpiter ,30 p.m,-(going blind),
Male : December
16th, 1850, 1 a.m.t Birmmgham (myopia, squints).
Male: Augüst 12tb, 1849, 7.30 a.m,-——(myopia).
Dozens of similar instances cooid be given,
Male;
August 13th, 185Ô, 5, Júpiter a.m,, London,
This is the
nativity of the poet Philip Bourke Marston.
Ascendi.
a 23*14' Sol ]) Vênus SÍ20°2* im&3o' njt2°35' Saturno T20°54' » ? ê # 11*23*32' ns 24^6* V
tío3zo' K2°Of & At four years of age he deveioped incipient cataract
supervening upon mfíammation.
His sight gradually
grew worse and was ultimately lost,
The Sun is
rising in Leo and receives the mundane [not zodíaca!]
squares of Luna and Uranus and the mundane semisquare of Mars.
The Moon is opposed by Uranus
from Taurus and receives the par. dec. of Saturn,
Stone IN Kidney and Bladder.—Gravei and stone
are the result of the crystallisation and deposition of
solid substances of the urine, and are usually the result
of Saturnine action.
This is the reason why such as
are subject to the condition are often of the melancholy
type and affected with hypochondriasis. In Chapter lí.
the kidneys are found to be placed imder Libra, but the
pélvis of the kidney under Scorpio. it is in the pélvis
that stone is formed.
(1) Male: April 21 st, 1822, 7 p.m., Lat 51°Hn
Long, 7w,W. Here we find the first degree of Scorpio
on the ascendant, and Sun, Moon, Satum and Júpiter in
close conjunction on the cusp of the seventh,
Both
luminaries receive a sembquartíle from Venus, and the
latter planet bears a similar aspeet to Saturn* It is
true no pianets are loca te d in Scorpio, The influence EXAMPLES 89 seeins to be entirely reflected from Taurus. This pair
of sígns is singularly reversiva in aetion, as we have
remarked before. The positions are thus :
—' n ln this case stone in the kidney was only a secou da ry
form of manifestation, The specifie Taurian £one—the
throat—was impressed with the greater evil—the resulting disorders being diphtheria, bulbar paraiysis, and
earlier in life quinsies and mínor throat affections.
(2) Fe male: March 18th, 1852, 10.30 p.m,T Lat
52°30'N., Long Í°18rW. The figure shows 1*115° on
the Eastern cusp, with a retrograde Júpiter rising in
the same sign, but otherwise quite unafflicted.
Vénus,
Saturo and Uranus are conjoined in Taurus and the
sixth, and with this exception there is very little afflíction
in the horoscope.
It would have been difficult to
diagnose the complaint from the figure, but it is very
signifkant considered by the light of the p revi ou s
example.
(3) Male: November 7th, 1866, +.30 p.m., Lat.
51°22'N., Long. 0°6*W,
Stone in bladden
Stricture
of urethra.
Dyspepsia.
Heart and back affected.
Scorpio assumes its full dominion here.
The last
decanate of Taurus rises, and Sun, Moon and Satum
are conjoined in Scorpio near cusp of seventh. (They
have passed the cusp and are nominally in sixth.)
Venus is applying to a semi-quartile of Saturn.
Mars
is in Câncer on cusp of fourth. This latter accounts MEDICA L ASTRO LO GV 90 for the stomach trouble,
It is well to note tbat in
kidney troubles Venus is usual! Netuno assodated with Saturn.
À SC, » - — \ ui Desc. o)
Ghronic Diarrhcea, Ch RO NIC Inflammation of
Bowels, Acüte Phthisis,—Mate: September +th,
1864, midnight. Keference to the figure of birth wüí
reveal abundant causes for the disorders specified. It
wili serve our purpose to present the main afflictions in
the form of a diagrammatíc tabulatíon in which they
can be seen at a glance;
Lungs
Bowels
O é {acüte)—--——ui o IhYTZ
V)—
The eonnecting lines indicate evil aspects.
line an evil aspect not quite completed.
parentheses throw rays from other sigas. The dotted
Planets in Scrotal Hérnia, Gravel, Díarrhcea, Angina
Pectoris, Acüte Neuralgic Pains in Head,
Kidney Trouble and Backache,—Màle: November Sth, 1855, Júpiter .45 p,m.t Lat. 52°28'N., Long. 7#w.W.
Uranusrises in Taurus, a very usual indication of darting
pains in the head (origín obscure). Sun and Mercury are
conjoined in the sixth house in Scorpio {scrofum.bladdet^
the former affhcted by a sesquiquadrate of Saturn, a
semiquadrate of Moon (also in sixth}, and an opposition
of Uranus. Venus is in the sixth in Libra sqtiared by
Saturn. The scrotal hérnia was due to the Uranian 91 EXAMPLES pressure; the grave] to the Satumian iníluenee; the
angina to tlie predominance of fixed signs, and the
occupancy by planets of fixed houses—'Júpiter and
Neptune eleventh, Mars fifth, Saturn second.
The
kidney trouble emanates from Venus in Libra squared
by Saturn. Both lumínaries are affiicted m the sixth
house, and the native ís a chronic sufferer. Chrgnic Bronchitis, Epxthelioma of Nose (operation)*—Male: June 21 st, 1826, L5 á.m., Lat, and
Long. as before.
Asccndt.
B 5°o' O
n 29 V I> Mercúrio Quadratura 24^33' Mercúrio «s2í°2S' *1 Ijl V D26°0' a23°2' V)I2°58' H * J
ni5°i7' V
1*8=3' For the bronchial trouble we have heavy afHiction in
Gemini, the lung sign, intensified in action by the
oecupancy of the third house (equivalent to the zodiacal
thírd). The type of disease is indicated by Saturn, viz.,
dironic. For the epithehoma (the ultimate cause of
death), we find Mars located in Scorpio (nose) exactly
opposing ascendant, angular and consequently of great
power. The pervrerted action of Moon in Capricorn
(conjoined Uranus and Neptune), a sign connected with
the epithelial tissues, should likewise be remarked.
Chííonic Bronchitis, Tumorous Growth in HEAD — Male: May 25th, 1846, 0.5 p.m., Lat. 53UN.,
Long. 10/ Urano .W. For the bronchitis the Sun and Moon
are conjoined in Gemini and receive the quartile aspect
from Saturn in Pisces. For the tumour we observe
Venus with Uranus in Aries squared by Mars from
Câncer.
OF Tonsils. — Fem ale:
Gastritis,
Removal
October 23rd, 1866, 0.40 p.m., La t. 5 2°28' NLong. 7 w.W. yJ
AsmdU
V35°i4' MEDICAL ASTRGL0GY
O
^29°52r D
T23°X5r ?
WU2®57' ? *? IJH T 1IU3DI4Í ©8*24' Tio°59r ê li ©zi^S1 1324*25' Mars angular in seventh; kinetic action to Sun in
Scorpio (just Ieavíng Libra) ; a fixed sign ruling the
throat by reflection from Taurus* Great irritability of
stomach. Gastritís* Martial and Uranian activity in
Câncer.
Bright’$ D i se ase*—Acute and chronic desquamative
nephritis wíll be usually accompanied by the ill associationofVenus and Saturn. But as tbese maladies are
not really due to some one form of morbid renal condition,
the boroscopical positions may not show regular static
energy in Libra. Sufficient cases have not come under
the authoFs notice to enable bim to draw satisfactory
conclusions. But this much may be tentatively advanced * (l) Venus badly aspected by Saturn, (2) Venus
badly aspected by jupíter, (3) Sun badly aspected by
Júpiter, ( Júpiter ) Moon occupymg Câncer, Scorpio or Pisoes,
(5) Fixed signs prominent, but especially Scorpio,
Aquarius and Leot (6) Fixed sign rísing, The reason
for this prominence of fixed signs and the evil condition
of Venus and Júpiter is not difficult to comprehend.
(l) Acute Brighfs disease (complications)* Female:
April 17th, 1878, 12*35 p.m*, Eye, Suffolk. The vinculi
are seen to be as below: 2 I Saturno Vênus —^ EXAMFLES 93 A fixed sign (SL with W) rises- The Moon occupíes a
fixed sign (m).
Five bodies and lhe ascendant are
located in fixed slgns,
(2) Brighfs d i se a se, pneumonia, dyspepsia.
Male :
August 9th, 1836, noon.—-- The pneumonia is prituarily indicated by Mars ín Geminí, The dyspepsia by
Moon and Venus (affiicted by Saturn) in Câncer, For the
albuminuría we ha ve th is planetary relationship : Venus
and Júpiter in quartile with Saturn ; Júpiter opposition
Neptune; Moon in Câncer; fixed signs promment, fie.,
five bodies located in them and a fixed sign (til) ascend*
ing.
Saturn is just above the cusp,
Approximate
ascendant 3o
(owing to the latitude of birth not being
ãvailable the exact degree cannot be determined),
(3) Female: January 4th, 1884, LI 5 p.m,
The scheme shows Venus opposition Júpiter, par, dec,
Saturn, Mercury and Mars, and applying to the opposi¬
tion of the latter planet, Mars, Júpiter, Saturn, Urauus
and Neptune are retrograde, The Sun is receiving the
quincunx of Saturn and applying to that of Mars and
finally Júpiter. The Moon is aftlicted ín Pisees, Fixed
signs are wetl tenanted, five bodies holding possessioii,
A fixed sign (Taurus) rises and Saturn is close to the
cusp.
( Júpiter ) Male: October 25th, 1833, 7,45 a.m., Lat
44°50'N.J Long. 0°34'W.
Ascendi.
0
11120°
nu* Júpiter °' D
M24°i2l
r? ^ Júpiter *57' Ç
nii4°34r ti
mí 29*57' ty
tí 0^24 J$ - iS°39' V?26543' $
This instance exhibits Sun opposition Júpiter; Moon
opposition Venus; Venus conjoined with Saturn (in the
actuaí renal sign) and receiving a quincunx front 94 MEDÍCAL ASTROLOGY Júpiter, The latter body is on the cusp of sixth, retro¬
grade, and afflicted by Satum and
Five planets
occupy fixed signs, and a fixed sign is risíng.
The
Moon is in Pisces. This case is also one of diphtheria,
scarlet fever and cirrhosrs of kidney.
For the former
see under the remarks on that disease, and compare
the State of affairs with the examples there introduced.
The principal consideration is that section of the figure
here shown :
Cusp of Twelfth Hcusf. Çnsp of Ascenâtxnt
Mental Derangement, Exaggerated Ego, etc. —The mental nders, Moon and Mercury, will both be
afflicted, and usually in affliction with each other too.
There are, however, many forms of mental trouble.
Violent lunatics will be the outcome when Mars is the
eausative agent; hypocliondriacs when Saturn. There
is also a ciass the subjects of whích for a great part of
their li ves may exhibit brilliancy akin to genius in some
direction,more particularlyof the mechanically mathematicat order, or where rapid calculation and mental subtlety
are requisite,
The primary responsibihty rests upon
the association of Mars with Mercury, especial ly by the
conjunction and opposition. Many lightning calculators,
chess players, inventors, mechanical geniuses, cranks,
etc., bave this position, the planets at the sarne time
being located ín one of the angles, or the third or ninth
house. George Bidder, the celebrated calculating boy
may be mstanced (June 14th, 1806, 3.45 a.m.). Mars EXAMPLES 95 has just left the Moon (in Tauras) and is making
appulse to Mercury; but in th is case Satura is in
conjunction with Uranus, and the Sun in trine to both,
while Venus, in Taurus, is in trine to jupiter in Capricorn: Taurus is a sign peculiarly associated with
mathemãtical abílity,
Gerard de Nerval, the poet
and miscellaneous writer, had Mars conjoined with
Mercury, but also opposed by Saturn,
He conimitted
suicide in a fit of insanity. Morphy, the chess player,
had Mercury squared by Mars and Uranus, Retheí,
the German fresco-paínter, had Moon opposítion Mars,
Mercury opposition Uranus,
George HL had Moon
conjoined with Uranus and both squared by Mars.
Mercury was also in conjunction with Saturn,
VaricoseVeinsof Lower Limbs.—These willfrequently occur with Ve nus or Moon(or both) in Aquarius
more or less afflicted, especially if there is Martial
activity.
(1) Female: midnight, December 31st, 1864, Lat.
52°2SÍN,I Long. 7m. W.
Moon and Vénus occupy
Aquarius, The former is in close par, dec. with Saturn
and applying to the quartile of Mars. Vénus receives
the semi-quartíle of Neptune.
(2) Female; February 21st, 1826, about 10 a.m,, sarne
Lat* and Long, Venus and Mercury are in Aquarius
on the cusp of eleventh (a house synchronising with the
sigu Aquarius),
They are opposed by the Moon,
Mars throws a cross quartile ray,
PULMONARY CONSUMPTION.—One or both luminaries
occupy a common sign and a cadent house, particular! Netuno sixth or íwelftb. There is general afflictíóh in common
signs and houses,
Saturn and Mars evilly aspect
Juminaries according to type. In some cases Aquarius 96 MEDICAL ASTROLOGY holds affüctecl bodies, especially in acquíred consumption
and congestion of lungs.
(1) Male:
March 15th, 1863» 7.45 p.m,, Lat,
55°52'N., Long, Júpiter °18rW. The Sun ís in Pisces and on
the cusp of sixth, a very frequent position with the
consumptive. It is in par, dec. with and applying to
the opposition of Saturn, in quartile with Uranus,
quincunx with Júpiter, and almost in conjunction with
Neptune. Mars and Uranus occupy the chief lung sign
’—Gemini. Saturn has passed into the twelfth house,
When the latter planet completed its par. dec. with the
radical Sun, and the Sun met the sembquartile of the
radical Mars, the na ti ve died (in his 26th year).
(2) Male : March Uth, 1864, 8.30 a.m., Lat. 52°40'N.,
Long, 1°20'W,
The Sun again occupies Pisces,
but this time on the cusp of the twelfth,
It is
also in par, dec, with Saturn as before, in quartile to
Uranus in Gemini, and applying to the conjunction of
Neptune, The throat, too, was affected. The moon is
in Taurus and the twelfth, receiving the bad aspects
of Neptune, Venus, Júpiter and Saturn,
(3) Male : December 6th, 1859, Mercúrio a.m,———In this
case the Sun is on the cusp of twelfth in Sagittarius.
It is opposed by Uranus from Gemini, applíes to a
quartile of Neptune in Pisces, and receives in addition
the semi-quartile of Mars. The Moon is in Aries much
depressed by a par, dec. of Saturn, and having the
opposition of Mars and the quartile of Júpiter,
( Júpiter ) Mate : August 16th, 1850, 1.30 a.m., Lat, 53o30rN.,
Long, lOíM.W. Here it is the lesser light which is
posited in a common sign {Sagittarius) and on the cusp
of sixth.
It bears the sesquíquadrate of Saturn and
quartiles of Neptune and Mercury. The Sun is located
on the cusp of third in Leo, Mars is conjoined with
Júpiter in Virgo.
Five bodies tenant common signs. EXAMPLE5 97 (5) Fcmale: January 2Ist, 1855, 3 p.m,, Lat
54q4QlN., Long. 5m. W. Pneumonia, from catching
cold, Resolution being delayed, some degeneration in
lung tissue took place and there were tubercular focí
scattered through the lungs.
Many complicatíons.
Heart f ai lure and dropsy towards end, The Moon is
conjomed with Neptune in Fisces and squared by Satum
in Gemini from cusp of twelfth house. The Sun is in
Aquarius and par. dec. with Saturo. Five bodies in
Aquarius, Â Remarkable case.
A most interesting study is aflbrded by the following
geniture. The loose slip containing the figure fell out
of an old copy of Lilly some years ago. There were no
indicafions of time or place of birth, but these were
evidently at S.4Q a.m. on October 4111, 1834, in or near
London, the planetary positions being as below :
Ascendi, © m6°45f ^ io°40' D
mo°42# »?
*I3°Or Mercúrio ^2a°53f ^22°5f f i U H127V ®7c57f 0ii°4ir n W Scarlet fever, 1852 (Autumn). Gastric fever, 1859.
Brain fever, 1866 (May). Fever, 1873 (July). Arm
broken, 1869 (Febmary). Severe blow or fali, 1860
(December). Cut thumb nearly ofif at se ven years of age.
Cut no se nearl Netuno o ff, 1862 (March). G CHAPTER XIV.
INDICATIONS OF SHORT LlFE. The indicatíons oí very early death are usually of
easy remark to the astrologen
On the average the
number of cases is small wherein sucb indicatíons are
liable to be overlooked or misunderstood, but these
exceptions demand greater knovvledge than we novv
possess.
It wiil naturally be expected tbat infants should suffer
more from the severity of planetary influence than
adults ; that is to say morbid distemperatures will more
easily result from evil íransits, positions and directions,
on account of tbe greater tendemess of the severa! parts.
Tbe períod of life is indeed always to be considered in
judging the efíect of tbe stars as they forni tbeir various
aspects by motion subsequent to birth.
Old age,
senil ifcy, have something like a parallel epoch in infancy,
bot the stellar efíects are then of a dífferent order, since
the animal body by the actions inseparable from life
undergoes a continuai change: the stnaller fibres become
rigid, the mimite vessels grow into solid fibres no longer
pervious to duids; everywhere there is a tendency to
contraction, dryness and immobility, the true Satumine
principies.
Whenever the Sun is afdicted by Saturn, the vitalíty
is Jow, and althougb one sncb testimony does not
warrant the prediction of premature death, yet there is
danger in the early years. It is important to remark
the closeness of the aspect formed and whether applicatio
98 INDICATIONS OF 5HORT LIFE 99 or defluxus is being made* If the aspect is dose, and
forming, the danger ís accentuated. In those cases, too,
where by what is ter me d sí progression " or “ direction,”
to be explained later, a planetary body will cross the
cusp of one of the angular houses {particularly the First or
seventh) in the early period of life, and where moreover
the vitality, as gatbered from the Sim and Moon, is low,
a further testimony ís provided.
Even where this transiting body is the Sun, Moon or
Júpiter, the disturhance produced is frequently sueh as
to bring disaster to the ínfantile orgamsm* And where
a maiefic like Saturn is exactly on the oriental or
Occidental cusp, or upper or lower meridian, a chiíd is
often born dead or livres to inspire but a few lungfuls.
We must also bear in mind that some signs bestow
weaker constitutkms than others, and persons born when
they are rising or are oecupied by the Sun, have lower
vitality and prove more susceptible to the morbíd eflfects
of planetary action, than those making their appearance
under signs of naturally strong constitution, The weak
signs are Câncer, Capricorn, Pisces ; and in a general
way the whole of the common signs are less robiist than
the fixed,
Àgain, a most criticai epoch is the New Moon, and
before the contact is made. To this lunar bajamar or
menguante much infantile raortality is referable,
The
weakness of constitution engendered by the position
renders any contemporaneous maiefic conformation more
stringent still in its action upon the body.
The First case I take from the Âstrologers' Magazine
and Philosophical Miscéllatiy for October, 1793, ít is
there given to show the presumed importante of the pars
fortunce ashyleg. Hannah Pamel, March llth, 1793,
12 p.m., “ at a Mr. Matthew^, No. 16, Church Lane,
White Chapeí.11 100
Ascendí. ntzS-rr MEDICAL ASTROLOGY
O
H2i°55r D
K iS°2g' íf
X22°35' Saturno T 2f} 5S' ?
a 7*51' i|j
( í
tG°47' 1/
/i°54' \ Netuno 20^j' I|) (1112 j°) í4 I calculated this nativity,1’ says lhe writer, “when Lhe
chíld was about three weeks old, and informed the
people of lhe house that it would scarce li ve half a year,
though very different thoughts were at that time enter*
tained by the chiÍdTs rdatíons, However, it did not li ve
three montbs, but díed ou the first oí June."* The Moon
wants a trifie o ver three degrees to complete its conjunction with the Sun.
Sun, Moon and Merctiry
are conjoíned in a weak sign. Júpiter and Mercury are
quite near to the cusps of first and fourth houses
respectively. The Sun is in dose par. dec. with Mars
and semi*quartile Vénus. Thus there are diselosed three
of the testimonies previously emmeiated as prospicients
of early death, viz.: L Moon applyíng to conjunction
Sun, 2. Sun (also Moon and Mercury) in a sign of
semi-vitality (K) and afflicted.
3. Bodies very near
angle cusps.
A somewhat similar instance is afforded by the
positions in the figure below. They are given from tbe
chart which accompaníed the communication, as neither
latitude nor longitude isstated, Fetnale : January 16th,
1828, 10,40 p.m. Díed August, 1828,
Ascendi* *5°2J' 0
V3 25°52' 5
V3 25°i2í Vênus ®r6°5' 1327*50' ?
s2o02S' /
iaii°ia' yji6°i3' 1, The Moon is applyíng to conjunction Sun, beíng
only 0J40' of are from completion. 2. The Sun afflicted
The approsrimate positions of
and
taave been added here
although they did not of course enter ínto the write^s calculatíons. 1NDICATIONS OF SHOKT LIFE 101 n a sign of low vitality (Itf): six bodies in signs of
ow vitality*
3* Bodies near angle cusps: Saturn
culminating.
The next case shows a terrible array of evil aspects
and positions* Male: December 21 st, 1870, 7 p.m.,
Lat 39°57rN*, Long. 75° Mercúrio 'W.
Ascmdt,
Si iV GD
ViO°o!
f 22°sil 5
ni5c5t' *
W3ôi7’ ^o04S' sa 25*36' ng° Netuno <í
W26^i' U
1120*15' H
Prem ature birtb—six weeks in advance.
Spinal
meningitis, died January Ist, 1872. 1* Moon applying
to conjunction Sun* 2* Sun afllicted in a sign of low
vitality (Vj) ; tbree other bodies in same sign too* 3,
Neptune culminating and near cusp. Júpiter *
Note the
heavy affliction of luminaries, cjuite suflficient in itself to
negative the idea of life :
© d Urano » B i í ■ O & -— Female: March 7th, 1894, 2 p.m., near Canterbury.
Died Autumn of same year*
Âtttndt, © ál8° xi7°i' Saturno $ ü24°i6' mi5ais* {V ino'5»' ]. Moon applying conjunction Sun. 2. Sun and Moon
afflicted by par. dec. Suturn, quartile Neptune: Sun,
Moon and Mercury are conjoined in a sign ot low
vitality (x), 3. Saturn near cusp of rourth. 102 MEDICAI. ASTROLOGY Starbeck. The little one was Christopher Turner, son
of John Turner, goods porter, at Starbeck, Harrogate.
The child was born on the 28th of March, at 1 p.m.,
and died on the 29th, froni asphyxia, due to premature
birth.
Ascendi.
Ülz°^Of ©
T6a4o' I)
To°34f Saturno -7°*3f ç
*21*55’ 1*| ?
s Júpiter °55' cf
^7*44' n
K ScJ3f IJJ
©oc59f The luminaries are heavily oppressed by Mars, Neptune,
and Saturn*
In addition Uranus and Neptune throw
quartile rays to the Moon, and Saturn is opposing the
ascendant (in “—asphyxia), having just set. Probably,
the time of birth was a Jittle earlier, when that body
was exactly on the occident cusp.
The Moon is
applyíng to the conjunction of Sun.
Male: October I2th, 1890, Mercúrio .32 a.m., Lat. 52°28'N.
Long. 7m.W. Died suddenly, January, 1891. Occasioned a coroner's inquest.
Asctnàt. tH22- Netuno O d s ? -i°o' Urano -Iü27' Lua / Júpiter °3'
V «H 1252S' ^ 26*34' i
ni2aig' U
=2°jg' u Õ°32* n
1.
l he Moon applies to conjunction Sun, although
more distant from that luminary than in the former
map. 2. The Sun is ajflicted hy Marst Uranus and
Ve nus. 3. Saturn is transítíng the mid-heaven.
Arcs of Djrectiün. \\ bere planetary bodíes are close to one of the angle
cusps the are of direction to that cusp is important,
operating powerfully upon the child, and, when lokens 103 INDICÂTIONS OF SHORT LIFE of short life obtain, usually indicating tbe exact time of
death.
For instance, in the above figure the Ârc of Direetion"
required is a littie over Sol °14', since the rate of measurement is Io—1 year, or 15' -3 months. To determine
this we say :—Right Ascension Satura 164°28r27", iess
the Right Ascension of the Mid-Heaven 164° 14r0*11equais
Arc of Direction 41 M.C. 6 b , in Mundo ”-0°14f27",
Another direction operative at the time was Moon
conjunction Mercury, d.d. zod.
lhe conjunction falis
in 1q27' Libra, Dec. 0°34'l %vith a RA. of Í81°19 and a
Semi-arc of 89°17*.
Moon's Smi-arc
Moon's Meriâían Distante
Stmi-an Aspect 95°22'
iS°39'
89**7' (l Moon'$ Secand Distana
M.D. Aspect ifi9’ „ Arc of Dírecíion loS (ariih- comP )
-gSííio '&45°
1-01679 17o Sr
o°i4|i Moon conj. Mercury, d d, zod. Fetntde* Septernber Ist, lb94t
Another example. Mercúrio .1S a.m., Latitude and Longitude as before,
*
i
M
Ascendí.
0
D
sflí
JU5c5S'
«3°35Jf
-2o°4o' ^8°53r 1H29 57
"*7 5
Ht Urano íi1
*22c2ir
11112*5' U X5°44'
The affliction obtaining here, as regards the three centres—Sun, Moon and Ascendant—we find to be Sun
conjunction Mercury (affiicted by Saturn, hence maletuj, involved, wUh illuatrations of the methods employed. 104 MEDICAL ASTKOLOGY semi-quartile Saturn, quartile Neptune. The Moon has
just left the Sun, is in quartile with Júpiter and semiquartile Venus. Saturn is on the the cusp oí ascendant
The child died on the 29th of October, 1895, of consumption*
Note the affiictíon in lung signs.
lf we now
compute the arc of Saturn to conjunetion of ascendant
we shall have^the time of terminus viicc. The RA. of
Saturn is 20 T3T, the Semi-nocturnal Arc 99°31f, the
M.D. 98°22r. Then Semi-arc of Saturn 99°3T minits
M.D> Saturn 98°22r equals 1° Mercúrio ', the Arc of Direction
Ascendant conjunetion Saturn in mundo.!l
This, at
the rate of one degree per year, and five minutes (of arc)
per month, reaches exactiy to the time when the event
transpired.
Mate: July 26th, 1895, Mercúrio ,45 a.m., Lat. and Long, as
before.
Ascendi. 3f -0°i O
«TL 3^7f j) $ ? dli
Sl2$0I8, Urano íao°57' ® 2*21*31' V
ni7°i5' The above figure exhibits the Sun affiícted by semiquartiles of Neptune and Venus, and a quartile of
Saturn, 1 he Moon is on the ftrst house cusp, semisquared by Uranus.
brorn the latter posítion one
would expect somethíng peculiar in connection with the
head, Às a inatter of fact there was a curious malformation of the skull: a longitudinal depressíon in
central patt and on eíther side soft, watery, hemispherical exerescences,
This child died, Àpril 1896, of
bronchitis complicated with measles.
Male : March 15th, 1898, 3,50 p,m,, Lat, and Long,
as before.
Consumptive, died November ISth, 1899,
Notice that no fewer than síx planets occupy iung signs
and that the luminaries mutually afflíct each other, the
Sun itselfbeing posited in the “house of death,1* INDICATluNS OF SHORT LIFE
Ascettdt.
nj 2°3o' ©
M26*6' D
tztfzq* Mercúrio *24* Mercúrio ' <? »il /I2t3i5# / 3a311 ?
Ti0^1 ê
-zfao' 105
11
^6*43' oig^S' The Time Factor. Plutão /fní^/íirjj Plutão ^r/ods, Climacteriç Yearst etc.
it is well to note that tbere are certain fairly wellmarked planetary periods governing the lífe.
Thus,
from birth to the fourth year is dominated by the Moon;
the 4th to 10th by Mercury ; the lOth to 18th by Vénus ;
the 18th to 37th by Sun ; the 37th to 52nd by Mars;
the 53nd to 64th by Júpiter; and onwards from the
latter year» by Saturn*
The deductions from this
are pretty obvious*
Evil direcfcions of the Moon
during the lunar period vvill be especially dangerous;
those of Mars in the Martial period ; those of Saturn in
the Saturn ian ; and so with others*
Not only this, but there are the climaeteric years to
be observed, for such epochs are tindeniably disastrous
to organic equilibrium.
They are especially to be
considered when malelic directional aspects are in force.
The accompanying diagram will exhibit the planetary
Hfe-periods and the lunar criticai epochs (p. 106)*
In this diagram the “ three score years and ten1” of
the psalmist are represented as the are of a semt-cifde,
the radial lines índicatlng the time of expiry of the
infliience of one planet and the commencement of the
one vvhich succeeds it.
The ten chords divide the are iuto seven-yearsections,
which have a double significance in relation totheliíe.
Firstly, the Planet Uranus completes his cycle in eighty- The Planetary and Climacteric Periods. 106
MEDICAL ASTROLOGY INDICATIONS OF SHORT LIFE 107 four years, or one sign in seven years, and thus takes un a
positionM *,o,A, etc,, his radical place, every seventh
year after birth. Secondly, and thís is perhaps of more
importance m direct relation to health, the effect of tbe
progress of the planets after birth is felt by means of
what is termed the “ progressed horoscope,” in which the
movement of the planets eacb day áfter birth is found to
affect the corresponding year of life,
Since, then, the
Lunar Quarters so important in the animal econoroy
occur each seventh day or thereabouts, we can thus eastíy
see how the Jife wíll be mapped out into seven-year
periods of correspondingly greater importance in the
life of man,
And here ít seems pertinent to mention that every
lunar month typifies the circle—birth to death, generation to fruition and decay,
There ís consequently a
monthly renewal and dispersion of force, bios. It ís
only in tbe more fluent fornis of matter that the influence
is pronouncedíy apparent, nevertheless all grades of
matter are afFected, There is a tide of the bodily fluids
as well as of the ocean, a period of activity and repose,
a systole and diástole, times of preparation, development, perfection and disintegration.
All these are
represented by the lunar phases,
The New MoüN implies disintegration, death, prepara*
tion for a new cycle. It is the low ebb, the nityapralaya,
the systole,
The First Quarter is concerned with organic development and the revitalisation of function and tluid.
The FULL Mook typifies fruition, maturation, bigh
tension, fluidic plenitude, This is the lunar expiration
and diástole.
The Last Quarter is devoted to the appíícation of
power already generated. The reaping of the harvest.
The medullary and cerebral substance is augmented 108 MEDICAL ASTRÜLOGY ai the fullf and sufíers dimínutíon at the new.
The
size and weight of the brain depend very inuch upon
the relatíon between the íuminaries at birth, being
smaller at the new and íncreasmg to the maximum at
the fulL
Likewise on account of the plenitude in*
duced at the latter epoch, many plethoric and other
effüsions and emissions are brought abo li t, viz,t catamenia, hamiorrhoidaí and allied sanguineous discharges
and evacuations, epistaxis, haemorrhage, hamioptysís,
malaena, etc.
In certain febrile disorders which rim their course in
a short time, there occur criticai days. These depend
upon the lunar aspects forraed with the place of the
Moon when the illness seizes one. This latter time is
known as the “ decumbiture Tl among the older astrologers*
The aspects in question are the semi-quartile,
quartile, sesquiquartile and opposition* and of these the
principal are the quartüe and opposition, formed about
every seventh day. The temperature and pulse of the
patíent frequently obey cíosely theswayof these periods.
[The Second Manual of this Series, What is a Horoscope
and How is it Cast ?, gives clear elementary mformation
concerning the Casting of a Horoscope, and also hints as to
its jndgment when cast. Fuller Information will be found in
Casting the Horoscope and in How to Judgc a Nativity* NOTE,—For the benefit of enqmrers a little booklet entitled
** The Stars and How to Kead Them," has bcen prepared, and
will be scnt post free on receipt of address.
Send a post-card to The Editor of “Mqdern Astrolocy," Imperial Buildings, Ludgate Circus, E. C. MANUAL No. 1. ESOTERIC SERIES. Symbolism and Astrology.
By ALAN LEO. An introduction to EBoterio Astrology through
symbolism. PRICE ONE SHIELING NET.
Post free, 1/2. This manual, the first of a new series, is issued to
meet the demand for a siniple elementary boob
that sball heginat ihe begitming of astrological study. It is non-tecbnical, plain reading, and yet it is fuü
of suggestive ideas not to be found in any other
work. 110 ALAN LEO S ASTROLOGICAL NIANUALS.
Pocket édlüong* neatly bound ia cloth. Price 1/- each, 1/2 post free. American Price to certía,
Indian Price 12 ans. EYERYBODY’S A3TR0L0GY :—A book for btginncn. A very
popular manual, íd vvhkh there is given a complete series of
delmeations of lhe nnain characteristícs of each of the 144 distrnct aud separate lypes of persons born in each year theír
fortuna te and unfortunateperiods of Hfe, etc., etc. Si* th edition. WHAT IS A HOROSCOPE AND HOW IS IT CAST ?:-Firtt tUpt
" f“prmieal St,‘dy of^rology. It fully e*plains tbe meaning of
a horoscope, in all senses of lhe word, and is entirely free írora
calcufations of any description, Fourth Edition.
PLANETARY INPLUENCES :-A dmpuandtafUnatorymanual. A
very mterestmg manual for those who desire to grasp the meaning of planetary influences vvithout arduous study.
Hdilion, revísed. Second THE HOROSCOPE IN DETAIL:—A vad, m for rvery ttudcnt
A complete supplement to What it a Horotcop,and Howit it Catt?
Gives all lhe additional detai Isnecessary for study. Third Edition. DIRECTIONS AND DIRECTING:—An Mroiuction to prtiitUv'
Aitrology, dealing vvith King Edward's and King George's
Nativity and Directions. Second Edition.
THE “REA80N WHY IN ASTROLOGY t-Anrxpianation of atirologicalprtctpt auãpmiUt. A philosophical treatise on Astrology
n IS a very useful manual, especiaily for theosophists, fuil of
suggestive and illuminating ideas. Second Edition III Alan Leo’s Astrological Manuais.
HOEARY ASTROLOGY;—How to obtain an ansunr to any question.
This manual explains the art of divination by Horary Astrology.
It gives rules for obtaíning the answers to questions such as :—
IVill it be aãvisable to nmovt ? etc* There is also a full glossary of astrologícal terms.
THE DEGREES OF THE ZODIAC SYMBÔLISED:~A symboJkal
inürpretahon of each d cgr es of the Zodiac. Each degree of lhe Zodíac is symbohsed and explained by two distinct systems.
Third Edition.
MED1CAL ASTROLOGYi—An introivction to the study of Asirolcgy
in nlatian to physical hcalth, A new and entirely original work. WH AT DO WE ME AN BY ASTROLOGY? A book for the inqmrer. Á fitting book to place in the hands of those who know nothing
wh ateve r about the subject. Second Edition* A THOUSAND AND ONE MOTÂBLE NAT1YITJES:—Thehorompn
of rmarkabk peopte obtained fmn authentic sourccs. Thís is the book for students in search of horoscopes for study or reference.
MY FRIENDS’ HOROSCQPES:—A koft of Mop Charts This manual conlains a large mimber of maps for filling in the boroscope of one's friends, etc. Tt is well bound and can be carried in the pocket without injury. A blank page faces each map, MUNDANE ASTROLOGY:—This new manual, dealing wilh National Astrology, supplies a want long felt hy all stmlents of
Mundane Astrology WE&THER PREDICTINC by Astrú-Meteorotogy* 112 Alan L.eo’s Astrological Text Books. ASTROLOGY FOR ALL.
Frice 10/e net* poat free 10/10*
American Frice «3,00. Indian Frice Rps. 744, This book is now in the fmirtfe edition, U is entirely free ot ali
calculaüons, requiriug no kaowlodgs of malhematics, and can be
read througbnut the 'Abole of its 300 pages by the most sim pieminded or by the keenest intelkct, and, what is very much to the
purpose, the truth of the statements it contains can be proven by
each individual reader ; indeed the most confirmed critic cannot
help being amasted at the accuracy of its delmeations. The minds of none will be injurcd by its perusal, and all must benefit by the
instrnction it gives. CASTING THE HOROSCOPE.
REVISED AND ENLARGED EDITION* Frice 10/6 net, post free 10/10*
American Frice «3.00, Indian Frice Rps. 7.14. The Third Edition has received several important additions, having been enlarged to neariy twice its original ske, and is now
made so thorougbly complete as to be quite índispensable to
every student of Astrology. No astrological book ever published has bad sucli a rapid sale as this work.
‘‘THE ASTRGLOGERS BAEDEKER*1' In fact, it has been termed IT3 Alan Leo’s Astrological Text Books, HOW TO JÜDGE A NATIVITY,
REVISED AND GREATLY ENLARGED,
Price 10/6 net, poat frcc 10/ÍO*
American Price 13.00. Indiau Price Rpa. 7.11, The work is divided into two parts, in the first of whích íhc
Nativity is dealt with almost entirely in its purdy e xô Une aspect.
The judgrnent is chiefly mun dane and pracltcab by far the greater
portion of the readmgs given relating merely to the ordinary
occupations and vicissitudes of life, these being entered into with
great minuteness. How ia Jitãgê a Nativity is tberefore not only a Standard Text
Book, the only one of its kiod in existence, but furnisbes a storehouse of general Information concerni ng planetary and zodiacai
infiuences. THE ART OF SYNTHESIS.
Price 10/6 net, posfc free 10/10,
American Price $3,00» Indtan Price Rps. 7,14* N.R.—This Edition is not only greatly amplífied and
extended, but more than half of it is entirely new,
A separate chapter is devoted to eacli of the planets. with
specíal treatment of the ** mystery planets/' Uranus and Neptone,
wbile the relation between Planets and Conseiousness has been
tnade clear in a simple manner, The art of synthesis is gradually
unfolded, and examples from various horoscopes are furmshed,
including an exhaustive treatment of the nativity of °ne wbose
fame is world-wide. There is also added an Astro-Theosophical
Glossary which greatly increases the usefulness of the book.
tt Alan Leo’s Astrological Text Books.
THE PROGRESSED HOROSCOPE. Price 10/6 net, post free 10/10.
American Price $3.00,
Gives a Detaíled Indian Price Rps. 7,14, and Full Delineatiqn of every possible Progressed Aspéct, Solar» Mdtdal, and Lünar* their influence
on character and destiny being fuiiy described, thus enabling any
student io form a firm and soíid foundation on whicb to base his
own individual judgment of any progressed horoscope he may m$ Saturno to inierpret. Tbere is ako a lengthy chapter dealing wkh Transite
íd a nove! and intelligible manner, the esoteric as well as the
exoteric meaning being given, making the subject both interesting
and usefnl. Finally, the last section comprises The Art and
Fractice of Directing, a complete Handbook on "Primary
Directions,” of enormous value to all who study Astrology
in any form. This sectíon alone suffices to render the work quite
uníqua, as no ireatment of the subject has ever before been
pubíished in book form. THE KEY TO YOUR OWN
NATIYITY.
Price 10/6 net, post free 10/10. American Price $3.00. Indian Price Rps. 7.14. It is now possible to read not only "YOUR OWN” but ANY
nativity, from a series of mimbered DELINEATIQNS that bave
been in daily use for over ten years, and what is more have been
continually ímproved and tested by several competent astrologers
until further revision has been deemed unneeessary.
' Noonecan estimate the true value of this imique book until
he has tried it upon his own nativity, From an astrological point
of view tbere are no words available to snffidently illustrate its
merits. u5 Alan Leo’s Astrological Text Books.
ESOTERIC ASTROLOGY.
A 3TUDY IN HUMAN NATURE.
Bv ALAN LEO.
Price i 0/6 net, post free 10/10, «mark^bl,Ehnnlrare\*"Sete^ t0 explain the confen‘s of this
ífífiifr* .w b j
Mâ^ Netuno diagrams and illustrations are eiven to
facihtatc the understanding of a profound subject.
aH_ BjT’1 deal3 ":|th Natal Astrology m a manner never before
ílr(«, Plutão (rf.|byfi“° Netuno Wrl í °l Astrol°By. It ia divided Into three
parts. In tbe first part the theoretical aspeet of Esoteric Aslroloev
is explaioed, m the second part tbe practical side of Esoteric
Astrology is demonstra te d by many Exaraples and Completa
Ljcplanaüons. The third part deats with the sub-divisions of the
4oaiac, etc.
For the first time in the history of Astrology an entirely new
Arfeadm£ horoscopes is given* The INDIVIDUAL and
Síarsiof a!l persons are explained by a series of
bi AK AI At S, sfaowiog howtheage of the soul maybeastroloeicallv
discovered.
3
It shows how tbe Horoscope may be cbanged into a Star Map,
the Star Map into a Fentagoo, and the Fenfagon into a Triangle,' PRACTICAL ASTROLOGY.
àlak Leo's First Book on Astrology*
Símply written* Revised and entarged, Príce 3/6 net, post free 3/10. American Price 61.25. índlan price Fpa. 2.16,