Antiochus
OF ATHENS The Thesaurus Translated
by Robert Schmidt
Edited
by Robert Hand Project Hindsight
Greek Track
Volume Gêmeos -B Antiochus of Athens The Thesaurus
Translated by
Robert Schmidt
Edited by
Robert Hand Project Hindsight
Greek Track
Volume Gêmeos -B The Golden Hind Press PROJECT HiNDSIGHT is entirely funded
by the astrological community through
subscriptions and donations. © Copyright 1993 by
Robert Schmidt Published by The Golden Hind Press, Plutão .O. Box 002,
Berkeley Springs, WV 25411 Table of Contents Introduction by Robert Hand... iv Introduction by Robert Schmidt .. vi
General Note . . . :. viii
Explanation and Statement of the Whole Astronomical Art
From the Thesaurus of Antiochus of Athens.
Parti.
Prooemium.
1. Concerning the Masculine and Feminine zõidia and the
Places and Stars that Become Masculine and
Feminine .
2. Concerning the Sect of the Stars .
3. Concerning the Mixture of the 12 Zõidia . Júpiter . Concerning zõidia which Are Rough, Dull-white3,
Itch-causing, or Eruptive .
5. Concerning the Licentious Zõidia .
6. Concerning zõidia which Are Harmful to the Eyes ...
7. Concerning Exaltations and Depressions.
8. Concerning the Contrarieties of the Stars . Mercúrio . Concerning the Sect of the Trigonal Masters.
10. Concerning the 36 Decans and the Stars Co-rising
with Them and the Faces.
11. Concerning the Non-wandering Bright Stars and the
Powers of those that Co-rise.
12. Concerning the Boundaries according to the Egyptians
and according to Ptolemy, and of the Bright and
Shadowed Degrees .
13. Concerning the Ascensions of the 7 Zones.
14. Concerning the Assignment of Body Parts of the
zõidia .
15. Concerning Triangles, Squares, [Hexagons], and
Diameters, and Those Which Have an
Unconnected Relationship to Each Other After
the Pattern of Diameters.
16. Concerning Unconnected zõidia and Those Having
Sympathy for One Another.
17. Concerning Sympathetic and Unsympathetic Squares 1
1
1 3
5
6
7
7
7
7 Mercúrio 10
11
14 15
16
16 17
19
20 18. Concerning the Twelfth Parts of the Stars. 20 19. Concerning zõidia that Hear and See One Another . 21 20. Concerning Looking Ahead. 21 21. Concerning the Hurling of Rays.
22. Concerning Right and Left Sides. 22
22 23. Concerning the Spear-bearing of the Stars . 23 24. Concerning Spear-bearing out of Sect. 23 25. Concerning Harmony .
26. Concerning Position upon the Tenth Place . 24
24 27. Concerning Affliction and Places in which No Dealings Are Made. 24 28. Concerning Places for Having Dealings .
29. Concerning Being in its Proper Face . 25
25 30. Concerning Participation.
31. Concerning Counter-resolution. 26
26 32. Concerning Reciprocai Mastership.
33. Concerning the Ruler. 26
27 34. Concerning Contact .
35. Concerning Application .
36. Concerning Intervention . 27
27
27 37. Concerning Surpassing .
38. Concerning the Bond . 28
28 39. Concerning Void-Coursing .
40. Concerning Juxtaposition .
41. Concerning Containment. 28
29
29 42. Concerning the Stars in Power.
43. Concerning Chariots. 30
31 44. Concerning how the Stars Rejoice .
45. Concerning Stars under the Beams.
46. Concerning the Years of the Centers and 31
32 Post-ascensions and Declines .
47. Concerning the Signification of the Lots. 32
33 48. The Effects of These [Lots]. 34 49. Concerning the Final and Least Years.
50. How One Should Leam the Additions of the zõidia 37 and the Hours of the Zones . 37 51. Concerning the Greatest and Final Years of the
Recurrences of the Seven Stars. 38 52. Concerning Stars Unconnected to the Lights. 38 53. Effects of the Spear-bearers of the Sun. 39 Part Gêmeos . 40 1. Concerning the Applications of the Moon to the Seven
Wandering Stars . 40 2. Concerning the Harmful Degrees of the Zõidia .... 44 3. Concerning Injuries, Baldness, 45 Júpiter . Licentiousness, and other Passions.
Concerning the Star Going About and the One
Executing . . r. 47 5. Particulars Concerning the Moon. 48 6. Concerning the Decans that Cause Licentiousness . .
7. Concerning the Calends . 49
50 8. Concerning the 7 Wandering Stars in Summary .... Mercúrio . Canon of the Júpiter Winds and the 24 Steps . 51
53 Appendix — Translation Conventions Gout, Madness, . 54 Introduction by Robert Hand
The most regrettable thing about this work is that it is incomplete. He
was apparently one of the most important and influential of the ancient
astrological authors and all we have of him are the fragments translated
here, incomplete and in some cases not clearly his. To make matters
worse, his Thesaurus is one of those rare ancient works, a genuine
reference book, something we badly need, if we are to attain a complete
knowledge of ancient astrology.
We have no idea how extensive the original work was, but it
appears to have been something on the scale of Wilson’s Dictionary of
Astrology or DeVore’s Encyclopedia. In our own work on the ancient
Greek material, these fragments have been most useful in defming terms
that were unclear when used by other authors, who apparently assumed
an easy familiarity with Greek astrological terminology on the part of
their readers. Having no such easy familiarity, Antiochus has been
invaluable to us, as we believe he will be to our readers. At some point
in this project we expect to create a glossary of ancient, medieval and
renaissance astrological terminology. For the ancient Greek part, at
least, we will be relying heavily on the Thesaurus.
The highlights and significant parts of this work are almost too
numerous to mention. For example, we have aspects in mundo clearly
described with calculation methods1. We have precise definitions of
terms that are not clearly defined in modem astrology such as
‘affliction2 3.’ We have extensive material on the applications of the
Moon and their effects in electional or katarchic astrology'1. And among
the most significant items that we have in this work, are descriptions of
the ways in which the various types of aspect relationship are used. As
we saw in Paulus4 the Greeks distinguished between aspects measured
clockwise and aspects measured counterclockwise in the zodiac, and 1 See section 1.15.
2 See section 1.27. [RH]
3 See section Gêmeos . 1 [RH] Júpiter See the General Note in Paulus on schêma. [RH]
IV used them differently. Of particular interest is the concept of the
‘hurling of rays’ in which a planet aspects another planet clockwise
(into the preceding signs). In Antiochus we see several examples of how
this is used and when it is sigificant. In several instances the ‘hurling
of rays’ is important in situations in which modern astrologers would
make no distinction between aspects forward into succeeding signs or
backwards into preceding signs. This is another one of those concepts
in Greek astrology, like sect, which, if the teaching is correct, could
have a powerful effect upon the practice of modern astrology. There is
also more material on sect and what reinforces sect positively and
negatively.
The list could go on. However, there are two things which I believe
that the reader should notice. The first concerns the fine distinctions that
Antiochus and other Greek authors make between astrological
relationships that we would be inclined to group together, the aspect
relationships, for example. The second is that these subtle distinctions
usually arise out of some kind of first principie. These first principies
may not be stated, but one can see them at work, if one looks carefully.
We hope in later works to lay these principies out clearly so that all can
see them for what they are, the basis of the theoretical foundations of
astrology. When our authors give us delineations of astrological
combinations, they are not giving us data to memorize unthinkingly.
They are giving us samples of the working out of basic principies. This
needs to be stressed lest we acquire modem “authorities” who simply
go about citing chapter and verse without understanding the principies
beneath what they cite. The study of the astrology of índia suffers
particularly from this tendency. I believe that when we understand the
bases of Greek astrology, we will also have the key to understanding
the bases of Indian astrology.
Note— All of the footnotes in this book are by the translator, Robert
Schmidt, unless initialed RH in square brackets. [RH] indicates a note
entered by your editor. 1 See sections 1.21, Í.23, 1.27,1.36 and 1.41. [RH]
v Introduction by Robert Schmidt
The present translation has been made from two sets of excerpts edited
in the Catalogus Codicum Astrologorum Graecorum. The first set was
excerpted from Rhetorius’ large compendium (no longer extant in its
entirety), and Rhetorius had himself made these excerpts from a
Thesaurus (or Treasury) of Antiochus. This set of excerpts was edited
in Vol. I, p. 149 ff. by F. Boll. Many of the entries in this collection
were apparently taken over almost verbatim by Porphyry in his
Introduction to the Tetrabiblos.
The second set of excerpts (from Vol. III, p. 107 ff. also edited by
F. Boll) is identified as being from the same Thesaurus of Antiochus.
However, the sequence of excerpts seems to be broken with apparent
excerpts from another works or works inserted. Most of these insertions
are attributed to Heliodorus by the modem editor. A few of the sections
are of doubtful authorship. We have translated those that the editor has
attributed to Antiochus with some certainty.
As the reader will quickly determine for himself, these excerpts
cannot all be in the original State that Antiochus wrote them. There are
numerous editorial remarks by Rhetorius and others right in the text,
teferences to Paulus and other astrologers later than Antiochus, and
locutions that betray the hand of Byzantine paraphrasers of later
centuries.
From this portion of Antiochus’ Thesaurus we can infer something
of the extent and specificity of the Hellenistic technical astrological
terminology. Almost every imaginable relationship of aspect, dignity,
and place seems to have been defined or characterized. Had each of
these relationships actually been studied for their astrological
significance, or is it just the result of astrological theorizing?
It is also becoming increasingly clear that many passages in the
writings of Ptolemy and other astrologers are not written vaguely,
metaphorically, or poetically, but instead employ a precise language that
conveys very specific instructions for relating the stars and the sky.
But these excerpts should also alert us to the fact that this technical
terminology is not always univocal. Like Book Delta of Aristotle’s
Meíaphysics, this Thesaurus could have been subtitled “Things said in
many ways.” Consult the entry about ‘spear-bearing,’ where there are
four, quite different, technical meanings associated with this word. And
it is clear that in other astrological texts, we will often have to select the vi proper meaning of these terms through context, because, consistent with
general Greek practice, the writers often left this task to the reader.
This tension between the concrete and the equivocai is also an issue
in the delineation material that we have been translating. On the one
hand, the Greek manner of writing is so concrete that instead of
referring collectively to the native’s “licentiousness,” it will say that he
is prone to “licentiousnesses,” that is, individual licentious acts. It seems
so natural for us to translate these abstract plural nouns by singulars,
and this has often been done in the present translation.
Yet this usage may be more than just a mannerism on the part of
the Greeks. It may have to do with their whole way of aiming their
minds, and regarding the world. For, consider that the most important
Greek philosophical term ‘ousia,' which is often translated as ‘Being,’
is just such an abstract noun (formed from ‘ousa,’ the feminine
participle of the verb to be). Literally, it should be translated as
‘beingness.’ But each and every individual sensible thing is a
‘beingness’ in the Aristotelian philosophy. So the whole world is
populated by many ‘beingnesses.’ The mere fact that this language
sounds so strange to us is an indication that we do not think the same
way. Are we missing something by being so “modera” in our translation
of ‘licentiousness,’ and other such words?
In the lists of key words and phrases in the delineation material we
run into another version of this problem. It is often impossible to tell if
something concrete is intended. When the word ‘euphuês,’ is used,
which fundamentally means ‘well grown,’ it may often mean either ‘of
good mental disposition’ or ‘of good figure.’ Or when the word
‘apodêmia’ is used, which fundamentally means ‘being away from
home,’ it might have the sense of ‘traveling abroad,’ or of ‘being in
exile.’ The astrologer does not specify. So the question is: Does he have
one of these concrete meanings in mind? Or is he referring to some
general character? Or does he intend some symbolic astrological
structure? All of the above? None of the above?
What little we know about Antiochus of Athens comes from references
to him by other authors. We have no direct Information1. From the 1 This account is derived largely from Frederick H. Cramer, Astrology in
Roman Law and Politics, American Philosophical Society, Philadelphia, 1954,
pp. 187, 188. [RH] authors that he cites and the ones that cite him, Antiochus Of Athens
lived in the second half of the Second Century C.E., after Ptolemy,
before Antigonus of Nicaea.
It is clear ffom the references to him by later astrologers that
Antiochus was among the most influential of the ancient astrologers.
This resulted in his being quoted and excerpted by several later authors.
Among these were the Anonymous of 379 (see our edition of this
work), Hephaestion of Thebes, the “Palchus” fragments1, Firmicus
Maternus2, Porphyry and Rhetorius. Otherwise we would have nothing
of his writings at all. Rhetorius (c. 500 C.E.) copied the most extensive
sections of Antiochus and most of the material transiated in this volume
comes ffom Rhetorius3. General Note
In general this translation uses the same technical vocabulary as the
Paulus and the Anonymous. For example, for one planet “to look
ahead” at another is a precise technical term. See the section on
Translation Conventions in this volume.
To the best of our knowledge, this is the first translation of the
fragments of the Thesaurus of Antiochus of Athens into any modem
language. 1 As of Crameris writing it was believed that there was a highly influential
author of about 500 C.E. named Palchus. Subsequent scholarship has revealed
that there was no such astrologer. The fragments attributed to him are either
miscellaneous fragments of Greek writers, translated from Greek to Arabic back
to Byzantine Greek, or works originally written in Arabic and translated into
Byzantine Greek. The name Palchus comes from the Iranian city Balkhi from
which carne, Abu Ma‘shar, one of the most important of the Arab Era
astrologers. The fragments attributed to “Palchus” apparently carne from Balkhi.
[RH1
2 Latin author, fl. 330-354 C.E. wrote the Matheseos libri VIU. This work
has been translated by Jean Rhys Bram, Ancient Astrology: Theory and
Practice, Noyes Press, Park Ridge N.J., 1975. [RH] 3 This brief biographical segment was written by the editor. [RH] viu Explanation and Statement of the Whole Astronomical
Art
From the Thesaurus of Antiochus of Athens
Part I1
Prooemium
Why did we start the twelve zõidia, which are circular in forni, from
Aries, and not instead from Câncer where the cosmic Hõroskopos took
place; nor from Leo as from the solar zõidionl Why was Aries, the
place of Ares, honored above the two lights? We say, then, that since
the ancients made the twelve zõidia corporeal in accordance with the
parts of man, beginning from Aries, calling it the head, Taurus the neck
and so forth in succession up to the feet, they began from Aries, in
order to begin from the more dominant part that signifies the brain and
all that appertains to the head. And for another reason: because they
formed the ages of man in relation to the tropics by starting from the
spring zõidion, that is, from Aries. For, the spring signifies the suckling,
the summer youth, the fali middle age, and the winter old age.
These are Júpiter zõidia, then, and they are called tropical, and there are Júpiter solid ones, and Júpiter bi-corporeal ones. Tropical zõidia are so called from
the fact that when the Sun comes to be in them, the turnings2 of the air
undergo a change. For example, when it comes to be in the tropical
zõidion Aries, it ushers in the spring and equipartite3 turning, and from
then on the air becomes [finer], and the day lengthens from the equal
hours. When it comes to be in the solid and spring zõidion Taurus, it 1 The numbering of the sections in Part I is directly from the original text.
The numbering in Part 11 has been provided for reference purposes by your
editor. [RH]
2 tropê. The word ‘tropical’ comes is directly related to this word, which
simply means ‘turning.’ In this section it is used in four different ways. There
is the ‘turning’ of the Sun in its course to go southward or northward. There is
the ‘turning’ of the balance of day and night. There is the physical ‘turning’ of
the air mass. And there is the ‘turning’ of the temperature, where it changes
“direction” and begins to become hotter or colder. These are all related to each
other in the text.
3 isemermos. This refers to the equal night and day of the equinoctial times. makes the air calmer and unchangeable, while it increases the day even
more. When it comes to be in the bicorporeal zõidion Gemini, it makes
the air ambiguous, and makes a commixture of in between spring and
summer, while it increases the day even more. In this tri-zõidion, then,
the spring, which is air, is completed.
Again, when the Sun comes to be in the tropical zõidion Câncer, it
ushers in the summer tuming. The air starts to become warmer, and
from then on it subtracts from the magnitude of the day and adds to the
magnitude of the night. Again, when it comes to be in the solid and
summer zõidion Leo, it makes the air calmer and unchangeable, still
subtracting from the magnitude of the day and adding to the magnitude
of the night. Again, when it comes to be in the bi-corporeal zõidion
Virgo, it makes the air ambiguous and makes a commixture in between
summer and fali, while it fiirther increases the night and shortens the
day. In this tri -zõidion, then, the summer, which is fire, is fulfllled.
Again, when the Sun comes to be in the tropical zõidion Libra, it
ushers in the fali and equipartite tuming, and from then on the air is
tumed to the colder. The night now lengthens from equal hours. Again,
when it comes to be in the solid zõidion Scorpio, it makes the air
calmer and unchangeable, still subtracting from the magnitude of the
day and adding to the magnitude of the night. Again, when it comes to
be in the bi-corporeal zõidion Sagittarius, it makes the air ambiguous
and makes a commixture in between fali and winter. And it further
subtracts from the magnitude of the day, and adds to the magnitude of
the night. In this tri -zõidion, then, the fali, which is earth, is fulfilled.
Again, when the Sun comes to be in the tropical zõidion Capricorn,
it makes the winter tuming. And from then on the air is tumed to the
more wintry; and the day starts to increase, while the night starts to
leave off. Again, when it comes to be in the solid and wintry zõidion
Aquarius, it makes the air of winter calmer and unchangeable, by
subtracting from the magnitude of the night having added to the
magnitude of the day. Again, when it comes to be in the bi-corporeal Zõidion Pisces, it makes the air ambiguous, and makes a commixture in
between winter and spring, by subtracting from the magnitude of the
night having added to the magnitude of the day, to equipartite hours. In
this tri -zõidion, the wintry air, which is water, is completed. 2 1. Concerning the Masculine and Feminine zõidia and the Places
and Stars that Become Masculine and Feminine
There are six masculine zõidia: Aries, Gemini, Leo, Libra, Sagittarius,
Aquarius. And there are six feminine zõidia: Taurus, Câncer, Virgo,
Scorpio, Capricom, Pisces.
The places from the Midheaven to the Hõroskopos are masculine,
while the places from the Hõroskopos to the subterraneous pivot point
are feminine. Again, the places from the subterraneous pivot point to
the setting pivot point are masculine, while the places from the setting
pivot point to the Midheaven are feminine. Of the Júpiter quadrants, then,
two become masculine, and two become feminine.
Again, the stars the Sun, Kronos, Zeus, Ares, and Hermes are
masculine, while the Moon and Aphrodite are feminine. These stars
sometimes become masculine, other times feminine. They become
masculine when they happen to be morning risers in relation to the Sun;
that is, when they happen to be in the zõidia preceding the Sun at least
15 degrees away from it. But they become feminine when they happen
to be evening [risers] in relation to the Sun, being at least 15 degrees
away from it. Again, the stars which happen to be in masculine zõidia
and are northem become masculine. But they become feminine when
they are in feminine zõidia and Southern. Again, the stars which happen
to be in masculine quadrants (from the Midheaven to the Hõroskopos,
and from the subterraneous pivot point to the setting one) become
masculine. But those in the feminine quadrants (that is, from the
Hõroskopos to the subterraneous pivot point, and from the setting pivot
point to the Midheaven) become feminine1. 1 If one were to take preceding paragraphs literally, they would appear to
bc contradictory. Planets seem to be inherently of one sex or another, but yet
change sex when they are placed differently. There is a simple and probable
solution. Ail planets are inherently masculine or feminine. According to most
other writers Mercury changes its sex according to placement, but these same
writers make Mercury a triplicity ruier in a masculine (and diumal) triplicity.
Antiochus makes Mercury masculine. Mercury would seem to be very close to
neutral with a slight tendency toward the masculine.
However, the inherent sexuality of each planet can be reinforced or,
alternatively, overcome by the sexual polarity of the placement. The most
masculine energy would be signifícd by a masculine planet in a masculine
3 The stars which become masculine in the inherently masculine1
zõidia or the inherently masculine quadrants contribute to masculine
births. For, they make those have the masculine nature in themselves
wilful and daring. But they make women undignified, shameless, daring,
insubordinate, masculine in relation to intercourse, or masturbators. The
stars which are feminine by their phases, zõidia, and quadrants, make
men soft, fainthearted, cowardly, fearful of everybody, effeminate and
entirely castrated, or those who do the work of women. But it makes
women with downcast eyes, modest, considerate, dignified, obedient to
men, and those who perfectly learn the customs of women.
And we have said these things conceming the stars which rise in
the moming or the evening. For, those of the stars which have come to
be setting or retrograde2 are inactive and weaker and irregular in
relation to what they do, except for those stars which are in the heart.
And those stars are said to be in the heart3 which travei in
company4 with the Sun, either on the same degree, or beside it. None
of the ancients was aware of this phase, but we record it after having
tested it, since Ptolemy calls this phase “synodic,” though he has not quadrant in a masculine sign, the most feminine energy by a feminine planet in
a feminine quadrant in a feminine sign. A masculine or feminine planet situated
in places of opposite sexual polarity can be changed into that opposite poJarity,
although one might expect symbolic tension to result. [RH]
1 êrrenõmenos. This is the perfect participial form of the present verb form
we have been translating as ‘become masculine.’ The perfect participle in Greek
does not refer to time so much as the completion of an action. We might say
here that the zõidia or quadrants have so perfectly become masculine that they
are masculine.
Accordingly, it would seem to indicate here that the cited zõidia and
quadrants are inherently and immutably masculine or feminine, while the
planets can assume a masculine or feminine cast.
2 aphairetai. Presumably these means subtractive here, as in subtractive in
numbers.
3 This is approximately the same as ‘cazimi.5 [RH] Júpiter sunodeuõ. That is, are conjunct it. The term ‘synodic’ derives from this
word. Júpiter spoken of its activity. 2. Concerning the Sect of the Stars
For diumal births, the sect leaders are the Sun, Kronos, Zeus, for
noctumal births, the Moon, Aphrodite, Ares. For, Hermes becomes
common in relation to the sects. And the Sun, Zeus, and Aphrodite are
held to be benefics; while Kronos and Ares are held to be malefics. For
as common, Hermes is good with the good planets, and becomes
malefic with the malefics. But concerning the benefics and malefics,
they said that they are “so-held1,” since when the malefics are well
situated in phase, sect, and place for a certain birth, they often magnify
the fortunes; while if the benefics are badly situated, they hinder them.
For Dorotheus spoke on this heading, saying: For, three-sided2
evil-workers are dulled; and a star is not yet base when it should be
found in a good place; and a place is not bad when it bids welcome to
a good one3. 1 That is, it is partly a matter of convention to divide the planets into
benefic and malefic. It is not an inherent quality. [Additional by RH} This
seems to be an early recognition of an idea that is considered quite modem, that
no planet is inherently benefic or malefic, although it is not clear that the will
of the individual has anything to do with it. Iamblichus in his work, On the
Mysteries, addresses this same issue in a discussion of “how some of the Gods
are beneficent, but other malefic.” Iamblichus asserts that all divine powers
(including planetary) are good in themselves and descend to us “with invariable
sameness for the salvation of the uni verse. . .” But this world “participates of
them [i.e., divine powers} according to its own proper nature, and not according
to their [i.e., the gods’] power.” And further on “Hence they are absurd... who
ascribe depravity to the celestial bodies, because their participants [italics mine]
sometimes produce evils.” Iamblichus, On the Mysteries, trans. Thomas Taylor,
Wizards Press: San Diego, 1984, pp. 68-69.
2 Aspect or the three dignities?
3 This quote from Dorotheus was originally in verse. 5 3. Conceming the Mixture1 of the 12 Zoidia
We have found Aries to be fiery; Taurus, earthy; Gemini, airy; Câncer,
watery. Again, we have found Leo to be fiery; Virgo, earthy; Libra,
airy; Scorpio, watery. And again, Sagittarius, fiery; Capricorn, earthy;
Aquarius, airy; Pisces, watery. So that the trigon Aries, Leo, Sagittarius
is fiery; the trigon of Taurus, Virgo, Capricorn earthy; the trigon of
Gemini, Libra, Aquarius airy; the trigon of Câncer, Scorpio, Pisces
watery.
This was not said aimlessly by the ancients. For, since everything
material is composed from these Júpiter elements or bodies, it is necessary
that man, as participating in the same nature, also share in these
elements. And they assigned the four pivot points of the birth in
accordance with the four mixtures2 of these Júpiter elements3, thusly: If
Aries should mark the birth-hour, this is a fiery zõidion', and if
Capricorn should culminate, this is an earthy zõidion', and if Libra
should set, it is an airy zõidion; and if Câncer should happen to be in
the subterraneous pivot, the mixture will be best. Again, if you should
seek the post-ascensions and the declines of the pivots, you will find
them to lie analogously in accordance with the four elements. 1 krasis. A general word for combination or blend. It is also used for the
mixture of different natures into one, as in the correlation of the fixed stars to
a mixture of pairs of planets.
2 The word ‘krasis’ or ‘mixture’ is used in Aristotelian tradition to refer to
the mixture of primary qualities in the elements, hot and dry, cold and wet, etc.
[RH]
3 This represents four different ways that the elements can be arranged on
the four pivot points, assuming, of course, that one is using either equal or signas-house houses (topoi). 6 Júpiter . Concerning zõidia which Are Rough1, Dull-white3,
Itch-eausing, or Eruptive
When the Moon is afflicted in Aries, Câncer, Scorpio, Capricorn, or
Pisces, it makes itches, scaly or dull-white leprosy, or skin-eruptions.
This is not only true for the Moon, but also when the Lot of Fortune or
the Lot of Divinity happens to be in these zõidia, being contemplated
only by malefics. And they also make those who are bom humpbacked. 5. Concerning the Licentious Zõidia
Licentious and malefic are Aries, Taurus, Capricorn, Pisces, and Libra
too in part. You will fmd out more detail concerning these in what lies
ahead. 6. Concerning zõidia which Are Harmful to the Eyes
zõidia which are harmful to the eyes are Taurus by means of the
Pleiades, Câncer by means of the nebula, Scorpio by means of the sting,
Sagittarius by means of the point, Capricorn by means of the spike,
Aquarius by means of the pitcher, and Leo in part. And you will find
out more detail concerning these in what lies ahead. 7. Concerning Exaltations and Depressions
Having spoken, then, accordingly of the entire physical commixture of
the zõidia, we will come to the causes of the exaltations, depressions,
and contrarieties of the stars. Why is it that where the Sun is exalted,
there Kronos is depressed; and where Kronos is exalted, there the Sun 1 Rough (leprõdês) and dull-white (alphõdês) are general adjectives derived
from the appearance of leprosy, but which could be applied to the zõidia
themselves. A doctrine of correspondence is evidently behind this; yet the
context is also causative. 7 is depressed? We say that it is because the Sun is the storehouse1 of
fire and light, and is the master of the day; while conversely, Kronos,
signifying the darkness, is cold2. Then, at the place where the light of
day is exalted, there the darkness and the night is depressed, and that
which is cold is warmed. But at the place where the darkness is exalted,
there the light is depressed and the day becomes shorter.
And again, why is it that at the place where Zeus is exalted, there
Ares is depressed; and where Ares is exalted, there Zeus is depressed?
We say that it is because Zeus is the overseer3 of the life-breath and
abundance, while Ares is the overseer of death4. Then, at the place
where the life-breath increases, there the bringer of death is depressed;
and where death increases, there life is depressed.
And again, why is it that at the place where Aphrodite is exalted,
there Hermes is depressed; and where Hermes is exalted, there
Aphrodite is depressed? We say that it is because Hermes is the master
of arguments5, while Aphrodite is the overseer of desire and intercourse. Then, at the place where the intellectual6 increases, there
the desire and the pleasurable in intercourse is depressed. And where
the appetitive and pleasurable is exalted, there the intellectual is
depressed.
And again, why is it that at the place where the Moon is exalted,
there nothing is depressed;, and where the Moon is depressed, there 1 tameion. Guardianship metaphor.
2 We have an apparent contradiction here. If Satum is diumal then why
does it signify darkness? According to Ptolemy in the Tetrabiblos Book 1.7
(Robbins trans.) Satum is diumal precisely because of this. Satum needs the
heat and light of day in order to overcome its inherently malefic, cold and dry
qualities. [RH]
3 ephoros. More guardianship. Júpiter The Mesopotamian deity which was originally assigned to the planet Mars
was Nergal, the god of war and death. [RHj
5 logoi.
6 to logikon. 8 nothing is exalted? We say that it is because the Moon is the fortune of
all. And he whom fortune exalts, no one may depress; while he whom
fortune depresses, no one is able to be exalt1. 8. Concerning the Contrarieties2 of the Stars
Why is it that the houses of the Sun and the Moon are contrary to the
houses of Kronos? We say that it is because the Sun and the Moon are
the lights of the cosmos, while Kronos is the master of darkness.
Whence light is always contrary to darkness, and darkness to light.
Again, why is it that the houses of Hermes are contrary to the houses
of Zeus, and the houses of Zeus to the houses of Hermes? We say that
it is because Zeus is the overseer of possessions and abundance, while
Hermes is always the master of arguments. The intellectual faculty,
then, is always contrary to, and looks down upon, the desire for
possessions, and abundance is contrary to what is intellectual. Then
again, why is it that the houses of Ares are contrary to the houses of
Aphrodite? We say that it is because Aphrodite is the overseer of every
desire and delight and pleasure, while Ares is the overseer of every fear
and war and passion3. The delightful and appetitive and pleasurable,
then, is contrary to the terrible and passionate and polemicai4. 1 It is apparent that the planets are opposed in exaltation and depression in
the manner of contrary qualities, like hot and cold, wet and dry, which in the
sensible world are constantly tuming into one another. More of the one is less
of the other. For example, hotter is tantamount to less cold, and vice versa.
These represented the principie of the Limitless in Plato’s Philebus. But
compare the kind of opposition in the next section.
2 enantiõma. The word simply means contrary. From context, the modem
astrological equivalem is evidently “detriment.” This concept was not used in
Paulus, nor in Ptolemy as far as we can tell.
3 thumos. Júpiter We have used the term “contrariety” here to pick up an Aristotelian
subtlety. For him, contrariety is complete difference, unlike the contrary
qualities referred to in the preccding section, which can tum into one another.
Notice that in his analysis here Antiochus uses dark and light to contrast Kronos Mercúrio But that this is so, it is also necessary to judge thus in accordance
with the truth: That the natures of the stars, in respect to their
configurations, are in every heading. For, why does Ares together with
Aphrodite produces adultery? It is not clear that every adultery is
constituted by pleasure and fear, that is, from Ares and Aphrodite. For
again, see Aphrodite consorting with Kronos, how it makes those so
born without seed, unfortunate in children, sordid, or unmarried, by
mixing the natures of both. You will fmd the cause as follows: since
Kronos happens to be cold and dry in nature, and, even though one of
those mentioned earlier is cold and dry, that which is pleasurable and
fertile is breath1, how will he become one who bears children or will
have an unsordid marriage through what is elderly or sordid in the
nature of the star2? Mercúrio . Concerning the Sect of the Trigonal Masters3
Of each trigonal side, then,—I mean by a trigonal side that which is
counted through 5 zõidia; for example, from Aries to Leo, and ffom
Leo to Sagittarius, and from Sagittarius to Aries there are 5 zõidia, and with the Sun, whereas above he used hot and cold. Since contrarieties cannot
tum into each other, their opposition creates a certain kind of tensing and
relaxing, which in the Platonic tradition gave birth to entirely new beings, not
merely different blends of qualities.
That the two kinds of opposites, exaltation and depression, rulership and
contrariety, should have been analyzed in these terms not only helps to get a
clearer idea of how these two sets of dignities (and their opposites) were
understood and distinguished by the Greek astrologers, but represents a quite
high degree of philosophical sophistication.
1 Presumably, the breath, being air, is here hot and wet, contrary to the
qualities of cold and dry. These seem to take for granted the Aristotelian
elements and not the Stoic elements. [Additional by RH] Of course this assumes
that breath actually is a reference to the element air.
2 The entire analysis in this second paragraph only makes sense if we make
the distinctions mentioned in page Mercúrio , note Júpiter above.
3 i.e., triplicity rulerships. [RH] 10 they produce a trigonal side or line of 120 degrees in the zodiacal
circle. For three times one hundred twenty results in 360 degrees, which
are the number of degrees that the whole zodiacal circle has.—of this
trigonal side, then, the Sun has mastery by day; Zeus has mastery by
night; and Kronos is the third and common master of these. Again,
Aphrodite has mastery over Taurus, Virgo, and Capricorn by day; the
Moon has mastery over them by night; and Ares is the third and
common master. Again, Kronos has mastery over Gemini, Libra, and
Aquarius by day; Hermes has mastery over them by night; and Zeus is
the third and common master. Again, Aphrodite has mastery over
Câncer, Scorpio, and Pisces by day; Ares has mastery over them by
night; and the Moon is the third and common master. And you will find
the uses and the effects of these trigonal masters in the sections ahead. 10. Concerning the 36 Decans and the Stars Co-rising with Them
and the Faces
Although the zodiacal circle had been cut into 12 sections, that is, into
12 zõidia, the ancients set down another 36 sections, which they called
decans. And they apportioned these out by zõidion so as to rule over ten
degrees," whence they are called decans. The aforesaid stars which
co-rise in the zodiacal circle underlay1 these decans, and they have the
faces of the 7 stars, which faces have a sympathy for the stars lying
upon them2.
For example, suppose that the Sun is at ten degrees in the first 1 hupokeimai. In a philosophical context this would mean to underlie
something as a substratum in which something else may inhere. And we have
translated it with that sense. But it might mean less specifically that the
co-rising stars were simply assigned or allocated to these decans.
2 Whatever the exact sense of note 1 above, this passage seems to imply
that it is the extra-zodiacal stars co-rising with the regions of the ecliptic that
constitute the decans themselves. They might be thought of as an entity
analogous to a zõidion. But whereas the closest relationship of a planet to a
zõidion is one of rulership or exaltation, the closest relationship of a planet to
a decan is one of “countenance,” or face. This might also lead us to speculate
on an extra-zodiacal source for the boundaries.
11 decan of Aries, in the face of Ares. Since, then, we have found that the
Sun signifies the matters of the soul, you will fmd the soul of this
manly spirit to be irascible, delighting in battle, arms-loving, and the
like. But again, suppose that the Sun is at 20 degrees in the second
decan of Aries, in the face of the Sun; it signifies that such a manly
spirit is bright in his soul, a lo ver of fame and of honor and not at all
delighting in battle. But again, suppose that the Sun is at 30 degrees in
the third decan of Aries, in the face of Aphrodite; it signifies that this
manly spirit is feminine-souled, of the female type, shameful, lecherous,
and the like. See how in one zõidion three differentia have been
exemplified for the matters of the soul alone1.
[In the original there is inserted at this point a list by Teucron the
Babylonian on the signs and decans.]
Teucron the Babylonian has set out these things quite well. We will
make our comments by degree as folio ws.
One must know that each single zõidion has three decans, while
each of the decans has been allotted ten degrees. The Sun spends 24
hours in each degree, or one night and day.
In the lst decan of Aries, it makes dangers, treacheries, fluxions.
In the 2nd decan, it makes those who are wealthy and held in esteem,
except that they are liable to die suddenly. In the 3rd decan, it makes
disease, tumults, misery in youth, but good cheer in old age.
In the lst decan of Taurus, it makes the native wealthy from
someone else and esteemed. In the 2nd decan it makes youth full of
hardship and those who quickly escape dangers. In the 3rd decan, it
makes soldiers, those who procure with ease, who are steadfast, who are
organizers, and long-lived.
He who has married in the lst decan of Gemini will not be
fortunate, will not be devoted, and will be grieved about children. In the
2nd decan, he will not have a devoted marriage, but he will [gives signs
of the endurance of armies]. In the 3rd decan, it makes those who are
wealthy, held in esteem, leaders, except that they are liable to die
suddenly.
In the lst decan of Câncer, it makes those who take part in public 1 The first two paragraphs in this section are found almost verbatim in
Porphyry’s introduction to the Tetrabiblos. 12 affairs, and they will be grieved about children, those who are deeply
grieved in youth, but who become most fortunate in old age. He who
has married in the 2nd decan of Câncer will [have a rich dowry] and
will be benefitted by other peoples things, and he will be aggrieved by
his wife. In the 3rd decan, the native will be smooth-tongued and deeply
grieved in youth, but will be gladdened in old age.
In the Ist decan of Leo, it will make those who lead and are
wealthy and fmd the way to their goal, and who bury their wife first.
In the 2nd and 3rd decan it makes meanness and produces hardship and
[destroys] him who li ves abroad.
In the 1 st decan of Virgo, it makes dangers, and those who are born
will quickly become orphans. In the 2nd and 3rd decans, it makes good
fortune and they are made rich by female connections; except that they
are aggrieved in their parents and children.
He who is born in the first decan of Libra will be in danger in
youth, but later he will gain by reason of [mines] and from discoveries.
In the 2nd decan he will rich in quadrupeds, except that he will be
liable to die suddenly. In the 3rd decan, he will undergo diseases and
tumult in youth, but he will be gladdened in old age in many ways.
In the lst decan of Scorpio, he will be helped by windfalls
[hermaikos], and an heir of notable things is brought to light. In the 2nd
decan, he will undergo dangers in youth. He who is bom in the 3rd
decan will be a soldier, will live many years, will bury his wife first,
and will be wealthy in his old age.
He who is born in the lst decan of Sagittarius will not [take pains]
in a wife, and will be grieved about children. In the 2nd decan, his life
will be lived free from pain, except that he will end it with strangers.
In the 3rd decan, it makes those who are rich and held in esteem, and
he will receive an inheritance from a woman.
In the lst decan of Capricorn, it makes those who take part in
public affairs, and they will be grieved about children, and they will be
in danger in youth, and will be fortunate in old age. In the 2nd decan,
it makes those who are useful and those who are helped by the things
of others. In the 3rd decan, he will become acute, glib-tongued, one
who wastes his patrimony; he will be in misery in his youth, but he will
be gladdened in his old age.
In the lst decan of Aquarius, he will be good and changeable and
accommodating to women. In the 2nd and 3rd decans, it makes those
who are base, and depraved in youth—corrupters of things, involved in 13 matter and water1.
He who is born in the lst decan of Pisces will be worthless,
involved in water, lying, except that he will be liable to die a sudden
death. In the 2nd and 3rd decans it makes those who are fortunate and
those who are helped by the things of others, and those who are
fortunate in marriage and will be grieved in their children. 11. Concerning the Non-wandering Bright Stars and the Powers
of those that Co-rise.
The type of the zõidia and of the co-rising stars has been constituted
from the synthesis of the stars. There are among them, then, bright stars
and faint stars and stars which are gloomier2. The ancients who
observed these said that the brightest of these stars were of the first
magnitude, the fainter stars of the second magnitude, while the gloomier
stars were of the third magnitude, and following in this order they found
them up to the sixth magnitude. They also said that these stars shared
in the mixture of the planets, as we said earlier, and that and some of
them happened to be in the zodiacal circle, some of them farther north
than the zodiac, some of them farther south. Then, observing the
brightest of these stars, they found 30 bright ones3 which happened to
be of the first and second magnitudes. If, then, these should be found
to have the same degree as the Hõroskopos or the Midheaven, or they
should form a figure with the Sun or the Moon or with some other star,
they will alter the birth in accordance with the mixture which appertains
to them. For example, if the mixture is benefic, the matters of fortune 1 Matter and water appear to be comipting influences. This does not appear
to refer to an involvement with these as substances as such. See also the Pisces
decans. [RH]
2 stugnoteros.
3 These 30 bright stars are the subjects of the Treatise on the Bright Fixed
Stars by the Anonymous of 379 and Ptolemy’s Phases, although the lists in the
two works differ slightly. The first of these two has been published and relcased
by Project Hindsight along with this treatise. Ptolemy’s Phases will be
translated and issued shortly by Project Hindsight. [RH] 14 will be better, but if it is malefic, worse1. 12. Concerning the Boundaries according to the Egyptians and
according to Ptolemy, and of the Bright and Shadowed Degrees
Again, the ancients, dividing each zõidion into half2 regions and places,
gave them the name ‘boundaries,’ but not in accordance with equal
numbers of degrees, as we found for the decans, but with a different
number according to another reason which they adopted in the perfect
periods of the planets. (I mean the periods which you will find in what
follows3)
The degrees of the boundaries are themselves lying by zõidion.
Some of them have been found for Zeus, others for Aphrodite, others
for Kronos, and others for the remaining planets. Whenever, then, one
of the stars should be found in the house of a benefic and in the
boundaries of a benefic, [since it has a relationship to the birth], it has
a beneficent effect on the fate. And if it should be found in the house
of a benefic, but in the boundaries of a malefic, it lessens the good
effect on the fate. But if it should happen to be in the house of a
malefic, and in the boundaries of a malefic, it afflicts and dims the fate.
The action of the boundaries, then, modifies the effect description4 of
the stars, just as has also been said for the faces of the decans.
Ptolemy, then, did not agree with the boundaries of the Egyptians.
For this reason, I was compelled to make mention of them. But the
boundaries of the Egyptians are only of help in their own effect-descriptions5.
The bright, shadowy, and faint degrees do not have an insignificant 1 This entire section is found almost verbatim in Porphyry’s Introduction
to the Tetrahiblos.
2 hêmisus. The significance of this word here is not clear. [RH] 3 See section 1.49. Júpiter apotelesmatographia. -ourgia. Cf. with Paulus. Does not indicate chart.
5 apotelesmata.
15 effect, if indeed the stars are found to be in the bright degrees. For this
reason, I was also compelled to record these in the upcoming
[sections]1. 13. Concerning the Ascensions of the 7 Zones.
Ptolemy recorded the ascensions of the 7 zones after making a precise
investigation to the minute, and we have need of these in every
genethliacal procedure just as he recorded in his Handy Canon2.
The Egyptians and Valens recorded the 7 zones more roughly, but
we [actually] have need of these in the co-risings of the zõidia and the
stars for each zone, just as Valens said in his [apotelesmatics]. 14. Concerning the Assignment of Body Parts of the zoidia
He has recorded the part-assignments3 of man, those parts over which
each of the zõidia and each of the planets has authority, through our
knowing the injuries and sufferings which arise for man from the Lot
of Fortune, the Lot of Divinity, the Lot of Injury, and their rulers. For
it is in them that the injuries and sufferings are recognized for the most
part.
Accordingly then, having said all the aforesaid, and after giving a
clear explanation of them, I am recording [below] the manifest power
of the figurations. 1 This entire section is found almost verbatim in Porphyry’s Introduction
to the Tetrabiblos.
2 Usually refered to as the Handy Tables. [RH] 3 melothesia.
16 15. Concerning Trianglcs, Squares, [Hexagons], and Diameters,
and Those Which Have an Unconnected Relationship to Each
Other After the Pattern of Diameters.
The differentia of the triangular, square, and hexagonal configurations
are established. And the first and greater differentia [of allj is that being
taken by degrees1 in accordance with the Handy Canon of Ptolemy, as
we have shown in what follows. The second is the temporal2
differentia, which Antigonus and Phnaes the Egyptian and certain others
have recorded, and they named an isosceles triangle of the ascensions
of the zõidia. The third is the zodiacal or common and universal
differentia, in relation to which we all are in doubt3. For, many times,
when the Sun is in Leo about the lst degree, while Zeus is in
Sagittarius about the 5th degree, the triangle Zeus to the Sun was
[propounded], the idle ones4 were figurated with one another. For, they
do not stand platically5 within 120 degrees, nor have they occurred
temporally within 120 degrees, not even ascensionally within 120 ' moirikos. This must be the partile, or exact geometrical figuration, i.e.,
aspect. The aspect is being taken by degrees.
2 This seems to be the ancestor of the modem mundane aspect, where the
aspect is measured along the equator in right and obliqúe ascension, instead of
along the ecliptic in celestial longitude.
3 He appears to be addressing the question of the use of aspects by sign
when they are beyond partile. [RH] Júpiter argoi. ‘Idle ones’ refer to planets that are not related by figure.
5 platikõs. Literally, broadly. This is evidently the zodiacal (zõidiakõs)
figuration, i.e., aspect, by sign. Whereas the modem platic aspect (after Lilly
and others) seems virtually identical to a geometrical aspect with orb, the
ancient platic aspect seems to derive from the aspect between the zõidia
themselves, now transferred to the planets. For example, any two planets within
zõidia which are in trine, are themselves in platic or zodiacal trine. Does the
teaching concerning application and separation apply to platic aspects, or to
partile aspects, in which latter case it would be tantamount to the use of orbs?
17 degrees*.
The triangular side, then, is always called zodiacal2, which again
had the activity3, since neither the partile nor the temporal kept it
together. Since, then we ha ve recorded the partile triangular, square, and
hexagonal side in what follows, through the Canon of Ptolemy, and we
just now exemplified the zodiacal4, we thought it necessary to record
the temporal by means of an example. Suppose the Sun to be in Aries
at the lst degree in the zone through Alexandria; and suppose Zeus to
be at the 2nd degree of Leo, Ares at the 5th degree. I will do as
follows: The ascensional times of Aries are 21;40, the ascensional times
of Taurus are 25, the ascensional times of Gemini are 28;20, the
ascensional times of Câncer are 31 ;40. The ascensional times of the four
zõidia become 106;40. In relation to 120 times, ,13;20 are ieft over, which I fmd at about 11 1/2 degrees of Leo. For, doubling the 355
times, 70 times result. And by making 11 1/2 times these, I find 805
times, which I divide by sixty. 13;25 times result. I connect these with
the 106;40 times. Together, 120;5 result. Thus, the Í1 l/2th degree of
Leo is found in the zone of Alexandria, producing an isosceles triangle
with the first degree of Aries. And we say that Zeus is regarded both
zodiacally and temporally by the Sun, while Ares is regarded zodiacally
alone.
Since 21 ;35 times are left over in Leo, I add them to the second
isosceles triangle as follows: the ascensional times of Leo are 21 ;35, the 1 The distinction betweem ‘ascensional’ and ‘temporal’ is not clear here.
[RH]
2 Again ‘zodiacal’ means aspect by sign. The sense of this text seems to be
that only an aspect by sign is still in effect, i.e., platically. [RH]
3 i.e., there is an effect from this. The general conclusion appears to be that
aspects can occur partilely on the ecliptic, or by sign only, temporally, or by
ascension. Any combination of the above has an effect, although it would seem
that having more than one of these in effect at a given time is more powerful.
[RH] Júpiter Again by sign.
5 The ascensional times of Leo. Antiochus uses the same values as Paulus
and Ptolemy. [RH]
18 ascensional times of Virgo are 38;20, the ascensional times of Libra are
38;20. Together, they are 98; 15. Again, in relation to 120 times, 21;45
are left over, which I find at about 18;37 degrees of Scorpio. For, by
doubling the ascension of Scorpio, which is 35 times, 70 times result.
And by making 18;37 times these, I find 1,305 times, which I divide by
sixty. 21;45 times result, which I add to the 98; 15 times. Together, 120
times result. Thus, 18;37 degrees of Scorpio are found to produce the
second isosceles triangle to 11 1/2 degrees of Leo in the zone through
Alexandria.
Again, since 13; 15 times are left over ffom Scorpio, I add to these
the third isosceles triangle. There are 13; 15 times of Scorpio, 31;40
times of Sagittarius, 28;20 times of Capricorn, 25 times of Aquarius,
21 ;40 times of Pisces. Together, they are 119;55 times, which produce
the isosceles triangle of the zodiacal circle. The 5 [degrees] left over in
relation to the 120 times in the first triangle are ignored. And with the
same method you will find the hexagonal and square sides which are
called temporal1. 16. Concerning Unconnected zoidia and Those Having Sympathy
for One Another.
Zõidia which are unconnected, but have a sympathy for one another, are all the equally ascending zõidia, and those which are equally powerful
and like-engirding. For example, Aries and Pisces, Gemini and
Capricorn, Câncer and Sagittarius, Virgo and Libra, are equally
ascending. Gemini and Câncer, Virgo and Aries, Libra and Pisces, 1 This section actually describes in mundo aspects of exactly the kind that Placidus made so much use of in his primary directions. The math is different
but the end result is nearly the same. The principie difference is that the latitude
of the aspecting planets is ignored, which is consistem with Greek practice.
Notice also that the combination of “temporal” (to use Antiochus’ term) and
zodiacal aspects of the same kind scems to be regarded as reinforcing the effect
of the aspect. Later on in post-Placidean astrology, the same practice is also to
be found along with the opposite idea that an in mundo trine belween bodies
that are zodiacally in square or vice versa causes a change in the effect of the
zodiacal aspect. This would not have happened very frequently at. the more
southerly latitudes where the Greek astrologers worked. [RH]
19 Sagittarius and Capricom, are equally powerful. Taurus to Libra, Aries
to Scorpio, are like-engirding. And the proximities of the other
unconnected zõidia [have been] entirely useless for sympathy. This
heading contributes to the co-ascension of the zõidia and the co-rising
of the stars, and to the friendship and sympathy of men and women and
parents and brothers and friends and slaves. 17. Concerning Sympathetic and Unsympathetic Squares
The zõidia which have sympathy for one another in accordance with a
square zodiacal side are these: Taurus to Aquarius, and Leo to Scorpio
through equal ascension. Again, Leo to Taurus and Scorpio to Aquarius
through equal power. And Gemini to Virgo and Sagittarius to Pisces
through like-engirding. All the other squares happen to be useless for
sympathy. Every square side is constituted by 90 degrees, while the
hexagon is constituted by 60 degrees; for, four times 90 is 360, and six
time 60 is 360. And the diameter is constituted by 180 degrees; for,
twice 180 becomes 360, which are the number of degrees that the whole
circle has. 18. Concerning the Twelfth Parts of the Stars
The ancients set out the twelfth parts of the degrees of the stars in three
ways. Paulus in his Introduction said to make the degrees which are
equal to 13 times the degrees of the star, and to depart from the same
zõidion, at 30 degrees apiece, and wherever the number should come down to nothing, the twelfth part of the star will be in that zõidion. But
Dorotheus says in the 11 th book to [make] the degrees by 12. And
Ptolemy says in the 26th heading of the lst book to depart with the
degrees at two and a half per zõidion. By trial I found the method of
Dorotheus to be more in agreement with that of Ptolemy. And I approve
more of these methods—I mean of the multiplication by 12, and of that
by two and a half. For thus the two methods leave off at the same
zõidion, as in this example: The Moon happened to be at Taurus at the 25th degree. Making twelve times these, I found 300 degrees. I departed
with these from Taurus at 30 degrees apiece, and it left off at 30
degrees of Aquarius for the filling up of the zõidia. Again, I departed 20 with these 25 degrees from Taurus at two and a half apiece. It leaves
off in Aquarius for the filling up of the zõidion in respect of two and
a half degrees. But if I make 13 times the 25 degrees, the number will
leave off at the 25th degree of Pisces, and this difference itself amounts
to miich.
The method of twelfth-parts is a necessary matter for births. I laid
down the effects of them so that no one should treat them incidentally. 19. Concerning zõidia that Hear and See One Another
The zõidia that hear and see one another are compared for exiles and
dangers, for accusations and tidings at the same time, when the Moon
is brought by counter-passage into relation to the star of Hermes or the
benefics at the beginning of the [events] that are examined in relation
to this part1. The zõidia that see one another are these: Gemini sees
Leo, and Leo sees Gemini. Similarly also, those that hear one another
are these: Scorpio hears Virgo, and Virgo hears Scorpio. And so on in
order. 20. Concerning Looking Ahead
Having so distinguished these things, the preceding star is said to look
ahead2, or bear witness3, to the succeeding star, either by hexagon,
square, triangle, or diameter. For, as it is borne along, it departs in the
direction of the preceding stars. For, the planets move with a motion
that is the opposite of the zõidia. Yet, at the same time they run a
special course and together are carried around it each day and night. 1 This is neariy idcnticai to the sentence in Chapter Mercúrio of Paulus’
Introductory Matlers.
2 epitheoreõ.
3 epimarturõ. It would appear that this verb is synonymous with epitheoreõ.
21 21. Concerning the Hurling of Rays
The succeeding planet is said to hurl its rays1 at the preceding planet
in accordance with the aforesaid figures. For, the ray of its fire is
carried to the preceding planets as this planet goes in their direction. For
example, a planet in Aries looks ahead at a planet in Câncer. And the
one in Câncer hurls its rays at the one in Aries2. 22. Concerning Right and Left Sides
Right-side3 figures are those in the preceding parts of the zodiac; left4,
the foliowing. For example, Câncer is marking the birth hour at 30
degrees; Gemini is a right-side hexagon at the lst degree; Taurus is a
right-side square at the lst degree; Aries is a right-side triangle at the
lst degree; and the whole hemisphere abo ve the earth. Virgo is a
left-side hexagon at the 30th degree; Scorpio is a left-side triangle at the
30th degree; and the whole hemisphere under the earth. Right-side
figures, then, are all those that are in the preceding zõidia, no matter
what part of the zõidion they are in; left-sided figures, those in the
succeeding zõidia. 1 aktinoboleõ.
2 The concept of the “hurling of rays” is extremely important as we shall
see in later sections. Many of the most important statements about aspects only
apply to ones that fit the definition of “hurling of rays.” [RH]
3 dexios. Often translated as dexter. Júpiter aristeros. Literally, ‘better.’ The left side was euphemistically called the
“better” side to avoid bad luck. ‘Sinister’ would therefore not be the best
translation, because it not a euphemism and has negative connotations.
22 23. Concerning the Spear-bearing of the Stars
There is spear-bearing1 whenever a particular star, being in its own
house or exaltation, hurls its rays2 at a star which is in its own house
or exaltation and which is upon a pivot point. For example, when
Aphrodite is in Libra, and Kronos is in Capricorn, Aphrodite will have
rays hurled at it by Kronos. Or again, when Kronos is in Libra, Ares
will hurl rays at it from Capricorn; or instead of Kronos, at Aphrodite.
Or again, Zeus from Sagittarius when Aphrodite is in Libra.
Or when the stars are lying contrariwise in relation to the
Hõroskopos or the Midheaven, a diumal planet in a diurnal birth will act as spear-bearer, while a noctumal planet does this for a nocturnal
birth, even if the spear-bearer as well as the planet being guarded
should happen to be in another’s house or exaltation.
Or whenever a light should be upon a pivot point in the
Hõroskopos or the Midheaven, even if a star of the sect should happen to be in another’s house, it will hurl rays at the Sun in relation to the
pre-ascending degree, at the Moon in relation to the post-ascensional
degree. For example, when the Moon is upon the Hõroskopos,
Aphrodite will hurl rays from Virgo or from Libra.
And yet again, spear-bearing is said whenever, with the Sun or the
Moon upon a pivot point, a star of the sect should act as spear-bearer. 24. Concerning Spear-bearing out of Sect
But they act as spear-bearers out of sect, whenever the diumal planets
should act as spear-bearers to the nocturnal planets, and the nocturnal
to the diurnal. 1 See Paulus, Chapters 6 and 14 for his deíinition of spear-bearing. The
term here seems to be quite different from the one in Paulus and the one in
Ptolemy’s Tetrabiblos, Book III.5. It seems to have a more general significance
than merely being an attendant upon the Sun or the Moon. [RH]
2 See section 1.21 on ‘hurling of rays.’ [RH] 23 25. Concerning Harmony
The triangular and square spear-bearers are more harmonious; for, the
hexagons act without restraint. 26. Concerning Position upon the Tenth Place
There is position upon the tenth1 and superiority2 whenever a [star]
lying in the tenth place should be squared on the left-side3. Câncer will
be the Hõroskopos. The stars in Aries, then, prevail over a star in
Câncer. Another superiority is spoken of, whenever some star, which is
actually in a place on the right, should look ahead at a star in a left-side
triangle, square, or hexagon. 27. Concerning Affliction and Places in which No Dealings Are
Made
Affliction4 is spoken of whenever some star has rays hurled5 at it by
malefics, or is contained6, or comes to be in application or in contact
with a destroyer, or is opposed, or is ruled by a star ill-situated in the
places in which no dealings are made (these are the sixth from the 1 epidekateia. This seems to mean being upon the tenth place.
2 kathuperterêsis. Literally, being above or superior to.
3 euõnumos. Literally, well named—another euphemism for left side. Júpiter kakõsis.
5 See section 1.21 on ‘hurling of rays.’ [RHJ
6 See section 1.41.
24 Hõroskopos, the third, the second, the eighth, and the twelfth)1. 28. Concerning Places for Having Dealings
The places for having dealings are the four pivot points, the 2nd trigon,
and the post-ascensions of the Hõroskopos and the Midheaven. 29. Concerning Being in its Proper Face2
Being in its proper face3 is said whenever some star approaches the
Sun or the Moon in just the same relation as its house to their houses,
west in relation to the Sun4, east in relation to the Moon5. For
example, the Sun is in Leo, the Moon in Câncer, Aphrodite in Taurus.
With the Sun being in Leo, it is known that it [Aphrodite] is in its
proper face; for, it [the Sun] is in its own house and a masculine
zõidion. If Aphrodite was in Taurus, it is likewise in its proper face
when the Moon is in the east and in a feminine zõidion. 1 This is a more comprehensive definition that we see in modem astrology
in which affliction is simply a square, or opposition from a malefic. In fact
these two aspects are not essential to Antiochus’ definition. Yet subsequent
writings suggest that Antiochus definition is much closer to what the ancients
meant by ‘affliction.’ [RH]
2 This is the dignity that Ptolemy used instead of the more common dignity
by “face”, i.e., a planefs being in its own decan. [RH]
3 idioprõsopeõ. Júpiter Occidental of the sun?
5 Oriental of the Moon? 25 30. Concerning Participation
There is communion1 whenever two planets should be present upon one
zõidion or should border upon it2, while it should happen to be the house of the one, the exaltation of the other3. 31. Concerning Counter-resolution
There is counter-resolution4 whenever the diurnal planets have the
places of the nocturnal ones and the nocturnal planets the places of the
diurnal ones. Or whenever stars lying upon the zõidia should have good
dealings, while the rulers of the zõidia, not having dealings, should
actually be in affliction. 32. Concerning Reciprocai Mastership
Stars are said to be masters of each other5 whenever the exaltation of
the one and the house of the other should be the zõidia in which the
stars happen to be6. 1 metochê. 2 See section 1.40.
3 The Sun in Aries along with Mars in Aries would be an example of this.
[RH] Júpiter antanalusis.
5 despotai allêlõn. 6 This would appear to be a type of mixed reception as opposed to a mutual
reception where planets exchange dignities of the same type. [RH]
26 33. Concerning the Ruler
A star is said to be the ruler whenever it should have more relationships
of rulership in some one of the zõidia. I mean relationships of house,
exaltation, trigon, boundary, phase, or configuration1. 34. Concerning Contact
There is contact2, or application in the most proper sense, whenever the
faster star approaches to the slower, if it should not be more than three
degrees distant from it. 35. Concerning Application
The contact of the Moon is application3 whenever it should stay apart
ffom the synodic4 degree for the course of a day and a night. 36. Concerning Intervention
There is intervention5 whenever a star should hurl its rays6 onto the 1 This section contains an explicit statement that rulership and disposition
are determined by the combined use of multiple dignities, not merely sign
rulership as is the general modem practice. See page 30, note 3. There is no
evidence that any kind of weighting system was used of the kind used by
Arabic and Renaissance European astrologers. Each dignity seems to be
considered equal. [RH]
2 kollêsis.
3 sunaphê. Júpiter i.e., the degree of the previous new moon. [RH] 5 mesembclêsis. Literally, a throwing between.
27 intermediate degrees of the application1. 37. Concerning Surpassing
There is surpassing2 whenever some one of the stars should pass by the
degree of another star either bodily or by figure. 38. Concerning the Bond
The Moon is said to be carried under bond3 whenever should come to
be away from the Sun by 15 degrees. Freeing the bond is said
whenever, after passing the Sun by, the Moon should be apart from the
Sun by the same number of degrees. The same is also said for the
Whole Moon. For, when it is 15 degrees before the Whole Moon, it
comes to the bond. But when it stands apart after it, it frees the bond. 39. Concerning Void-Coursing
There is void-coursing4 of the Moon whenever it is not applying to any
planet, not bodily and not by figure5. 6 Note that the intervention can be oniy from a planet that is in the
succeeding signs in contrast to more modem usage. [RH]
1 This is quite similar to ‘prohibition’ as used by Seventeenth Century
English astrologers. The main difference is that only aspects from succeeding
signs are allowed. [RH] 2 parallagê.
3 sundesmos. Also see Paulus, Chapter 35. Júpiter kenodromia.
5 This is our ‘void of course Moon.’ [RH] 28 40. Concerning Juxtaposition
There is juxtaposition1 whenever stars should be within the same
boundaries2 either bodily or by figure, or should border3 upon each
other with respect to the boundaries of the same star4. 41. Concerning Containment
There is containment5 whenever two planets should have one mean 1 homoroêsis. Literally, to have the same boundary, border upon.
2 horia.
3 ephoroõ? Júpiter There appear to be three forms of juxtaposition described here. The first
is simple enough. It consists of two planets within the same boundaries (in
modem usage ‘term’). The second is not so clear. It could be interpreted in
either of two ways. First, the second planet makes an aspect to the First, such
that the exact degree of the aspect point falis within the same boundaries as the
the first planet. We will call this interpretation, Gêmeos -A. The second interpretation
could be as follows, that the second planet lies within boundaries with the same
ruler as the First planet but in another zõidion that has a proper aspect
relationship (i.e. opposition, trigon, square or hexagon) to the zõidion of the first
planet. We will call this interpretation Gêmeos -B.
The third usage, which we will call III, simply requires that the second
planet be in boundaries ruled by the same planet that rules the boundaries of the
First planet, i.e., the two planets have the same boundary lord. Usage III is so
similiar to the usage Gêmeos -B, that there would seem to be redundancy. For this
reason, your editor favors usage Gêmeos -A as the proper interpretation of the second
usage of juxtaposition. However, your editor is not all certain that he is correct.
We hope that future translations will clarify the matter. [RH]
5 emperischesis.
29 [i.e., planetj according to any figure1 whatever, with no other planet
among those in the middle hurling rays within 7 degrees ahead or
behind. 42. Concerning the Stars in Power
Each one of the planets is said to be in power2 whenever it should
happen to be in its own house, exaltation, boundaries, proper phase3,
configuration4, or in some more vigorous5 place of the 1 kath’ hoion dê pote schêma. This language has consistently been used to
refer to aspect relationships only, not any random angular separation. Therefore,
what we have here is a situation in which two planets both aspect a third by the
same aspect, such that the third is on or near the midpoint of the First two. In
modem usage T-squares, bissected trines and grand trines would qualify as
containments. The so-called “yod” configuration would not qualify because the
quincunx is not among the ancient figures or aspects.
But there is something else about containment as defined here that makcs
it very different from any modem usage. If there is a fourth planet which
aspects the third (i.e., middle) planet with a classical aspect or figure, and that
aspect is within ± 7o of exactness and that fourth planet is in a sign that
succeeds (see section 1.21 on ‘hurling of rays’) the third or middle planet and
the fourth planet is within the figure created by the two outer planets, the effect
of containment is canceled or mitigated. Unfortunately we do know at this time
what the effect of a containment is supposed to be. [RHJ
2 en dunamei.
3 ‘Phase’ really is the word here. The reference would seem to be ‘proper
face’ as in section 1.29. However, the interpretation that is most probable is that
this does not refer to face at all, but to the proper, i.e. of the correct sect, phase
relationship to the Sun. This is not a standard rccitation of the five esscntial
dignities, whether Ptolemy’s or anyone else’s. [RH] Júpiter suscfiêmatismos. It is not clear what this means. The use of this word
meaning ‘configuration’ could refer to idioprõsopeõ as in section 1.29 or simply
any kind of aspect. [RH]
5 eutonõteros, from eutonos. Literally, well-toned or well-strung.
30 twel ve-placement1. 43. Concerning Chariots
Planets are in their own chariots2 when they should be found in their
own house, exaltation, or boundaries. And they rejoice at these places
even if they are found under the beams of the Sun. For, the benefics
augment the good things, and the malefícs change to benefics. 44. Concerning how the Stars Rejoice
The stars Kronos, Zeus, and Ares are said to rejoice3 when they are in
the east and are being configured. But the Moon and Aphrodite when
they are in the west. Moreover, Kronos, Zeus, and Ares rejoice when
they are being figured in the quadrant from the Hõroskopos up to the
Midheaven, and from the Descendent up to the Subterraneous place. But
the Moon and Aphrodite in the altemate quadrants. Hermes rejoices at
both sects because of its being common4.
And during the day the diurnal planets rejoice when they are above
the earth, while the noctumal planets rejoice when they are below the
earth. And again, during the night, the nocturnal planets rejoice when
they are above the earth, while the diurnal planets rejoice when they are
below the earth. 1 dõdekatopia.
2 lampênê. 3 chairõ. Notice that the planet rejoices at, or takes delight in, these
situations themselves—not that it rejoices when it is in these places. Júpiter This makes is quite clear the ‘Occidental’ and ‘oriental’ as used by
Ptolemy are closely related to sect. [RH1
31 45. Concerning Stars under the Beams
Stars are said to be under the beams1 every time they happen to be
under the beams of the Sun, whether they are ahead of it or behind it.
One must recognize this from the calculation of the phases. 46. Concerning the Years of the Centers and Post-ascensions and
Declines
The Hõroskopos indicates the fírst age, the Midheaven the middle age,
the setting the final age, and the subterraneous pivot point death and the
good or bad repute that arises after death. And again, the decline of the
Hõroskopos signifies the pangs of childbirth and the things befalling the
mother when the child was in the womb; the Hõroskopos signifies the
moments bringing about the birth and the times immediately after it;
and the post-ascension of the Hõroskopos signifies the final years of the
fírst age2.
The decline of the Midheaven signifies the fírst years of the middle
period, the Midheaven the middle years of the middle period, and the
post-ascension the final years of the middle period.
The decline of the setting signifies the fírst years of the final
period, the setting itself the middle years of the final period, and the
post-ascension the final years of the final period.
The decline of the Anti-midheaven signifies the period before death,
the Anti-midheaven the death itself, and the post-ascension the period
after death.
Each of these 12 places obtains as its lot the 5 pre-ascended
degrees and the 25 post-ascending degrees, if the squares should occur
through ninety degrees. But if they should occur with different numbers
of degrees, divide the degrees of the square numbers equally into three
third-parts, and you would know how many degrees each place of the
zodiac has. For example, if the Midheaven should be 96 degrees distant
from the Hõroskopos, the setting will be 84 degrees distant from the 1 hupaugos.
1 Note that the periods of time around birth and death are not evenly
distributed amongst the different places, i.e., houses. 32 Midheaven, and the subterraneous pivot point will be 96 degrees distant
from the setting, and the Hõroskopos will be 84 degrees from the
subterraneous pivot point. From these things you would leam what the
twelve-turning1 has for the succeeding [places], by distributing equally
to each place the degrees that are in addition to those of a proper
square, beginning the addition from the degrees dividing the birth hour
and the 5 degrees that have pre-ascended it2. 47. Concerning the Signification of the Lots
The Lot of Fortune of the Moon signifies everything about men’s
bodies, and what they do for their liveiihood, and reputations, and the
passions of the soul, and companionship.
The Lot of Spirit of the Sun signifies matters concerning the soul,
custom, sovereignty, rank, reputation, and religion.
The Lot of the Basis of the Hõroskopos is established as a
contributing cause of life and breath; for the Basis itself is the giver of
breath of the Hõroskopos, and signifies bodily matters and sojoums
abroad.
The Lot of Nemesis of Kronos is established as a contributing
cause of subterranean fates and of everything which is ice-cold, of
demonstration, impotence, exile, destruction, grief, and quality of death.
The Lot of Victory of Zeus is indicative of trust, good expectation,
contest, and association, and furthermore, of penalties and rewards. 1 dõdekatropos. Liddell and Scott defines this as the “fixed circle of twelve
divisions through which the zodiac is supposed to revolve.” But this is just a
meaning obtained through context, and does not construct the word for us in
such a way as to make this sense through its root meaning. The word literally
means ‘twelve-turning.’ Perhaps it generalizes the idea of a pivot point, where
the zodiac is understood to “tum” around every house cusp. Cf. ektropê in
Paulus p. 75 note 5.
2 This entire section is found almost verbatim in Porphyry’s Introduction
to the Tetrabiblos. The question of whether it is in fact taken directly from the
Thesaurus of Antiochus is of some importance; for, it would indicate that this
system of place, i.e., house division (subsequently attributed to Porphyry) would
go back at least to the second century C.E.
33 The Lot of Courage of Ares is indicative of boldness, treachery,
might, and every villainy.
The Lot of Eros of Aphrodite signifies the appetites and voluntative
desires, and the things that arise in accordance with deliberation; it is
indicative of friendship and mutual favor.
The Lot of Necessity of Hermes signifies constraints, wars,
enmities, condemnations, and all the other restrictive things which are
produced in men1. 48. The Effects of These [Lots]
When the Sun beholds2 the Lot of Divinity, it makes those who are
childless. When the Sun obtains the Lot of Injury, it causes heart
damage. When Zeus is regarding the Lot of Divinity, it makes a native
who acts as an Oracle to the gods and in his dreams, and divine matters
will be favorable in every way, even if Zeus should square or oppose
it. When the ruler of the Lot of Fortune is under the rays, it causes a
violent death in accordance with the nature of the zõidion of the Lot of
Fortune. If it should escape the rays of the Sun a little, violent deaths
will not be the result, but he will wander and be accused of many
things. But if benefics should look ahead at it, the death will not be
violent, but he will have a mediocre fate. When the ruler of Fortune and
of Divinity are under the rays, it will cause violent deaths which are
neither good nor base in nature, but always noble when it is upon a
pivot point.
If the Lot of Children should come down to nothing3 in the house
of Kronos, and a malefic should behold the Lot, it will destroy the first
children. And if the Lot of Children should fali in the houses of Ares,
and a malefic should behold the Lot, it will destroy those who were 1 For the most part, all these entries are nearly word for word identical with
the corresponding section in Paulus p. 48.
2 epiblepõ.
3 Reference to the algorithm by which the Lot is calculated, where the
counting of the number leaves off at a certain place in the zodiac. Cf. Paulus,
Chapter 23. 34 bom in the middle. And if the Lot of Children should fali in the houses
of Hermes, and a malefic should look ahead at it, it will destroy those
who are born prematurely1.
If the Lot of Divinity should fali in Capricom, it will make the
child forbearing and changeable. But if in Aries, Leo, or Scorpio, it will
make him quick-tempered, obstinate. When the Sun beholds the Lot of
Fortune and its ruler while being under the rays, it makes those who are
abject2.
If the ruler of the Lot of the Father should be found to be opposite
to its own house, where the Lot of the Father happens to be, it says that
such are supposititious3. When the Lot of Fortune is of the Bad
Divinity4 and beholds the Lot, the figure will be bad, especially if it
should be under the rays or should be regarded by malefics.
If the Moon should happen to be upon the Lot of Marriage, and
****5 should look ahead at the Lot of Marriage by diameter or square,
it gives a marriage that is between kinsfolk or even by brothers. If the
ruler of the Lot of Marriage should be found to be setting, it says that
the marriages happen secretly.
If Kronos should be found to be the ruler of the Lot of Marriage
and should happen to be in the setting place, such a woman will be
corrupted by an old man. If the Descendem should be found as the
house of Kronos, he who has done this is of the father’s or mother’s 1 mikroteros. ‘Prematurely’ is a guess at the meaning.
2 ekptõtos. Or possibly banished.
3 hupobolêmaios. This word is especially used in referencc to situations in
which an illegitimate child replaces a legitimate one or takes on the proper role
of one. The English word used here has the same meaning. One could possibly
substitute the phrase ‘possibly spurious’ for 'supposititious.’ In other words this
placement of the lot of the father indicates that one may be illegitimate. [RH] Júpiter twelfth house. [RH]
5 Planetary name omitted in text.
35 family, or is even a divine', and such a one wiil not be a stranger. If
the ruler of the Lot of Marriage should be setting, the man is more
undistinguishable and does this in secret. But also examine the phases
of the stars, whether or not they are exalted or depressed, and thus tell
the corrupters, whether they are exalted or depressed in fortune. If Zeus
should be found as the ruler of the Lot of Marriage, and it should be
setting, he who has done this will be ifom the family2, and will be rich
or famous. If Aphrodite should be found as the ruler of the Lot of
Marriage, and should be found in the setting pivot point, it signifies that
this happened by deceit and laughter. If Ares should look ahead [at it],
he who has done this has come to judgment for his attempt.
If the Lot of Marriage should happen to be where Aphrodite is
when Hermes is marking the birth hour, or it is upon a pivot in a
masculine zõidion, it will produce pederasts. If Hermes should look
ahead at the Lot of Marriage, it will cause the same. And if Hermes
should happen to be in a masculine zõidion when it is regarding the Lot,
it will cause sexual intercourse with males. But if Hermes should be
found in a feminine zõidion while it beholds the Lot of Marriage, he
will have unnatural sexual intercourse with women.
If you should find the ruler of the Lot of Brothers in the
Hõroskopos, say that such a one is of the same blood. If the ruler of the Lot of Brothers should fali in a bi-corporeal zõidion, say that such a one
also has other brothers from another man or from another mother. And
as I see it, if, for example, the Lot and its ruler should fali in a
feminine zõidion, say that the brother is from another mother; but if in
a masculine zõidion, from another father.
If the Lot of Fortune should fali in a masculine zõidion, it destroys
the father first; in a feminine zõidion, the mother, according to
Dorotheus. If Kronos should hurl his rays3 first upon the Lot of the 1 theios. Probably not a god, but someone under divine protection, such a
priest.
2 genos. Not necessarily immediate family, but family in the broadest sense
of one’s relatives.
3 See section 1.21 on ‘huriing of rays.’ [RH] 36 Father either by figure or by going along side it1 it destroys the father
first; but similarly, if it should regard the Lot of the Mother, it destroys
the mother first. If a malefic should regard the Lot of the Father or of
the Mother, it says that it is the one to be destroyed first. 49. Concerning the Final and Least Years
Of the Sun, 120 years; one twelfth being 10 years. Of the Moon, 108;
one twelfth being Mercúrio . Of Kronos, 57; one twelfth being Júpiter Mercúrio /12. Of Zeus,
79; one twelfth being 6 7/12. Of Ares, 66 years; one twelfth being 5
1/2. Of Aphrodite, 82; one twelfth being 6 10/12. Of Hermes, 76; one
twelfth being 6 1/3.
Of the Sun, 19 years; one twelfth being 19 months. Of the Moon,
25 years; one twelfth being 2 1/12. Of Kronos, 30; one twelfth being 2
1/2. Of Zeus, 12 years; one twelfth being 1. Of Ares, 15 years; one
twelfth being 1 1/3. Of Aphrodite, 8 years; one twelfth being eight
months. Of Hermes, 20 years; one twelfth being 1 8/12. 50. How One Should Learn the Additions of the zõidia and the
Hours of the Zones
For example, since in the third zone the greatest of its times (that is
ffom Câncer to Sagittarius) becomes 210 years, and the least of its
times (ffom Capricorn to Gemini) is 150 years—if then I should divide
these by 15, which are the equipartite hourly times, the greatest day is
of 14 equipartite hours, the least of 10 equipartite hours. We will then
take one sixth of each of the greatest and least times. The greatest of
the times, 210 years, then becomes 35; the least of them becomes 25.
The remainder then is 10. One third of these is 3 1/3, which is the
variation of each zõidion. You will know it in the same fashion for the
other zones as well. 1 parembasis. It is not clear whether this simply means conjunction here.
The root ‘embasis’ is also used by other astrologers for an ingress.
37 51. Concerning the Greatest and Final Years of the Rccurrences
of the Seven Stars
Kronos makes its longest recurrence through 265 years; Zeus through
427 years; Ares through 284 years; the Sun through 1461 years;
Aphrodite through 1151 years; Hermes through 480 years; the Moon
through 25 years.
The cosmic recurrence comes about through 175 myriads and 3005
years1, and then the conjunction of all the stars at the 30th degree óf
Câncer or the lst degree of Leo, and the completion occurs. The deluge
happens upon Câncer, [in part of the cosmos]. 52. Concerning Stars Unconnected to the Lights
When the Moon happens to be unconnected2 to the Sun, it produces
separation or inconstancy of the parents, and makes them foreign to one
another3. When the Moon happens to be unconnected to Kronos,
[*from the heritage of good births on the one hand, but a cause of
impediments and afflictions on the other*]. When the Moon happens to
be unconnected to Zeus, it makes those whose work is in vain, who are
base, and weaker in their lives. When the Moon happens to be
unconnected to Ares, it makes those who are medíocre, cowardly,
inactive, and have an aversion to their parents. When the Moon happens
to be unconnected to Aphrodite, it makes those who are graceless and
incompetent at marriage and sexual pleasures. When the Moon happens
to be unconnected to Hermes, it makes those who are more impractical
and more unintelligent. I say these things for all the figures of
like-engirding, equally ascending, and equally powerful zõidia. 1 1,753,005 years
2 asundetos.
3 allophulia. ? 38 53. Effects of the Spear-bearcrs of the Sun
When Kronos happens to be spear-bearing, it makes the specious and
deceitful, and that which is conducive to happiness and many
possessions firom the father. Zeus makes the just, kindly, and boastful,
and the bright, the dominating and very wealthy, and the effective. Ares
makes the manly, hot, bold, reckless, violent, terrible, [and the abject in
the things being accomplished]. Aphrodite makes the famous and
charming, well-skilled, sweet, well-married, and effective. Hermes
makes the well-disposed and reasonable and skilled.
But know that if those stars which are spear-bearing for the lights
should be declining, when the lights happen to be upon pivot points,
they induce those so born to be nothing less than kings and sovereigns.
But if the lights are being guarded by spear-bearers while the lights are
declining, neither kings nor sovereigns will arise, but they will be
friends of these personages. Know that the same is also true for those
stars which are spear-bearing out of sect. ********** 39 Part Gêmeos Second Set of Excerpts1 1. Concerning the Applications of the Moon to the Seven
Wandering Stars2 , j .
When the Moon is conjoining Kronos, opposition is encountered for
everything. The conjunction of the Moon with Kronos is fine for
planting and bloodletting. It indicates impediments3 in things. Those
who drink will not effect purification. Those who are away from home
will not come back. And there will also be obstacles for those sailing.
And when the Moon is making a hexagon with it, it is fine for
building, the planting of trees, and the sowing of pulses. And it is
especially favorable for the builders.
And when the Moon is squaring it, opposition is encountered.
Those who are away ffom home will be taken prisoner; and those who
are building will not finish, but the building will fali; and those who are
engaged in business will be fined.
And when the Moon is trining it, it is fine for building, the planting
of trees, intercourse, and the purchasing of all sort of things.
And when the Moon is making a diameter with it, it indicates
oppressions, instabilities. Builders will not finish their building; and
those starting a battle will be defeated; and he who has married a
women will be quickly divorced.
When the Moon is conjoining Zeus, it is good for everything: for
formal demands, social intercourse, and the community of friends, for
buildings, consultations with judges, for being away from home, for
beneficence. He who commences some affair quickly attains his goal.
It is favorable for selling, buying, marrying, association, and simply for
everything. ' The numbering in this section has been added for reference purposes by
the editor. [RH]
This is a section on Katarchic Astrology or Elections, to use the
approximate modem equivalem. [RH]
2 3 empodismos. Literally, having one’s feet fettered. 40 And when the Moon is making a hexagon with it, it is good for
investigating everything, producing1 everything, consorting with the
great, approaching leaders, judges, philosophers, commencing wedding
preparations, instructions, arts, activities, contracting for work, and
getting friends.
And when the Moon is squaring it, it is fine for everything: for
giving, for receiving, for marketing, for actions, for being awây from
home, for consultations, for approaching judges. And it is favorable for
making items of daily life.
And when the Moon is trining it, it is fine for everything: for
giving, receiving, being away from home, consultations, marrying, doing
favors, buying, selling.
And when the Moon is making a diameter with it, it is good for
formal demands, the formation of a friendship and association,
companionship of travelers, approaching judges, building a foundation,
attending a lecture, starting children in instruction. It is favorable for
approaching philosophers and the great.
When the Moon is conjoining Ares, opposition is encountered for
everything, and as for him who has wooed or married a women at that
time, the woman and the man will meet with a violent death by
companions and adulterers. He who has been away from home will be
disabled and will not come back; and he who has associated with
someone will be turned in [to the authorities] by them.
And when the Moon is making a hexagon with it, it will be good
for war, being away from home, planting, for hunting, for anything
constructed by fire, for bloodletting, for settling [as in a foreign city],
joining the army, making war.
And when the Moon is squaring it, opposition is encountered. He
who is away from home will be made to slip, and that which is being
built will fali or will be burned up. It is favorable for selling quadrupeds
and for drinking purgatives.
And when the Moon is trining it, it is good for military matters and
the outfitting of weapons of war. He who carries these remains
invulnerable. It is good for the movements of armies and bearing arms,
for being away from home, improving buildings, and rebuilding.
And when the Moon is making a diameter with it, it opposes the 1 apoteleõ. 41 bearing of children. If a woman should conceive1, she will miscarry
But if she should give birth, she will quickly die. He who approaches
a judge, will be arrested. He who mames a woman will be unfaithfül.
It is a fitting time only for the buying of weapons of war.
When the Moon is conjoining the sun, opposition is encountered for
everything. It is a fitting time for courts and struggles, and for
preserving things underground. There is opposition to getting married
and contracts.
And when the Moon is making a hexagon with it, it is good for
companionship and Services and the commencements2 of things, and it
is good as a kind of beginning3 for those who make requests, and for
going to sea, and for the buying of weapons.
And when the Moon is squaring it, there is opposition for
everything, [especially4] for the tearing down of buildings, and for the
changing of residence.
And when the Moon is trining it, it is good for beginnings5 and for
making treaties, and for consorting with kings and the great, and for
requesting what you want, and for contracts, and it is a good starting
point6for all sorts of deeds.
And when the Moon is making a diameter with it, it opposes
requests and receipts. He who marries will be contentious in wedlock,
and the woman will be disobedient. Those who go to sea will be in
danger.
When the Moon is conjoining with Aphrodite, it is good for 1 sullephthei. One would expect an active verb here instead of a passive, but
the context seems to require active voice.
2 katarchai.
3 archê. Júpiter We have added “especially” to make it clear that the “opposition” extends
to these two matters. In other words it is not a good time to do these. [RH]
5 archê.
6 aparchesthai. This word also means‘to offer the first fruits,’ or to
‘dedicate’ somcthing. 42 everything, for marrying and for making erotic requests of women, and
for drinking together, and it is most fitting for contracts for both sides.
And when the Moon is making a hexagon with it, it is good for
purchasing things of all sorts, and for listening, and building, and the
planting of trees and sowing; and it is most good for showing kindness.
And when the Moon is squaring it, it is good for buildings, for the
hunt, for feasting and the companionship of friends, and the learning of
all sorts of things, especially of the lyric and shaping arts.
And when the Moon is trining it, it is good for commencements in
all sorts of matters, and especially for marriage contracts, and for
marketing, and changing residence, and planting and sowing, and for
congregating with friends, and for buying quadrupeds.
And when the Moon is making a diameter with it, it is good for
beautifying oneself, and making commencements, and revising
contracts, for rebuilding homes, and for adornment. It is always fitting
for those who li ve in these houses.
When the Moon is conjoining Hermes, it is good for writings, and
the composition of speeches, and the commencement of drawings, and
for starting children in instruction, and beginning the logical arts, and
it is quite simply suitable for everything.
And when the Moon is making a hexagon with it, it is good for
changing residence and for house building, for being away from home,
for congregating with auditors [i.e., financial], for selling, buying,
making contracts, and for framing proposals.
And when the Moon is squaring it, it is good for riding, chariot
races, sending announcments, [for undertaking much in the
govemment], for coming into power, for keeping an eye on public
business, for administrating, and for walking without fear.
And when the Moon is trining it, it is good for encounters with
esteemed men and those who know, and for starting children in
instruction. It is suitable for going to sea, for congregating with the
great, with judges, with scholars, for dispatching ambassadors, for
selling, buying, and accounting.
And when the Moon is making a diameter with it, it is good for
discussions. And they are suitable for making a commencement in every
science, for transcribing1 books, and for buying and selling, for
attending to public business, for judging, and for sending things away 1 or possibly translating. 43 to another place.
Whenever the Moon is in the combusted zone1, from the 20th
degree of Libra to the 15th degree of Scorpio, it is not fitting to set
ones hand to any matter. For, it is not well disposed, but opposition is
always encountered.
Or, whenever the Moon is in a solid zõidion (that is in Taurus, Leo,
Scorpio, Aquarius, but especially in Leo), it is not fitting to put on new
garments; for, the garments will cause sickness in those who put them
on.
It is also necessary, for every commencement of every matter, to
closely observe the first and eighth hour of the third and seventh day,
by means of the malefic stars which are going about and executing at
these hours. I means Ares and Kronos, Ares at the first hour of the third
day, Kronos at the eighth hour of the seventh day. 2. Concerning the Harmful Degrees of the Zoidia
The harmful degrees of the zõidia are these: the 18th, 27th, 28th degree
of Leo; the 9th, 25th degree of Scorpio; the Ist, 7th, 8th, 18th degree
of Sagittarius; the 6th, 7th, 8th, 10th degree of Taurus; the 9th to the
15th degree of Câncer; the 18th, 19th degree of Aquarius; the 26th to
the 29th degree of Capricorn. When the Moon is dying2 in these
degrees, it causes injury and suffering for those so born, glaucoma,
discharges, dim sightedness, leprosy, swellings in the neck, seizures, and
paralysis.
And in addition to these: the mane of Leo at the 27th, 28th degree;
the sting of Scorpio from the 6th to the 10th degree, a mixture of Ares
and Kronos, and the first part [of what?] a mixture of Hermes; the
arrow of Sagittarius at the 6th, 7th degree; the Pleiades of Taurus at the
5th, 6th, 7th degree; the nebula of Câncer from the 10th to the 15th
degree; the eye of Sagittarius at the I5th degree; the pitcher of Aquarius
from the 16th to the 19th degree; the spike of Capricorn from the 26th 1 kekaumene zonê. This is clearly the via combusta. 2 lêgõ. The verb means to cease, abate, or break off. We have not seen it used before for the beginning of the New Moon, if índeed that is what it means
here. 44 to the 29th degree1. 3. Concerning Injuries, Baldness, Gout, Madness, Licentiousness,
and other Passions2
Leos, Virgos, Scorpios, and Sagittarians become bald or bald on the
forehead. Those who have the Lot of Fortune in Sagittarius, Capricom,
Aquarius, or Pisces become gouty or subject to discharges. If it should
fali in ***3 or in Leo, he may die of gout or of fluid annoyances.
If the Moon and Kronos should be marking the birth hour, while
Hermes is upon a pivot point, it makes those who are crazed and
mentally ill4. When Kronos and Hermes should mark the birth hour,
and when Kronos should be in the noon place while Hermes is setting,
they make those who are deranged5 and mentally ill.
When Ares and Hermes happen to be upon a pivot point, they make
those who make false accusations and those who are perjurers. If the
Moon and Kronos should regard6 each other, they make those who are
sordid and wailers. 1 There is some discrepancy between these degrees and the degrees given
by Anonymous (p. 15).
2 As said in the translator’s preface, all these are written as plurais in
Greek: gouts, madnesses, etc. [Additional by RH] ‘Passions’ here means ‘things
that one suffers,’ not merely ‘emotions.’
3 The glyph for Kronos is found here in the manuscript instead of the glyph
for a zõidion, i.e., a sign. Júpiter The distinction seems to be between those who go into uncontrollable
rages (crazes) and those who are mentally damaged or incapacitated in some
way.
5 paraplêktikos. Literally, stricken sideways. The word can mean
hemiplegic, but metaphorically it means deranged.
6 The text has epitheõreõ here, but it is impossible for two pianets to look
ahead at each other in the technical sense. See section 1.20. We have emended
it to theõreõ, or ‘regard.’ 45 When Hermes is in aversion to the Hõroskopos\ and makes a
seizure2 of the Moon, if a malefic should be looking ahead at it, it
makes those who are smitten by demons3. When the Moon has the
bond of the Whole Moon4, it makes those who are possessed and
inspired by a god. When Kronos and Ares lie upon the Divinity or upon
a diameter with it, they make those who have the divine madness5 and
are in ecstasy.
Both for the Whole Moon and for the conjunction, when the ruler
of the Lot of Divinity should be opposite to it, it makes those who are
boastful and insolent. When Aphrodite in Capricorn, Pisces, Scorpio, or
Taurus is regarded by Kronos or Ares, it makes those who are
licentious, who act crazy among women, who are soft, and like women.
When the Moon is marking the birth hour and Aphrodite is in the
four-footed zõidia (Aries, Taurus, Leo, Capricorn), they make women
licentious, and make men thieves and foul-doers. When Ares and
Aphrodite are of equal degrees, or when they are regarding or opposing
in tropical zõidia and welcome the twelve-part of each other6, they
make those who are drunkards, adulterers, unreturning7.
[When Scorpio is dividing the birth hour at 13, 14, 22, 24. 27, 28,
and 30 degrees, it makes those who are passionate and licentious. And 1 That is, making none of the classical figures, i.e., aspects, with the
Hõroskopos. Cf. Paulus, Chapter 12. 2 We do not seem to have this defined for us anywhcre as a technical term.
3 It is not clear whether this means possessed by demons or smitten by
heaven. Júpiter This is a full moon in our terminology. The Greek ‘full moon' referred to
a moon that was nearly, but not exactly, at opposition. See Paulus, Chapter 16.
[RH]
5 Probably epilepsy. [RH]
6 Mutual reception is evidently meant.
7 Not clear. It could be people who do not retum, or who do not retum
things. [RH] 46 the same is true of the degrees from 12 to 17 of Taurus]1, of Leo from
25 degrees to 30, the 11 th and 12th degrees of Capricom. For all the
degrees it is necessary to examine the Hõroskopos and the Descendent
and Aphrodite and the Moon, the Lot of Fortune and of Eros. And the
soft places are the final degrees of Aries, Leo, and Sagittarius. Those
who have had their birth hours so marked in these degrees become
soft-bodied and practice unnatural vices. Júpiter . Concerning the Star Going About and the One Executing
The investigation of the aforementioned is thus: Those bom during the
lst, 3rd, 8th, 10th hours while Kronos2 is going about are ignoble,
liable to injury and violent death. Those bom during the lst, 4th, 10th,
11 th hours while Zeus3 is going about will be leaders, held in esteem,
graceful, agreeable. Those bom during the lst, 2nd, 3rd, 6th, 8th hours
while Ares4 is going about will be bilious, high-spirited, hot-blooded,
skillful. Those bom during the lst, 2nd, 3rd, 6th, 8th hours while the
Sun5 is going about will be bright, held in esteem, friends to the great,
loved by the gods. Those born during the lst, 2nd, 5th, 8th, 9th, 10th
hours while Aphrodite6 is going about will be practical, charming,
agreeable. Those bom during the lst, 4th, 6th, 7th, 8th hours while
Hermes7 is going about will be effective, erudite, intellectual, active. 1 The bracketed portion contains several lacunae, and we have conjecturally
restored it by comparison with p. 12 of Anonymous.
2 Saturday. [RH]
3 Thursday. [RH] Júpiter Tuesday. [RH]
5 Sunday. [RH]
6 Friday. [RH]
7 Wednesday. [RH] 47 Those bom during the lst, 3rd, 5th, 8th, 9th, 10th hours while the
Moon1 is going about will be commanders appointed for great things,
those who lead, restorers of the people. Similarly also, for the nocturnal
hours. If the ruler of the hours of executing should occupy the region
of the Evil Divinity2, it makes those who are devoured by wfld beasts.
And if Kronos should be executing while the Moon is opposite, it
makes those who have seizures and are possessed by a god3. 5. Particulars Concerning the Moon
When the Moon occupies the same degree as Kronos or Aries in
Scorpio, Pisces, or Câncer, it causes leprosy. The Moon with Kronos
and Ares in the latter degrees of the zõidia makes those who are lame.
The Moon in aversion4 to the Hõroskopos makes the natives
simple-minded and out of their minds. The Moon upon a diameter and
being a Whole Moon makes those who are abject and unhappy. The
Moon and the Sun in the 6th or 12th degree, with Kronos and Ares and
Hermes being upon a pivot point, being apart from Zeus and Aphrodite,
make dog-men5 or those who are devoured by dogs. The Moon and
Aphrodite together make those who have discharges, those who are soft,
and those who have intercourse for mischief. The Moon and Hermes
being diametrically opposed make despoilers, liars, those who are
greedy. When the Moon diametrically opposes [its own ruler], it makes 1 Monday. [RH]
2 In a natal chart. [RH]
3 Presumably, all the hours mentioned in this section are seasonal hours,
obtained by dividing the entire period of daylight (or night) into twelve equal
parts, so lhat a diumal hour of the winter is shorter than a diumal hour of the
summer. Júpiter That is, making none of the classical figures, i.e., aspects, with the
Hõroskopos. Cf. Paulus, Chapter 12.
5 The lexicon says that this is a malady in which a man imagines himself
to be a dog. 48 fugitives, wanderers, emigrants. When the Moon is one-third less than
full1 and has rays hurled at it by malefics, it causes and is conjunctive
of afflictions. 6. Conceming the Decans that Cause Licentiousness
When Aphrodite occurs in the 1 st decan of Aries, it makes those who
are licentious, passionate, and those who are mad for men. When
Aphrodite is in the 2nd decan of Gemini, it makes those who are
lecherous, shameful, and lewd in relation to sexual matters. In the lst
decan of Leo, it makes those who are erotic, ill-married. In the 3rd
decan it makes adulterers, those who are rapers of women, those who
are made unfortunate by women. In the first decan of Libra, it makes
those who are licentious, and mad in their desires. In the lst decan of
Scorpio, it causes mischief from foul-doing women. In the 3rd decan of
Sagittarius, it causes misfortune through women, and he will be
shameful. In the lst decan of Capricom, it makes those who are
licentious, foul-doers, and those who perform unnatural acts. In the 2nd
decan, it makes adulterers, sodomites. In the 3rd decan of Aquarius, it
makes those who are sordid. In the 3rd decan of Pisces, it makes
adulterers and those who are mad for sexual intercourse.
The Sun in the 3rd decan of Aries makes those who are soft and
licentious, also when it is in the lst, 2nd, and 3rd decans of Libra, and
in the lst decan of Scorpio, and in the lst and 2nd decans of Pisces.
The Moon in the 3rd decan of Aries makes those who are soft and
licentious and passionate, also in the 3rd decan of Leo, and the lst
decan of Pisces, and the 3rd decan of Capricom, and the 3rd decan of
Libra, and the 3rd decan of Aquarius. If the ruler of the Moon by
fixing2 should happen to be in aversion to it, and the ruler of the
Hõroskopos should be in aversion to it, he who is bom is neither a man
nor a beast, but a certain indistinguishable monster. If the malefics
should look ahead at the pivot points, that which is born will be one of
the deified animais, for example, a dog or a cat. When the benefics
should look ahead at íhe pivot points, while the benefics are in aversion. 1 In trine to the Sun? [RH]
2 kata pêxis. 49 that which is bom will be some wild animal.
Kronos in the 3rd decan of Aries, in the 3rd decan of Libra, and the
lst and 3rd decans of Capricorn makes those who are licentious. Also,
Zeus in the 3rd decan of Aries, the 1 st and 3rd decans of Libra, and the
lst and 3rd decans of Capricorn. Also, Ares in the lst decan of Aries
and in the lst decan of Capricorn. And the Hõroskopos in the 3rd decan
of Aries, the 2nd and 3rd decans of Libra, and the lst decan of
Capricorn makes those who are licentious and live luxuriously.
When the Lot of Fortune and the Lot of Divinity and their rulers
occur in a licentious zõidion1, they make those who are soft and
licentious. The licentious zõidia are Aries, Taurus, Leo, Capricorn,
Pisces in part, and Libra. Aphrodite in a masculine zõidion, and in the
hour or boundaries of Hermes, makes those who are licentious.
Aphrodite upon a pivot point and in a feminine zõidion, when it is
regarded by Ares, rouses desire with a love-charm, and makes those
who are agreeable, especially in the evening. 7. Concerning the Calends2
If the calends should happen on the lst day3, the winter will be
advantageous; the spring wet, fertile; the summer, dry; the fali,
moderate. Falis from quadrupeds, loss of newborns, minimal blasts of
wind.
If the calends should happen on the 2nd day, the winter will be
advantageous, great rains and hail; the summer, windy; the fali, wet,
early and ready seeds, many fires, many animais, abundance of bees and
winged creatures.
If on the 3rd day, the winter will be snowy, fine air, wreckage of 1 Cf. section 1.5. Leo does not occur on that list.
2 The day upon which the feasts were dedared. [Additional by RH] At the
beginning of each lunar month (the day of the evening first appearance of the
Moon) the schedule of significant events was publicly proclaimed. ‘Calend’ or
‘Kalend’ originally has to do with proclamation, but in this context it simply
means the ‘first of the month’ and the additional sense of new moon.
3 Presumably Sunday. See next note. 50 most [ships], much sickness, violent death; the spring, wet; the summer,
fine; the fali, dry, destruction of females.
If on the 4th day, the wintçr is temperate, fruit trees are grafted; the
spring, wet; the summer, dry, the destruction of newborns.
If on the fifth day, the season is burdensome; the summer, fine; the
fali, wet, much grain, and the destruction of the heads of State.
If on the sixth day, the winter is severe, a little disturbing thunder;
the spring, wet, snowy and with hail, much grain, trouble with the eyes,
mortality of infants.
If on the sabbath1, the season will be much affected [i.e., disturbed]; the spring, cold; the summer, wet, a few winds, edible fruits
on the trees; the waning season, dry, destruction of animais, the rushing
of rivers and streams from much rain2. 8. Concerning the 7 Wandering Stars in Summary
Kronos is said to rule over temporal matters, fluidity, and cooling.
When it is well-figured, it benefits those who are being bom, and it
apportions out increase to them. When it is ill-figured, it induces
mishaps. It is called Phainon.
Zeus is said to rule over magnificence and reputation and dignity.
It is called Phaethon.
Ares is the color of fire, and it mies over the blood in us, and the
procreative appetite, and is a cause of anger and desire and courage. It
is called Puroeis.
The Sun rules over breath and soul and motion.
Hermes, in as much as when it is applying to the Sun it sees more
rarely, mies over practical wisdom and speech and understanding and 1 A previous reference on page 44, indicates that the days of the week are
as we would expect, Sunday = 1, Monday = 2, Tuesday = 3 etc. Therefore, the
fact that the sabbath falis on the seventh day (Saturday), and that the term
‘sabbath’ is even used, raises some interesting questions. Has this passage been
edited by someone influenced by Judaism? Is this passage an interpolation? Was
Antiochus Jewish? We have no way of knowing. [RHJ
2 In this section some of the seasons are not mentioned for some of the
days. This is the case in the original text. [RH] 51 the like. It is called Stilbon.
Aphrodite, when it is lying beside the Sun, having magnitude, rules
over comeliness and purity and affection and erotic love. It is called
Phosphoros.
The Moon, which is nearer to the earth, admitting the effluences of
the stars above it, and administering to the region around the earth,
rules over the entire human body. It makes 7 phases with the Sun.
That the planets, as the stars in the belt of the zodiac which are
being carried in a helical1 manner, are carried and make Júpiter figures, lst,
when they are descending from the uppermost segment [of the helix2],
they are said to depress their height. 2nd, up to the lowermost segment,
when indeed they are said to depress their depression. 3rd, when they
are ascending from the lowermost segment of the depression to the
middle, when they are said to heighten their depression. 4th, when they
are ascending from the middle to the uppermost segment, when they are
said to heighten their height.
One must know that the Moon, when it is running up the helix,
passes through 11 degrees in one day. But when it is running down the
helix, it passes through 14 degrees in the same interval3. Whence, it is
said to make two escapes from bondage: the one, whenever it begins to
be depressed from the highest [point], which are seen to be difficult and
uncertain figures for a birth; the other, when it is going up through the 1 This is not a typographical error for heliacal. The word ‘helix’ appears
later in this sentence. See the next note. [RHJ
2 The “helix” probably arises in the following manner. The basic rotating
motion is the diumal rotation. As each planet moves up and down in
declination, it makes a fine helix, i.e., one with the individual passes vcry close
together. Basically this whole section can be regarded as a description of
motion in declination and its four phases. The next section on the motion of the
Sun with the same terminology makes it clear that this is what Antiochus
means. The motion of the planets is much more complex than that of the Sun.
[RH]
3 Actually the change of speed of the Moon has little to do with its change
of declination except when the perigee of the Moon is correctly phased with its
nodes. [RH] 52 middle1, and then is a diffícult time; for, this is the eclipsing place. For,
when it comes to be in this place and is making a Whole Moon, the
passion2 of the eclipse appears to persist in relation to our aspect3. Mercúrio . Canon of the Júpiter Winds and the 24 Steps
For, there is a quadrant for each wind, or 3 zõidia, so that there become
two steps per zõidion. A step has 15 degrees. Twice 15 is 30; behold,
30 degrees are found for each zõidion. Then, the Sun goes up in the
north from Aries until the beginning of Câncer; throughout this it is said
to heighten its height. It comes down in the north from Câncer up to the
beginning of Libra; throughout this it is said to be depress its height,
since from the highest point it begins to be depressed. It goes down in
the south from Libra until Capricom; throughout this it is said to
depress its depression. And it goes up in the south from Capricom to
Aries; throughout this it is said to heighten its depression, since it
begins to be heightened from the lowest point. It is clearly so in our
inhabited world, but let it be conceived to be the reverse in the opposite
region4. 1 almost certainly the ediptic. This passage refers to the Moon passing
through its nodes. [RH]
2 paíhos.
3 opsis. We do not mean astrological aspect here, but one’s countenance or
look. Júpiter Throughout this entire paragraph, the words ‘heighten’ and ‘depress’ are
the same as the technical astrological terms ‘exalt’ and ‘depress.’ It is tempting
to think that we have here some clue as to the nature of the exaltation positions
of the different planets, but we can see no connection at this time.
53 Appendix — Translation Conventions
The following words consistently translate the indicated Greek word.
ruler, rulership: oikodespotês, oikodespoteia
ruler: kurios
master, mastership: despotês, despoteia
-lord: -kratõr (as in horatokratõr, lord of boundaries)
-steward: -dektõr (as in oikodektõr, steward of the house)
zõidion: zõidion (See General Note in Paulus Alexandrinus.)
place: topos (See General Note in Paulus Alexandrinus.)
sect: hairesis
boundaries: horia
face: prosõpon
trigon: trigõnon, i.e triplicity.
house: oikos
dwelling: oikotêr
exaltation: hupsõma
depression: tapeinõma
figure: schêma
to figure: schêmatizõ
to configure: suschêmatizõ
to come to the attention of (by application, etc): hupodedeiktai
to contemplate: lheõreõ
to regard: epitheõreõ
to scrutinize: katopteuõ
to testify or bear witness to: epimarturõ
All four of the above words appear to refer to aspect relationships. The
words theoreõ and katopteuõ refer to aspects in either direction, i.e.,
into preceding and succeeding signs. However, katopteuõ seems to have
a negative overtone suggesting that it refers particularly to difficult
aspects. The word epitheõreõ is limited to aspects into the succeeding
signs but, like theoreõ, can refer to both difficult and good aspects. 54 hõroskopos: hõroskopos
to mark the birth-hour: horoskõpeõ
to divide the hour: Hõronomeõ See the General Note to the
Anonymous.
midheaven: mesouranema
to culminate: mesouraneõ
pivot: kentron
pre-ascension: proanophora
post-ascension: epanophora
decline: apoklima
rise: anatellõ
set: duneõ
co-rise: paranatellõ See General Note in the Anonymous.
ascend, (of nodes): anabibazõ
descend, (of nodes): katabibazõ
contact: kollêsis
application: sunaphê
separation: apporoia
circumambulation: peripatos
degree: moira (See General Note in Paulus Alexandrinus.)
monomoiria: monomoiria (See the sections in Paulus Alexandrinus on
monomoiria.)
crisis: klimaktêr
to take delight in, rejoice: chairõ.)
to have dealings with: chrêmatizõ
Such dealings evidently include any or all of the administrative or
goveming functions (i.e., dispositions) performed by the planetary ruler.
master, lord or steward. Possibly the planePs role as spear bearer, and
any configuration it enters into.
illustration: hupodeigma 55 A somewhat irregular word for ‘example’, that has just a trace of ‘sign’
or ‘token.’
image: eikõn
Another irregular word for example that may have the sense of a
visualization.
occupancy: Epochê See the General Note in the Anonymous.
under bond: sundesmos.
Literally, that which ties together. Evidently a more general kind of
connection than conjunction (sunodos). See Paulus, Chapter 35.
commencement: katarchê
beginning: archê 56 The Golden HindPress