Vettius Valens The Anthology
Book I
Translated
by Robert Schmidt
Edited
by Robert Hand Project Hindsight
Greek Track
Volume IV Vettius Valens The Anthology
Book I
Translated by
Robert Schmidt
Edited by
Robert Hand Project Hindsight
Greek Track
Volume IV The Golden HindPress Project Hindsight is funded entirely
by the astrological community through subscriptions and donations. ©Copyright 1993 by
Robert Schmidt Published by The Golden Hind Press, Plutão .O. Box 002,
Berkeley Springs, WV 25411. Table of Contente
Introduction to the Anthology of Vettius Valens, Book í
by Robert Hand.i
The Dõdekatêmorion. vii
Translator's Preface by Robert Schmidt.xv
General Note.xvi
The Anthology of Vettius Valens of Antioch, Book 1. 1
1. Conceming the Nature of the Stars. 1
2. Conceming the Nature of the Twelve Zõidia . 7
3. Conceming the Sixty Boundaries .18 Júpiter . Conceming the Hõroskopos.25
5. Conceming the Midheaven.30
6. Conceming the Ascension of the Zõidia .31
7. Conceming the Zõidia that See and Hear.33
8. Synodic Conjunctions and Whole Moons,
Roughly .
34 Mercúrio . Conceming the Seven-Zoned Sphere or Sabbatical Day,
Roughly ...35
10. Conceming the Ruler of the Year.36
11. Conceming Masculine and Feminine Degrees.37
12. Conceming the Lights of the Moon.37
13. Conceming the Concealment of the Moon.38
14. Conceming the 3rd, 7th, and 40th day of the
Moon.
38
15. To Roughly Find the Ascending Node.39
16. Conceming the Finding of Steps and Winds of the Moon 40
17. After Hipparchus, Conceming the Calculation of the Zõidion of
the Moon .41
18. Conceming the Calculation of the Other
Planets .
43
19. Conceming the Commixtures of the Stars .47
20. Conunixture of Three Stars .52
21. Conceming Conception .61
22. Conceming Children Bom in the
Seventh-Month.64
Appendix I Translation Conventions . 66 . : . i~ . • Introduction to the Anthology of Vettius Valens,
Book í
by
Robert Hand
This is the beginning of the single most ambitious of Project Hindsighfs
translation projects thus far, the first complete translation of Vettius
Valens’ Anthology into English. The text of the Anthology is huge, about
350 pages in Greek in small type, comprising nine books of varying
length, plus 50 pages of addenda, and about 150 pages of additional
material associated with Valens but probably not from the Anthology.
Altogether this constitutes the single largest body of ancient astrological
lore. In later books we will also see the most extensive compilation of
worked out and delineated astrological charts surviving from the ancient
world. If we are going to reco ver ancient astrology, we have to reco ver
Valens!
Unfortunately there are problems. As you will see even in this first
book, the original Greek is in very bad condition. Paragraphs and larger
sections are presented out of order; there are numerous gaps in the text;
and the copyists have had a field day.1 In chapter Júpiter we have found
passages in which the copyists mixed up ffactions written as
sexagesimal numbers (such as degrees, minutes and seconds) and
conventional fractions, substituting one for the other and vice versa.
However, despite this, and despite the amount of straightening out that
will have to be done over the next several years, even as we have it this
text is incredibly important, both because of its scope and because it
preserves an older pre-Ptolemaic way of thinking about astrology and
of doing astronomy.
Book I is a curious mixture. I truly doubt that it represents the real
Book I of the Anthology as it was originally written. Much of the
material consists of basic delineations, signs, planets etc., that one
would expect. Then there are chapters consisting of rather complex
calculations for rectifying Ascendants, computing approximate planetary
positions, phases of the Moon and the like. These calculations come
right in the middle of the basic delineation text. 1 Presumably these were not copyists with strong Virgos or if so, they must
have strong emphasis on the terms of Júpiter in Virgo. (See chapter 3.) The delineations consist of the planets, the signs, and the
boundaries (terms). In addition there are extensive sections taking the
planets in pairs and even in threes. The material in all of these
delineations is quite straightforward, but there are some significant
points that the reader should not overlook.
First of all this is the earliest reference that we know of to the
assignment of elements to the triplicities. Valens makes no special
mention of this; the elements are simply listed along with the other sign
attributes. But they are there and we know that they enter into his
delineations later on in the other books. I will have more to say about
this in the introductions to those books.
Second, this is one of the few sources any where for delineations of
the individual boundaries (or terms) of the signs. Usually they are just
treated as minor dignities and let go at that. Every boundary (term) of
every sign is specifically delineated in Book I, chapter 3. The
delineations do not always seem to follow from first principies, but
there is a general tendency to delineate the boundaries (terms) of a
planet according to the dignity of the boundary ruler in that sign by
rulership, exaltation and triplicity. The more dignified a planet within
in a sign, the more benevolent its boundary (term). However, while this
is a tendency, it is not absolutely reliable.
Third, planetary triples are not commonly delineated elsewhere in
ancient or medieval literature up until the 20th Century before the works
of Witte and Ebertin! The only exception that I am aware is one of the
writings of Abu Ma'shar, who delineated all combinations up to seven
at a time! We may, of course, flnd other authors who have written of
such combinations.
Fourth, the reader should notice the extensive use of the constellational symbolism in discussing the functions of the signs. There is a
little of this in Ptolemy's Tetrabiblos Book I, but not as much as here.
This leads us to the following question, one which we have not fully
confronted in our studies thus far. What zodiac was Valens actually
using?
The scholars have an answer. According to Neugebauer, Valens
used a mixture of systems that was common in the Hellenistic world.
He employed a system of computing rising sign times that scholars cali
“System A.” This system is discussed at length in the first note of
chapter 6. The System A rising sign times usually goes with a zodiac
in which 10° Aries is defíned as the vernal point. As this is usually ii described, íhis would be a tropical zodiac, like the one used in the West
today, but with a constant 10° difference in the longitudes. However,
Vaíens used the similar System B zodiac with the vemal point at 8o of
Aries. Similarly this would have a constant difference from our zodiac
of 8o.
.
The problem is this: Were these zodiacs really tropical or sidereal?
Did the fixed stars move (tropical) or stand still (sidereal). Some of our
authors are definitely tropical, Ptolemy, Paulus and parts, if not all, of
the Liber Hermetis. With Valens we do not know, It may be that the
zodiac was really sidereal, i.e., the stars did not move, and he simply
did not bother to move the vemal point. Or he may have really used a
tropical zodiac, i.e., the stars did move.
Certainly the logic of the use of the constellations both here and in
the Liber Hermetis is sidereal, but we do not know whether to precess
his boundaries are leave them alone. We do not even know whether or
not we should add 8o to his longitudes for the boundaries for modern
use. His system of boundaries is one which we also find used in the
Hipparchan-Ptolemaic tropical zodiac with the vemal point at 0o.
On the other hand, his ascensional times for the zõidia, which are
according to System A, would not be at all accurate if they were
computed for sidereal zõidia whose ascensional times would vary
considerably o ver time, especially if one adds 10° or 8o to the
beginnings of the signs. Cyril Fagan went over much of this ground in
his research but much more needs to be done.
Our problem is that our astrological ancestors lived at the time
when Western astronomy was just becoming aware of the precession of
the equinoxes. Hipparchus had discovered it in the 3rd Century B.C.E.
but a general awareness of it does not seem to have been widespread.
Certainly it did not occur to the early astrologers that mixing up
constellational symbolism with seasonally based symbolism would cause
a great deal of trouble 2000 years later! Only Ptolemy and his
successors seem to have been aware that clear distinctions had to be
made, so that we see Ptolemy basing the signs clearly on a seasonal
basis, and when he does refer to constellational symbolism, he precesses
the areas involved according to the apparent movement of the fixed
stars with respect to the vemal point.
The author of the Liber Hermetis and Valens do not seem to be
concerned with this at all and mix up symbolism ffom both systems of
ideas happiíy and without concem for our benefít. This is a job that we ni have to do! Ancient practices with regard to the zodiac were a mixture
of sidereal and tropical. We have to sort them out. Most of us in the
West use tropical signs. Are there sidereal ones that can be used in the
same way, as the Western siderealists and Hindu astrologers claim? Are
both sets of signs to be used, but differently?
In my own work, as many readers are aware, I routinely correct
natal planetary positions for precession before comparing them with the
transits, but for symbolism I use the tropical signs. I also add precession
to the natal Sun and Moon when casting solar and lunar retums (or
revolutions as the older astrologers knew them). Nor is my mixing of
the two systems either peculiar to me or a modem idea.
Lilly used tropical signs, but makes references to the placements of
planets in constellations. According to Fred Gettings in his book, The
Secret Zodiac,1 the astrologers who were responsible for the orientation
of the church of San Mineato al Monte near Florence, aimed at getting
a conjunction of planets in the constellation of Taurus, not the sign, in
their chart for the foundation of the church. And I am currently
translating the Opusculum of Johannes Schoener, a work dating from
1538. In it he gives delineations for the Arabic form of the lunar
mansions, with tropical longitudes related to the fixed stars that make
them up. They are clearly not based on the vemal point!
The astrological community both East and West has to stop taking
a doctrinaire position on the subject of sidereal versus tropical. The
ancient astrology was clearly a mixture of the two and the sorting out
of the East to siderealism and the West (with the exception of the
Fagan-Allen school) to tropicalism is a matter of historical accident. We
have to recognize that it is probably still valid, and even necessary, to
use elements of both. The question is which elements are which? On
that subject I expect controversy to thrive for generations.
The other major component of Book I is computational techniques.
These appear to have been the despair of the academic historians who
noted, quite correctly, that Vaíens’ astronomy was a bit crude and his
methods rough and ready. However, the “crudity” consists more of
approximations than inaccuracies. With the exception of his use of
System A rising times for the signs, which are genuinely wrong
especially for Virgo and Libra, his methods actually give fairly decent 1 Fred Gettings, The Secret Zodiac, London, Arkana, 1989.
ív results with a little calculation that could easily have been done with the
Greek equivalent of pencil and paper, and no reference books. These
would be just the thing for the itinerant astrologer who could not carry
weighty reference books (or scrolls) and who was 2000 years shy of
electricity and notebook computers.
But the value of these techniques goes beyond this in my opinion.
Their real value may lie in the area of astrological education. The
typical modern astrologer is so far removed from the process of
computing a planetary position, that he or she has no real feeling for the
processes involved and no real sense of their incredible numerological
underpinnings.
In the field of astrological education there is an ongoing debate as
to whether beginning astrology students should be required to leam how
to compute a natal chart by hand. The phrase 'by hand' here means with
the use of ephemerides and tables of houses. The idea is that doing
charts by hand in this manner gives the student a feeling for what the
chart is about. It is this writer's opinion that what it really does is to
give the student the feeling that astrology is drudgery. And the student
still gets no real sense of how a chart works. By contrast the methods
used by Valens, though they require updating and modernizing, give one
a real sense of the dynamics of planetary movement and of the
workings of the chart. (Further on in this introduction there is a short
essay which discussés this principie in the context of a particularly
striking example.) Perhaps what we need to do is to teach the kinds of
techniques that Valens used to our beginning students.
However, I need to issuè a waming. If you examine the chapters of
Book I on computing, you will not immediately find that simplicity and
closeness to the phenomena that I have been talking about here. The
problem comes from two sources, the garbled nature of the Greek text
and the strangeness of everyday Greek computational methods to
someone trained in present-day arithmetic. However, when these
techniques are converted to our methods of computing, they become
fairly simple.
As an example let us try out one of the techniques, which is
described in chapter 6, for computing the nearest, previous New or Full
Moon before a birth. Then compare this description using modern
methods with the description in chapter 6. v Given: Sun and Moon O \ Mercúrio °/59' & D 1°X'24' at 0:00 E.T. on Dec. 12,
1993. When was the nearest previous New or Full Moon?
We are just before a New Moon here so we want to compute the
previous Full Moon. For our purposes, it is sufficient to round
everything off to the nearest degree. At a Full Moon, the Moon is
opposite the Sun. Therefore we start with the point opposite the current
Sun degree, namely 20° Gêmeos or 80°(as measured from 0°T). The current
Moon is at 241°. We subtract 80 from 241 which equals 161. We then
divide 161 by 12 which gives us a bit more than 13 (161/12 = 13.42).
We subtract the 13 from the 80°, our starting point, which was opposite
the current Sun. The result is 67°. Therefore the previous Full Moon
occurred with the Moon at 7°H and the Sun at T/, and it occurred
roughly 13 days before on November 29. According to the ephemeris
the actual values are Nov. 29, 1993 at 06:32 E.T
7°II03' O 7V03'.
We can also compute the next New Moon using the same device.
The current Sun is 20°/, the current Moon f/. The arc between them
is 19°. If we divide 19 by 12 we get almost 2, therefore the next New
Moon will be on Dec. 13 at 22V. The correct figure is Dec. 13, 1993
at Mercúrio :28 E.T. at 21°/23'.
The key here is that the average daily rate of the elongation of the
Moon from the Sun is 12.19° which is very close to an even 12°. Using
another of Valens' methods for computing the position of Saturn, I was
able to compute the Dec. 1993 position of Saturn as 24°«s, knowing
only that Saturn was at 60° in May of 1942.
These are not merely interesting parlor tricks. We find when we
examine these techniques that they employ those same very mysterious
planetary periods that many of us have been wondering about for some
time. These periods are not only interesting numerologically but also
astronomically. It is when astronomy and numerology (in the higher
sense of the word) come together we know that we are looking at
something genuinely important for understanding our art and the other
so-caíled “occult arts.”
Another potential bonus in this book is chapter Júpiter . I call this a
potential bonus, because this is far and away the most fouled-up chapter
of the book with regard to the condition of the original text. This
chapter shows methods for finding an unknown Ascendant. Even though
we have made a start, it is going to take a while to straighten out the
paragraph ordering and other such problems. But in this section we have vi at least three methods for finding an unknown rising sign, and then
many more for computing the actual degree and minute. These are all
of course based on rationales that are obscure, to say the least, even to
modem astrologers, but they may prove of value. One of these methods,
known from Ptolemaic literature as the Animodar (Book III of the
Tetrabiblos) actually often does give an approximate value for the
Ascendant with no more data than the longitude of the prenatal New or
Full Moon (hence the calculation example chosen above). I can
conceive of no rational basis for this technique. However, Renaissance
astrologers used it routinely and no chart was considered correct until
it had been checked with the Animodar.
The Dõdekaíêmorion
The remaining part of my introduction I will devote to a discussion of
the dõdekatêmorion, as an illustration of the kind of insights one can get
from examining ancient astrological computing techniques. As readers
of my own writings may be aware in my book Essays on Astrology1 I
devoted a section in that book to the Greek system known as the
dõdekatêmoria (the plural form). We have also encountered it several
times in our translations, for example in Paulus Alexandrinus, Antiochus
of Athens, and the Liber Hermetis. For those who may not be familiar
with it, the dõdekatêmorion is the Hellenistic form of what is known in
Hindu astrology as the Dwadasamsa. In both cases the words mean
“twelfth part” and both of them are concerned with some kind of
twelvefold division of the signs. But in Greek astrology there are two
different methods for computing them, which appear quite similar, but
in fact produce different results. Here are the two methods:
1. Multiply the degrees and minutes of the planet within the sign and
add the result to the original position. That is the dõdekatêmorion.
2. Multiply the degrees and minutes of the planet within the sign That
is the dõdekatêmorion.
The First method actually amounts to the foliowing: Given a planet at 1 Robert Hand, Essays on Astrology, “Dodekatemoria: An Ancient
Technique Reexamined,” Rockport, MA: Para Research, 1983. vii x, its dõdekatêmorion, D is as follows: D=12x+x, in other words
D=13x! For this reason we will refer to this as the 13th harmonic
dõdekatêmorion. The second method amounts to D=12x. This method is the one
used in the Hindu dwadasamsa, so we will refer to this kind as the
dwadasamsa type. The dwadasamsa has received something of a
renaissance in Western tropical astrology, and has never died in Hindu
astrology, although it is not as prominent as the ninth part or navamsa
in present day use.
Before we go any further, we must point one more feature of both
systems. Both of them can be looked at in two different ways. First,
each can be looked at simply as a sign subdivision, especially the
dwadasamsa type. Here we are not concerned with an actual degree and
minute for the dõdekatêmorion, but simply its sign. The sign of the
dõdekatêmorion is a subdivision which can confer dignity or debility
onto a planet in the same way as a boundary (term) or face. However,
we can also actually compute the degree and minute and take aspects
among the dõdekatêmoria. This is the method that is described in
Essays and is also clearly referred to in several places by Paulus and at
least once in Book I of the Anthology, the present work. It seems that
the 13th harmonic type is more commonly used to compute degree
locations which are then inserted among the conventional positions in
the chart, while the dwadasamsa type is more commonly used to get the
sign only. However as the longitude within a sign increases the two
methods gives an increasingíy divergent result. At the end of the sign
the two twelfth parts differ by exactly one sign.
Neugebauer in Greek Horoscopes reports only the I3th harmonic
type, where he alleges that it can also be found in Babylonian sources.
Other authors report only the dwadasamsa type. It seems that scholars
are not generally aware that there are two kinds, even though both kinds
are reported by Paulus and Antiochus, Paulus preferring the 13th
harmonic type and Antiochus the dwadasamsa type.
When I wrote Essays I was of the opinion that the dwadasamsa
type was a degenerate form of the 13th harmonic, the I3th harmonic
being the earlier form. I still believe that the 13th harmonic form is the
older, but I am no longer so sure that the dwadasamsa type is merely
a degenerate form of the 13th harmonic.
I believed that dwadasamsa to be a degenerate form for the
following reason: The 13th harmonic type is a true harmonic in the Vlll sense that John Addey and his followers have defined it, that is, there
are complete sequences of the signs of the zodiac following in the
proper order from Aries to Pisces. For example in the ninth part or
navamsa, the ninths go in nine complete Aries-Pisces sequences around
the zodiac, each navamsa being 3°20'. The saptamsa or seventh part
does the same seven times. But the dwadasamsa divides each sign into
12 parts of 2°30' each such that the first dwadasamsa of each sign is the
same as the sign, but there is a discontinuity. The sign Aries has 12
dwadasamsas starting with Aries and extending to Pisces. Taurus has
12 dwadasamsas starting with Taurus and extending to Aries, but at the
Aries-Taurus sign boundary an Aries dwadasamsa is skipped! In the
13th harmonic type, Aries has dõdekatêmoria from Aries to Aries, so
that Taurus starts with a Taurus dõdekatêmorion and ends with a Taurus
dõdekatêmorion. There is no skipping over the second Aries. Under the
influence of the Addey school I assumed that the latter form, being a
true harmonic, was the correct form and the dwadasamsa simply an
approximation. Working with the Anthology has convinced me that I
was probably in error. I now believe that the dõdekatêmoria of both
kinds are valid systems and that they both derive from something much
more powerful than a simple harmonic basis, although harmonics are a
factor in their operation.
The key to this new understanding carne about by accident. In his
first draft of the chapter 6 of Book I, Robert Schmidt made what he
later realized was a translation error. Seeing the number 12 in the Greek
text followed by an abbreviation for what could have been the Greek
equivalem of 'part', he translated it is “twelfth part,” i.e., dõdekatê¬
morion. When I read this passage something did not quite make sense.
I realized that what had been translated as “twelfth part” actually had
to mean “12 degrees.” And it subsequently turned out that the number
and abbreviation really did mean “twelve degrees.” But on the way to
this realization I carne to the conclusion that the dõdekatêmorion was
closely related to Sun-Moon reíationships and that both kinds could be
accounted for in these terms. And this was later confirmed in Chapter
21, “Conceming Conception,” where Valens uses 2[ Saturno ° measures for
computing the Trutine of Hermes in exactly the same way that Lilly
uses 12° ares. The two measures are closely related! Incidentally the
12° arc is not unknown in modern astrology. In Hindu astrology the 12°
arc, when used to measure the elongation of the Moon from the Sun, is
called a tithi or lunar day. The sample caículation of the Full and New IX Moon given above shows the tithi in its use by Valens, although he
does not give it any special significance in that passage.
Let us first explore the origins of the 13th harmonic dõdekatêmorion. Suppose that there is a New Moon at exactly 0° T. For the first
couple of days both the Sun and the Moon are in Aries. The mean rate
of travei of the Moon is 13°10'35", while the Sun moves at 0°59'8". On
average the Moon will take 2 days, 6 hrs., 38 min. and 35 sec. before
it enters Taurus. The Sun in that same time will move an average of
2°14'39". A thirteenth of a sign of 30° is 2°18'28". That is the size of
a 13th harmonic type dõdekaíêmorion. In other words at just about the
same time that the Moon enters the sign Taurus, the Sun will enter the
dõdekatêmorion of Taurus. Similarly when the Moon enters Gemini, the
Sun will enter the Gemini dõdekatêmorion of Aries and so forth. If the
relationship were perfect, the Moon would always be in the sign of the
Sun's dõdekatêmorion. In fact whenever there is a New Moon at 0o of
any sign,! this relationship holds for most of that month. This arises out
of the natural relationship between the motions of the Sun and Moon.
As one can see above, the Moon's average daily motion is a little over
13° and the Sun's average daily motion is a little under Io.
Ancient astrology was strongly imbedded in the ancient Greek (and
probably pre-Greek) philosophical tradition, which believed that the
physical universe was an approximate reflection of an ideal universe in
which all mathematical relationships are perfect. This tradition is known
to us at its most developed in Platonism, but it is by no means confined
to that tradition. We have 360° in the circle because that is the nearest
elegant, whole number to the number of days in the solar year. Hence
the Egyptians, adopted a solar year of 12 months of 30 days, with a five
day period at the end belonging to no month, the epagomenal days.
Every fourth year a sixth day was added for leap years. But the
emphasis is on the number 360. Even in the present day there are
schools of Hindu astrology that compute planetary periods (dasas) using
an ideal year of 360 days!
In the same way I believe that the 13th harmonic dõdekatêmorion
was an idealized value for the solar motion that takes place while the
Moon traveis through a 30° arc. Although we have no documentary 1 At 0o of a sign the longitude and the dõdekatêmorion 13th harmonic are
the same. x evidence for this as yet, it would seem logical that those months in
which the New Moon occurs at 0o of any sign (in which the Moon sign
is for the most part the dõdekatêmorion of the Sun as mentioned above),
have some special signifícance. For in these months the ideal and
physical universes are synchronized.
The dwadasamsa type has a similar origin, but it comes not from
the motion of the Moon with respect to the zodiac, but from the motion
of the Moon with respect to the Sun, or elongation. As we have already
seen the average motion of the elongation is 12.19° per day. This is the
source of the idealized lunar day or tithi of 12°. If the Moon traveis
12.39° of elongation per day then the Moon will cover 30° of
elongation in 2.46 days. Given that the Sun moves a bit less than 1° per
day, this gives a solar motion of very close to 2°30', the value of the
dwadasamsa type of dõdekatêmorion.
So we see that the 13th harmonic dõdekatêmorion arises from the
absolute motions of the Sun and the Moon, whereas the dwadasamsa
type of dõdekatêmorion arises from the relative motion of the Moon to
the Sun. I believe that these are enough to establish these two measures
(measure being exactly what the Sanskrit ending -amsa means) as
especially significam. However, it turns out on closer inspection that
there are two additional reasons for the importance that may be attached
to the dwadasamsa interval of 2°30'.
The planet Saturn has a tropical cycle of 29.45772 years and an
average motion of 12.22 degrees per year. It takes therefore 2.455 years
to travei a sign. If we move a pointer at the rate of 1° per year in the
chart, which is the standard Greek rate for directing, we fmd that the
pointer will move very close to 2°30' in the same time that it takes the
transiting Saturn on average to move through a sign. And Saturn was
known to the Babylonians as the “old Sun!” Satunfs transit cycle
measured in years is also very close to the average length of the SunMoon cycle, or synodic month, measured in days, namely 29.45772
years and 29.530589 days.
The plar.et Júpiter has a tropical cycle of 11.86223 years. This
gives Júpiter an annual motion of 30.348 degrees, a little more than a
sign, and an average monthly motion of 2°3T, agaín our dwadasamsa
value!
It is the resonances of these astronomical relationships with the
harmonics of the planetary periods that gives the dõdekatêmorion of
both kinds their signifícance. I suspect that we err when use harmonics xi arbitrarily vvithout checking to see whether a particular harmonic has an
astronomical relationship of some kind. It is not clear whether all of the
harmonics used in Hindu astrology would bear up to this test1, but it is
clear that the dwadasamsa does and so also does the 13th harmonic,
each in different ways.
How important are the dwadasamsas in the history of ancient
Hindu astrology? We cannot say for certain, but here are a couple of
suggestive ideas.
If we have each sign divided up into dwadasamsas and decanates
(using the Hindu system not the Western Faces) we have the situation
illustrated in the following table, using the sign Gemini as an example. n
n
n o /VW
/VW q f ^ m / /*) « X | T tí Notice that each of the decanates is ruled by the sign that is also the
first dwadasamsa. The same is true for any other sign that one might
care to choose. Is this a coincidence? I suspect that it is not. There is
also a more obscure division used in Hindu astrology, known as the
chathuramsa which divides each sign into four divisions of 7°30’ each
in the following manner (again using Gemini as an example.) n
n
n o q IIP up H =£= Tfl QQQ H Tb 1 The navamsa does. The lunar mansion or nakshatra is 13°20' long. This
is very close to the average daily motion of the Moon in the zodiac, and it is
well known that this is the derivation. The navamsa is exactly one quarter of
that and therefore resonates to the passage of the Moon through the quadrants
of the chart. On average lhe Moon moves very close to 3°20' of arc while it is
rising from the Ascendant to the M.C., frotn the M.C. to the Descendant and
so forth. The chaturamsas, like the decanates, are ruled by the first dwadasamsa
in each. It appears that the decanates of the Hindu system (the ones also
used by most modera astroiogers) and the chaturamsas are not really
independent subdivisions at all, but are actually derived from the
dwadasamsas. This does not immediately tell us anything of practical
use, but it does show how important dwadasamsas were in Hindu
astrology. They are also not without importance in modera Hindu
astrology, but they do not appear to have the central role they may have
once had.
There is one more point before we bring this essay to a close. This
is a purely symbolic one. We have two kinds of dõdekatêmorion, the
13th harmonic and the dwadasamsa. And if the scholars are correct
(notably Neugebauer) and the 13th harmonic type is the older, and if,
as is certainly true, all memory of the 13th harmonic type has been lost
until recently, why did this happen?
One answer may be that the dwadasamsa type simply resonates
better with other celestial phenomena such as the Satura and Júpiter
cycles. But there is another possible answer that is consistent with other
changes that have occurred within astrology since the ancients. For
example, where in ancient astrology we have two complete astrological
systems (the sects) for day and night births, the first being solar in
orientation, the latter being lunar, in modera astrology we have only the
solar orientation. In the most ancient astrology we have two distinctly
different planetary Venuses, the morning star Venus and the evening
star Venus. According to Wilhelm Knappich the morning star Venus
“had a more masculine character and was known as Ishtar ofAkkad, a
goddess of war.” The evening star Venus “had a more feminine
character and as Ishtar of Uruk she was the goddess of the sensual life
and priestess of the gods.”1 The morning star Venus later became just
a debilitated Venus, and to Christians even worse; she became Lucifer,
the De vil.
We see here a gradual and Progressive devaluation of the feminine
fforn ancient astrology to the present. But how do the two systems of
dõdekatêmorion fit into this. The 13th harmonic dõdekatêmorion is
based on the Moon's own motion in the zodiac irrespective of the Sun,
13.17° per day. The dwadasamsa type is based on the motion of the 1 Wilhelm Knappich, Geschichte der Astrologie, Frankfurt am Main,
Klostermann, 1967, p. 31. My own translation. Moon relative to the Sun, 12.19° per day. The first shows the Moon as
an independent entity, the second as an entity dependent upon the Sun.
Of course, from a purely physical astronomical perspective the Moon
is dependent upon the Sun for its light, but its motion, of which the
light is really only a measure, is actually its own. Is the Progressive
change from the 13th harmonic dõdekatêmorion to the dwadasamsa
dõdekatêmorion, part of the same evolution that has made 13 an
unlucky number, while 12 is not?
I offer this only as a suggestion, not as anything defmitive. But all
of the foregoing should serve to give the reader some idea of what
kinds of material can be stirred up by the study of ancient astrology.
Final note: Except in this introduction, all of the notes that follow are
those of Robert Schmidt, the translator, unless they are marked with the
initials [RH]. Those are notes by your editor. Translator's Preface
by
Robert Schmidt
The present translation of the first book of Vettius Valens' Anthology
takes us right into the heartland of Hellenistic astrology. Written by a
younger contemporary of Ptolemy’s, it preserves the main line of the
astrological tradition with all its complexities and ambiguities, and
without the rationalizations (and consequent omissions) introduced by
Ptolemy. And as the reader will see for himself, it certainly qualifies as
one of the most elaborate 'cookbooks' of all time. The richness of the
delineation material is truly amazing.
Vettius Valens is another astrologer (along with Paulus) singled out
by Pingree as a “wretched writer.” It is certainly true that the text as we
ha ve it is a mess. It is disorganized, with repeated text and scattered bits
of paragraphs surfacing at odd places. The section on the zõidia (i.e.,
the signs) is particularly corrupt. However, there is no reason to
attribute this to Valens. It is more likely that it is due to the transmission and successive re-editings of the text.
There are other sections, however, that exhibit the tight and
carefully equivocai writing that we are beginning to recognize as the
distinctive mark of the authentic tradition. This is particularly true of the
description of the nature of Hermes in chapter 1, and the combinations
of the planets taken two at a time and three at a time in chapters 19 and
20, respectively. Valens himself makes it clear that he composed the
“synoptic” delineations of the latter two chapters himself and did not
merely paraphrase the ancients. They will certainly deserve some more
attention in the future revision of this book. They seem to be written in
such a way that a sudden tumaround or twist of the language is
supposed to implant the “form” of the combination in the reader's mind.
There are many places in those chapters where I felt that I was looking
through a veil, and did not see the true “form” at all. As a matter of
fact, it may only be through a more exact understanding of the planetary
symbolism that these passages will begin to reveal themselves at all.
Greek grammar only takes us so far. In any case, I challenge all our
readers to try to “construct” these delineations from basic symbolism,
or those of the 60 boundaries as well (chapter 3). How are these
delineations like or unlike the delineations for the planets and the signs
themselves? xv Criticisms have also been made of the mathematical sections of this
work. It is certainly true that they do not have the algorithmic simplicity
of modem astronomical methods. However, let me suggest that the
Greek astrologer/astronomers may not dealing with pure and abstract
mathematical quantities in the modern sense. They seem to be
concerned with manipulating the “portions” (moirai) of the heavens,
which are the allotments that pertain to man's life and destiny, not mere
degrees or divisions of a circle into a convenient number of parts. It is
possible that the seemingly cumbersome nature of the astrologer's
algorithmic language and presentation is due to his desire to bring the
leamer closer to these true objects of his art, and not to distance him
with a superficial profíciency of calculation that is only possible by
ignoring the specific nature of the objects under investigation.
One unexpected surprise of this work was the occasional bit of
esoteric material shining through the basic exposition. I refer to the first
phrases in the discussion of the nature of the Sun and Moon in chapter
1, and few enigmatical references to a “mystical or necessitated
Hõroskopos.” Was there more of this in the original text? Was it
censored? Did the author write like this for fear of persecution? Or was
this the accepted method of presenting an esoteric doctrine? Whatever
may be the case, we will have to keep a sharp lookout in the future
transiations for more such material.
This translation of the first book of the Anthology has been made
from the Teubner edition of the Greek text by Pingree. Although it has
been translated into a few European languages (French and German, at
least), to the best of our knowledge this is the first translation into
English. General Note
Updaíe on Zõidion. Here we would like to give some new reflections on the word 'zõidion,' which we have merely transíiterated in our
translations hitherto since we have not known how to cope with the dual
meanings of living thing and picture that pertain to the root word
'zõion.' The root word 'zõion' is formed ffom zõê meaning life plus the
ending 'ion' This ending is itself ambiguous. It either refers to place in
some way, or is a diminutive. The former seems the only possibility
here. Thus, a zõion would be a place for life. We preserve this sense in
some of our sayings: “the body is the seat of the soul, ” or the xvi “temple of the spirit. ” We might also speculate that the image sense of
zõion becomes more intelligible in this way. A statue might be regarded
as the seat of a god, for example.
In our first note about this word in our transíation of the
Introductory Maíters of Paulus, we suggested that the word 'animate*
(as a noun) might be a good transíation for zõidion. We subsequently
discovered that MacKenna had in fact used this transíation for zõion in
his editiõn of PJotinus^ However, in view of the material in the
preceding paragraphs, this no íonger seems to us a good transíation.
'Animate' in no way refers to the seat of life, but rather to the
animating power in matter. So we are still in a quandary.
The problem becomes even more complicated when we look at the
word 'zõidion,' which is itself formed by adding 'iorí to zõion (“the "d'
merely separates the last vowel of the root from the first vowel of the
suffix and is not an integral part of the suffix). It has always been taken
for granted that this is a diminutive rather than a locative1 suffice here,
meaning a small zõion. However, astrological usage leads us to wonder
if we may have a higher order locative suffix here. Each zõidion is
regarded as the dwelling place (oikétêrion—note the 'iorí suffix here
also with an unambiguous locative sense) of a planet (in modern
parlance, the planet is the ruler of this sign). So it is at least possible
that the zodiacal divisions are meant to be the dwelling places of the
planets or stars regarded as gods (which are considered to be zõia by
the Greeks), and that this is the origin of the designation 'zõidion.' Only
more study will enable us to decide this.
In any case, the equivocai character of zõion was a matter of
considerable significance for the Greek philosophers, and seemed to
contain within itself some higher truth about the nature of living things.
From the very first chapter of the Categories, we gather that Aristotle
did not regard the two meanings of zõion—living thing and picture—as
immediately referring to the same essence; that is, zõion cannot be
regarded as a genus of which living thing and picture are species. Nor
is the one meaning somehow derived from the other; in other words, a
picture is not called a zõion because it is a picture of an animal, since
the word may be applied to scenes that do not contain animais at all.
But neither do the two just accidentally happen to have the same name,
as is the case with homonyms. According to Aristotle, the zõion that is 1 i.e., pertaining to a place in which a thing is located. [RH]
XVII a horse and the zõion that is a picture are truly “similarly-named, ” that
is, they justifiably possess the same name out of some analogy. The
question is: What are the terms of the analogy?
In Plato's Epinomis, the Athenian Stranger States that a zõion
results, properly speaking, “whenever a single copulative union of soul
and body should give birth to a single shape [981 a 7- Mercúrio ]. ” Later in the
same dialogue, the gods (who have been characterized as zõiá) are
identified with the stars. The stars are “either the gods themselves, or
else images of the gods created by the gods themselves [983 e 5-6]. ”
From these passages we might infer that the underlying analogy referred
to above is that the soul fashions the body, makes it what it is, in the
same way that an artist fashions his material. And in each case we have
a union of soul and matter. This union is conceptualized as a sexual
one, as is further clear from Plato's Phaedrus, in which Sócrates
characterizes paintings (zõia) as the “offspring of the painter’s art that
stand before one as though alive (hõs zõntá) [275 d 5].
We might also infer that, for the Greeks, the image character that
pertains to zõia always derives from something higher and more real.
A picture is not an zõion-image because it is an image of some subject
or some scene. It is an image because it refiects or images the artisfs
soul—or at least something that exists in the artisfs soul.
Thus, the Greeks would not regard the figurai character of the
zõidia of the zodiac as due to human projections of men and animais
into the sky. Rather, to the extent that they were images, they were the
divine artwork. In the Timaeus, the Demiurge creates the world itself as
a zõion, a living being. But this living being is also created in the image
of the Idea of a Living Being, which is not an abstraction, but rather a
more fully real prototype of all living things.
Finally, in Plotinus zõia are regarded as the mirror-like images of
the higher light and life reflected in matter. The higher soul can be
regarded as present in bodies in so far as “it shines into them and
makes zõia not out of itself and body, but while remaining itself, it
gives images of itself, just as a face in many mirrors [1.1.8].
Here,
too, the meanings of living fning and image are ínextricably intertwined.
In the light of these passages, we would like to draw the following
tentative conclusions about the two meanings of zõion. 1 Compare this with Valens' symbolism of the Moon in the present
translation.
xviii 1. They were not regarded as homonyms, but as analogs.
2. The underlying analogy seems to be that the soul fashions the body
in the same way that an artist fashions his material.
3. The image character is not regarded as projection from lower sphere,
but only as an image of something higher in the sense of more real.
We do not see how astrologers could have used this language without
being ever conscious of the deeper truths presented in this ambiguity.
Update on Moira. Chapter 3 of the present translation deals with the assignment of boundaries (traditionally called 'terms') to different parts
of the zodiacal divisions. The grammatical usage there leads us to
believe that we were correct in assuming that the Greek astrologers used
the word 'moira' in full consciousness of its meaning as an vallotment'
or 'apportionment,' and did not simply regard it as a neutral division of
a circle into parts. In everything else we have translated so far, the
Greek astrologers are careful never to attribute the astrological qualities
to the parts of the zodiac itself. They always say that some such
zodiacal division is “significam for ” something, or that it “produces
” something in the natives. But all of a sudden we find Valens saying
the first 7 degrees (moirai) of Capricorn, for instance, those of Hermes,
are theatrical, satyr-like, imitative, etc., as if these adjectives were
proper predicates of the moirai. This wouíd be a conceptual blunder if
the moirai were themselves simply parts of the zodiac. However, these
qualities would be appropriate predicates for a human allotment or
apportionment. Then the above sentence would say that the first 7
allotments (to some native) are theatrical ones, etc., which makes sense.
We are moving more and more in the direction of discarding the
translation "degree' entirely. xix XX The Anthology of Vettius Valens of Antioch, Book I.
1. Concerning the Nature of the Stars
The all-seeing Sun, then, being truly fire-like and the light of the mind1,
the organ of perception of the soul,2 3 is significant at a birth for kingly
Office, hegemony, mind, practical wisdom, outward form, motion, height
of fortune, public registration, action, popular leadership, judgement,
father, mastership, friendship, persons of high repute, the honors of
images, statues, and crowns of office, arch-priests of the fatherland. . .
of places.
Of the parts of the body, it has authority over the head,
sense-organs, right eye, Júpiter ribs, heart, respiratory or sensory motion,
tendons.
It also has authority over the essence of gold, of fruits of wheat and
barley.
It is of the diumal sect, lemon-yellow as for color, and sharp as for
taste.
The Moon, being truly generated5 by the reflection of the solar light and 1 phõs noeron.
2 There seems to be some esoteric doctrine peeping through the text here. If the Sun in question is the “organ of perception of the soul,” where it is
located? It could hardly be merely a physical body “out there.”
3 Lacuna. Júpiter The idea that the Sun rules the right eye (only in males accordmg to
other sources) and the Moon the left eye, leads to an interesting speculation. As
we know from many ancient sources, the Greeks believed that when one looked
at something, a ray was supposed to go out from the eyes and then be reflected
back from the object, much like modem radar. The fact that one eye is ruled
by an active principie, the Sun, and the other by a passive and reflective
principie, the Moon, suggests that the Greeks may have thought that the
transmission of the optical ray went forth from the right eye (in males at least)
and was reflected back to the left eye, where perception occurs. Putting this
another was using English verbs, the right eye “looks at” while the left eye
“sees.” [RH]
5 genomené. Or perhaps, 'being truly bom from.' 1 possessing a counterfeit light,1 2 3 Júpiter 5 6 is significant at a birth for man’s life,
body, mother, conception, . . }, one’s person,3 goddess, living together
or legal marriage, nurse, older brother, Júpiter house-keeping, queen, mistress
of the house, property, fortune, city, gathering of crowds, receipts,
expenditures, home, ships, living abroad, wanderings (for, it does not
maintain a straight line through Câncer).
Of the parts of the body, it has authority over the left eye, stomach,
breasts, bladder, spleen, membranes, marrow (whence it also produces
dropsies).
It has authority over the essence of silver and glass.
It is of the nocturnal sect, leek-green as for color, and salty as for
tas te.
The star of Kronos makes those born under it concerned about trifles,
slanderers, those who bring themselves into disrepute, solitary, deceitful,
those who conceal their deceit, austere, downcast, those who have a
feigned appearance, squalid,5 black-clad, importunate, of sorrowful
countenance, miserable, given to sailing, those who work at waterside
trades. And it causes depressions,6 torpors, inactions, interferences with
what is being done, long-lasting punishments, dismantlings of things,
concealments, constrictions, bonds, griefs, accusations, tears, cases of
orphanhood, captivities,7 exposures.8 It also makes laborers and farmers
because it has authority over the earth. It produces tax and customs
collectors, and forced activities. Mercúrio It procures great reputation and notable
rank, guardianships and the administration of the affairs of others, and
fathers of the children of others. 1 This seems to pick up the esoteric theme above. The Moon is actually characterized as a reflection. It is not materiality per se, but results from
materiality’s throwing back of the solar rays. At the risk of sounding
anachronistic, we might call it the “organ of imagination.”
2 A one word lacuna.
3 prosopos. The word also means mask or countenance. Júpiter or perhaps older sibling.
5 auchmêros. Literally, dry, parched.
6 tapeinotês. Related to the word for 'fali,' (as opposed to exaltation). This
word can mean depression in all its fornis: low estate, dejection, vileness, etc.
7 Kidnappings?
8 Of a cnild at birth. Mercúrio I think this means a job that is unsuitable for one, or goes against the
grain. 2 It has authority over lead, trees, and stones.
Of the parts of the body, it has authority over the legs, knees,
tendons, blood-serum, phlegra, bladder, kidneys, and the inner private
parts.
It is indicative of whatever hurts are formed from cold and
moisture; for example, it is indicative of those who suffer from dropsy,
pain in the tendons, gout, cough, dysentery, tumors, spasms, demoniac
possession, unnatural lust, depravity.
It makes those who do not marry, and widowhood, orphanhood, and
childlessness. It produces violent deaths in the water or through
strangling or bonds or dysentery. It also causes falis upon one's face.
It is the star of Nemesis and of the diurnal sect, castor-like as for
color, astringent as for taste.
The star of Zeus is signiflcant for begetting children, child-birth, desire,
erotic love, alliances, knowledge, friendships with great men,
abundance, stipends, great gifts, plenty of fruits, justice, sovereignty,
governments, opinions, mediations of disputes, preferments of priests,
fidelities,
inheritances,
brotherhood,
community,
benefaction,
confirmation of goods, deliverance from evils, loosing of bonds,
freedom, trusts, possessions, households.
Of the outer parts of the body, it has authority over the thighs, feet
(whence it also pertains to running in athletic contests); of the inner
parts it has authority over the seed, womb, liver, the parts on the right
side.
It has authority over the essence of tin.
It is of the diurnal sect, grey and rather white as for color, sweet
as for taste.
The star of Ares is significam for violence, wars, rapine, screams,
insolence, adulteries, taking away of belongings, losses, banishment,
estrangement of parents, captivities, ruination of women, abortion,1
sexual intercourse, weddings, taking away of good things, lies, situations
void of hope, violent thefts, piracy, plunderings, breaches of friends,
anger, combat, reproaches, enemies, lawsuits. It brings on violent
murders and cuts and bloodshed, attacks of fever, ulcerations, pustules, 1 Literally, cutting up the foetus in the womb. 3 inflammations, imprisonment, tortures, manliness, perjury, wandering,1 2
excelling at villainy, those who gain their ends through fíre or iron,
handicraftsmen, workers in hard materiais.
It makes leaders and military campaigns and generais, warriors,
supremacy, the hunt, the chase, falis from heights or from quadrupeds,
weak vision, apoplexy.
Of the parts of the body, it has authority over the head, rump,
genitais; of the inner parts, it has authority over the blood, spermatic
ducts, bile, excretion of feces, the hind-parts, walking backward,2 falling
on one's back; it also has that which is hard and severe.
It has authority over iron and honor,3 clothes because of Aries, and
wine and pulse.
it is of the nocturnal sect, red as for color, pungent as for taste.
Aphrodite is desire and erotic love, and is significant for the mother and
nurse. It makes for priestly rites, the Office of gymnasiarch, the wearing
of gold omaments, the wearing of crowns, merriment, friendships,
companionships, further acquisition of belongings, purchases of
ornament, reconciliations for the good, weddings, purification arts,
euphonies, making music, sweetness of melody, beauty of form,
paintings, combinations and variety of colors, purpíe-dying and aromatic
arts, both the founders and the authors of these things, the arts or
commercial workshops of emeralds and precious stones, ivory-working.
As for those who spin gold thread and those who adom with gold,
haircutters, those who love cleanliness and those who are fond of play,
it produces them when it is in zodiacal boundaries4 and degrees
pertaining to it. It also bestows the office of market-overseer, measures,
weights, businesses, workshops, gifts, receipts, laughter, festive
rejoicing, ornament, water-chases. Also, it bestows advantages from
royal women or relatives, and, when it thwarts such matters, it procures
an outstanding reputation.
Of the parts of the body, it has authority over the neck, face, lips. 1 planê. Possibly meaning deceit or imposture in this context.
2 anapodismos. This is also the usual word for retrograde motion of a planet.
3 kosmos. Literally, ornament. Probably metaphorical here, as in the honor or credit that one wears as an ornament. Júpiter horia. Júpiter the organ of smell and the fore-parts of the body from foot to head,
intercourse of the genitais; of the inner parts, it has authority o ver the
lungs. It is also indicative of the nurturing of another, and of pleasure,
It has authority over precious stones and many-colored ornament
and the oils of fruits.
It is of the nocturnal sect, white as for color, very greasy as for
taste.
The star of Hermes is significant for the education of chiídren, letters,
disputation, speech, having brothers, interpretation, the herald's office,
number, counters, geometry, commerce, youth, playthings, theft,
community, announcement, Service, profit, discoveries, following,
contest, wrestling, declamation, sealing, sending messages, setting up,
being suspended, scrutinizing, hearing, versatility.
It is the bestower of intellect and practical wisdom, the lord oí
brothers and younger chiídren, and the fashioner of every mercantile
and banking art.
Properly speaking, it makes temple-builders, brick-makers,
sculptors, physicians, writers, lawyers, orators, philosophers, architects,
musicians, mantics, sacrificers, augurs, interpreters of dreams, braiders,
weavers, those who are methodical, and those who are in the forefront
in wars and military actions, and those who try their hand at paradoxes
and methodics1 with calculations and fallacious reasoning, those who are
strong performers or sing mimes, those who make their living through
display, and furthermore through deception and wandering and
confusion,2 those who come to know the heavens or even become
searchers of the sky3 with pleasure and contentment, those who covet
fame for a wondrous deed for the sake of profit.
For, since this star is capable of many pursuits, Júpiter it furnishes
activities in accordance with the variation in the zõidia or its variously 1 There is a lost treatise on this by Aristotle, but since it is lost we do not know what it is.
2 planes kai alêteias kai akaiastasias. These are all words that could equally well describe irregular planetary motion, which Mercury typifies.
3 Perhaps an epithet for astrologers. Júpiter metliodos. 5 configured interweavings with the stars.5 For some of these zoidia, it
furnishes knowing;1 2 for others, a negotiator; for some, Service; for the
[stars] in turn, it secures trafficking or instruction; and for some, [the
activities] of agriculture or temple-keeping or public magistracy, for
which stars in turn it secures the exercise of authority or leasing or
contracting or well-ordered display or being set at the head of public
Service or even guardianship, or it puts on the pomp of linen-wearing
of the gods or rulers.3
It wiil cause all the irregularities in our fortunes and frequently
sidetrack us from our goals. What is more, for those having this star
upon malefic zõidia or their degrees, it will even give a turn for the
worse.
Of the parts of the body, it has authority o ver the hands, shoulders,
fingers, joints, belly, ears, windpipe, guts, tongue.
And it has authority over copper4 5 and every coinage, of giving and
receiving; for, the god is common.
When the benefics are well and suitably situated, they produce their
special effects in accordance with their own nature and the nature of the
zõidion, with the additional admixture of the testimony or co-presence of each star; but when they fali amiss,5 they are indicative of the
opposite effects. Similarly, if the maleílcs have dealings when they are
suitably placed and in sect, even they are dispensers of good things, and
they are indicative of higher positions and advancements; but if they are
unprofitably placed, they produce dismissals and accusations. 1 Does this mean that the occupations associated with the zõidia and the
other planets can only be realized if they are in operative relationships to
Hermes?
2 This is 'knowing' in the sense of seeing with the mind’s eye.
3 This entire paragraph is very tightly and cleverly written in such a way
that the roles that Mercury plays in relation to the zõidia and other planets,
which would ordinarily be expressed using the astrological terminology for the
dignities and for various aspect relations, are here expressed in terms of various
human occupations. Cf. with Paulus, Chapter 26, for the activity of Mercury in
relation to what one does. Júpiter In other works and consistently in later works, copper is assigned to
Venus. [RH]
5 That is, when they are poorly and unfavorably situated.
6 Each star is the ruler of its own essence1 2 3 Júpiter 5 6 for its sympathies and
antipathies and mutual feelings in relation to the cosmos, and they have
the authority for their commixtures with one another in accordance with
application, separation, superiority,2 containment,3 spear-bearing, hurling
of rays, and approaching of the masters. Júpiter The Moon is set down as ruler of foresight,5 the Sun of light,
Kronos of ignorance and necessity,6 Zeus of opinion and crowns of
office and will,7 the star of Ares of action and troubles, the star of
Aphrodite of love and desire and beauty, and the star of Hermes of law
and custom and fidelity.8 Which very stars, [if they are dispensers] of
their own effects. . . Mercúrio 10 2. Concerning the Nature of the Twelve Zõidia
With these things drawn up in such a way, we must also discuss the
nature of the 12 zõidia.'0
Aries is the house of Ares, a mascuíine zõidion, tropical, terrestrial,11
|^
authoritative, fiery,12 free, ascending, semi-vocal, good, changeable, 1 ousia.
2 See Thesaurus of Antiochus, p. 24.
3 See Thesaurus of Antiochus, p. 29. Júpiter despotês.
5 pronoia. Providence. In the Corpus Hermeticum, this is the first of the
three kinds of fate.
6 ananke. In the Corpus Hermeticum, this is the second of the three kinds
of fate. It is interestíng that it is here connected with agnoia, or ignorance, just
as providential fate is connected with pronoia.
I prothumia. 8 From this paragraph and the preceding, we might infer that what truly
belonged to the planets as their own essence was a particular trait of soul, not
of body. Mercúrio Text breaks off here.
10 In the text, this sentence occurs two paragraphs back in the section on
planets. Gêmeos That is, of the land, as opposed to aquatic or aenal.
12 Here we see the earliest reference, as far as we know at this time, to the
elements and the tripicities. The system is the same one as we have today,
although these elements may not have the same qualities as the ones that we
7 administrative, public, civic, unprolific, servile, Midheaven of the
cosmos1 and cause of repute, two-colored2 (since the Sun and the Moon
make leprosies),3 skin-eruptions; it is also unconnected, a place for
eclipses.
Those who are born in this zõidion in accordance with the rulership
relation, Júpiter then, will be bright, notable, commanding, just, with a hatred
of knaves, ffee, authoritative, bold in purpose, braggarts, great-souled,
inconstant, irregular, haughty, up-in-the-air,5 threatening, quickly changing, well-off. When the rulers are well situated and testified to by
benefics, the natives become kingly, powerful, and have the power of
íife and death.
Aries is watery in nature, full of thunder, hail.6 More particularly,
the first parts up to the equipartite [place]7 are full of thunderstorms, have today.[RH]
13 One might think that this is our modem concept of mutable; however,
the assignment of changeable vs. unchangeable is totally different than the
modem one.
1 This and other such references to the cardinal signs as being the angles
of the cosmos, is a reference to the Thema Mundi which is also referred to
Paulus (chapter 37), and Firmicus Matemus (Book III, 1). [RH]
2 perhaps “two-skinned.” [Additional by RH] Leprosy causes a blotchy skin
discoloration which could easily be taken for two skin colors.
3 Perhaps two-colored. But in any case, I have no idea what this means
here. Júpiter This seems to mean those who are bom when the zõidion niler is present
in its zõidion, or perhaps also when it aspects it. Does that mean that this is the
only time the zõidion is pertinent at a birth? That the zõidion is represented only
through the planet?
~This the literal meaning and metaphorical meaning. [RH]
6 It is clear from the parallel descriptions in the upcoming zõidia that these
characteristics are not thought to belong to the zõidia per se, but that they cause
them upon the earth. Aries is “full of thunder” in the sense that it tends to cause
thunder when the Sun is present in it.
7 Obviously, we are noí dealing here with a tropical zodiac in which 0
Aries is assigned to the vemal point. [Additional by RH] The phrase
“equipartite place” refers to the vemal point. Valens used a zodiac in which the
vemal point and the other cardinal points were not at 0o of the cardinal signs.
It is usually considered (by Cyril Fagan et al.) that this is a tropical zodiac
which simply does not have the vemal point at the beginning. This may be
open to question. It may be a sidereal zodiac. See page ii of my introduction.
8 hail, wind, and destruction; the middle parts up to the 15th degree are
temperate, fwhile the foliowing parts are scorching and especially
pestilential] for quadrupeds.1
This zõidion has 19 bright stars. And it has 13 bright stars through
the belt, 27 shadowy ones, 28 underbright bright ones, and 48 faint
ones. The first part of Perseus ffom the northern regions co-rises with
it, as does the remaining parts and the left part of Auriga, and ffom the
south the back fin and tail of the Sea Monster.2 From the north, the
[feet] of Bootes set.3 From the south, the remainder of Lupus Júpiter These zones are subject to Aries: the front, Babylonia; the head,
Elymais;5 the right, Pérsia; the left, the vale of Syria6 and the contiguous
places; for the curve of the face, Babylonia; for the breast. Armênia;
under the shoulders, Thrace; for the belly, Cappadocia and Susa and the
Red Sea and Rhypara;7 the hind parts, Egypt and the Persian Ocean.
Taurus is feminine, solid, lying in the spring tropic, bony, rising from
the hind-parts, setting upright, of vvhich the greatest part lies in the
invisible cosmos.8 Tt is the wealth-bringing zõidion of the cosmos,
earthy, rural, pertaining to freedmen, descending, unprolific, semi-vocal
and mute, good, unchangeable, industrious, incomplete, significant for
foundations, acquisitions. The ecliptíc circle lies in the north, rising at
some distance Mercúrio Those born in this zõidion will be good, versed in a handicraft,
hard- working, good at preservíng things, pleasure loving, music loving,
generous, while some of them will be husbandmen, planters, builders.
And if the beneflcs should somehow incline10 toward this place, or also. 1 The bracketed portion was restored by the original text editor by
comparison with Hepaistio. A comparison with Ptolemy would further confirm
this.
2 kêtos. The monster to which Andromeda was exposed.
3 That is, they set from the north when Aries is rising. Júpiter Again, the remainder of Lupus sets from the south when Aries is rising.
5 A country of Pérsia between the Persian Gulf and Media.
6 Region between Lebanon and Anti-Lebanon.
7 A small island of the Aegean near Samus.
8 The rear part of the Buli is hidden by Aries. [RH] Mercúrio The last two seníences in this paragraph, and the entire next paragraph,
occur two paragraphs down in the criticai edition. We have moved them to this
more logical position, parallel to the treatments of the other zõidia.
10 prosneuõ. It is not clear just what this relationship is. Mercúrio if the ruler should be well-situated, they will become archpriests, and
gymnasiarchs, those who are deemed worthy of crowns and purple, of
images and statues, those who stand in the forefront of priests, notable,
bright.
It is a calm zõidion. By parts: From the lst degree up to the 5th
degree, the place roimd the Piei ades, it is undistinguished, destructive,
pestilential, thunder-causing, productive of earthquakes and thunderbolts
and generative of lightning. The next 2 degrees are fiery, and full of
fog; the parts on the right near Auriga are temperate, cooling; the parts
on the left are undistinguished and excite motion, and are sometimes
chilling, other times scorching; the head up to the 23rd degree has
temperate air, but pestilential and destructive of living beings; the
[foliowing] are destructive, undistinguished, full of pestilence.
It has 27 stars, the remaining part of Auriga co-rising from the
north, the remainder of the Sea Monster and the first part of Eridanus
co-rising from the south. It is of Aphrodite, Selene, Demeter, Ares,
Hermes.1 Bootes as far as the belt and [the shoulders] of Ophiuchus as
far as the knees set from the north.2 Orion, who has a sword set up in
his right hand, [co-rises] from the south. On the left dwells the so-called
Herald, who is sitting in the middle of the body.
The zones subject to it are: for the head, Media and the contiguous
places; with respect to the breast, Babylonia; the part near Auriga, the
right side of Scythia; the Pleiades, Cyprus; the left side, Arabia and the
nearby places; for the shoulders. Pérsia and the Caucasian mountains;
under the hump, [Sarmatia];3 under the loins, Ethiopia; under the horns,
Carthage; with respect to the middle parts, Armênia, índia, Germania.
Gemini is masculine, bicorporeal, euphonious, the house of Hermes,
ascending, airy, effeminate, pertaining to freedmen, barren, public. 1 This and other references to god-names in connection with the individual
signs refers to the conventional gods, not necessarily the planetary ones. Even
when a planetary god-name occurs in these lists, it should not be assumed that
we are dealing with some kind of altemative rulership scheme. These are gods
as gods, not as planets. There was apparently some sense of the distinctness of
the two kinds of gods. Similar lists are given in Manilius. [RH]
2 Again, they set when Taurus is rising, and the same phraseology is used
for the rest of the zõidia.
3 Conjecture on part of the editor of the text. 10 Those so born, then, become fond of discourse, those who work
with letters and education, poetic, lovers of music, teachers of the use
of the voice, capable in matters of household management, those who
receive trust, They also become interpreters, those with an aptitude for
commerce, critics of good and bad, prudent, curious, initiates in occult
matters.
And all the things that the ruler is at times accustomed to produce
by its own nature, whether good or base, or lesser or greater, each one
of the zõidia wiíl also produce according to whether the figure-description of its ruler is operative or unprofitable, in order that
we should not to seem to be writing the same matters.1
It is a calm zõidion. By parts: The 3 degrees are undistinguished,
destructive. From the 3rd to the 7th, mildly wet. lt is temperate from the
7th to the 15th. The south is mildly wet. The last degrees are mixed.
It has 21 stars. It lies in the west wind. In accordance with the
doctrine of spherics, the tail of the Sea Monster, which touches at some
part of the Southern parts, lies next to it. From the parts that occur
toward the south within the line to the south is Satyr, touching [the
club], the skin of which is actually seen from behind from its Southern
parts. Lyra lies toward the northern part. Gemini has stepped upon the
Southern line,2 being the middle of the north and south. Under its feet
upon the Southern line is the so-called Dog in front of the right íoot,
and it is cut by the Southern pole from its hind parts up to its head,
mounting up vertically with the pole. The remainder of Eridanus and
Orion co-rise from the south. The gods Apollo, Heracles, Hephaistos,
Hera, and Kronos associate with them. Bootes sets from the north, as
does Ophiuchus except for the head, and half of Corona as weli.
These zones are subject to Gemini: the front, índia and the
contiguous places, and Celtica; the breast, Sicily, Galatia, Thrace, and
Boeotia; the middle, Egypt, Libya, the Roman region, Arabia, Syria.
[Câncer] is the house of the Moon, feminine, tropical, Hõroskopos of 1 In the discussion of Aries, it seemed that the ruler accepted responsibility
for the affairs of the zõidion (i.e., sign) and administrated for it, depending on
whether it was situated in an active place. Here the text says that the zõidion
will effect whatever the ruler would effect by its own nature as long as the
planet is properly situated, which, on the face of it, would seem to be
contradictory to the earlier remark.
2 the celestial equator. [RH] 11 the cosmos, slavish, descending, mute, watery, good, changeable, public,
popular, civil, prolific, amphibious.
Those so bom, then, will be fond of repute, popular, changeable,
theatrical, cheerful, fond of pleasure and entertaining, public, inconstant
in knowledge, saying one thing but thinking another, those who do not
remain with one activity or two for long, who end up wandering and
sojourning abroad.1
Câncer is a calm zõidion. By parts: For the First two south-easterly
stars it is undistinguished, destructive, stiflmg, and productive of
earthquakes. From these up to the 10th degree it makes the air very wet,
scorching, having a downpour of water and continuous thunder-storms.
The parts on the right are undistinguished and destructive.
The Hare and the foreparts of the Dog and Procyon co-rise from
the south. It has Júpiter stars. It is a zõidion of Ares, Hermes, Zeus, Pan,
Aphrodite. The head of Bootes sets from the north, as well as the star
in the knees, and Aquila and half of Corona.
These are subject to Câncer: the front, Bactria; the left, Zacynthus,2
Acarnania;3 the hind parts, Ethiopia, Schine; Júpiter for the head, the Sea of
Azof and the nations dwelling around it, the Red Sea, the Hyrcanian
Sea, the Hellespont, the Libyan Sea, Brittanica, and the island of
Thoule;5 for the feet, Armênia, Cappadocia, Rhodes, Cos; for the last
parts of Câncer upon the belly; Troglodytia,6 Ionia, Hellespont.
Leo is masculine, the house of the Sun, free, fiery, well-tempered,
noetic, kingly, sedentary, good, ascending, changeable, solid,
authoritative, civil, originative, irascible.
Those so bom are notable, good, unchangeable, just, hating work,
insubordinate, despising flattery, beneficent, puffed up with intentions.
If the ruler should happen to be upon a pivot point or should be with
benefics, they will become bright, esteemed, tyrannical, kingly. 1 In the text, these fírst two paragraphs of Câncer occur after the following
two paragraphs.
2 An island south of Cephalenia and west of the Peloponnesus, later called
Zante.
3 A country at the north of the lonian sea between Macedonia and Achaia. Júpiter Unidentified geographic entity. [RH]
5 An island far north of England or Scandinavia, usually spelled Thule in
other literature.
6 Apparently, a region in Ethiopia where the people dwelt in caves. 12 It is scorching. The bright star in the breast is fiery and stifling. It
is, by parts, up to the 10th degree, stifling, pestilential for quadmpeds
in the underlying zones and places. The parts on the right excite motion
and are fiery. The parts in the south are mildly wet. The lower parts are
deadly for all. The parts in the middle and on the left are temperate.
Leo has . . .! stars. According to the doctrine of spherics, the left
arm of Bootes co-rises from the north. The stem of Argo and the
remainder of the Dog co-rise from the south, as does the remainder of
Hydra, whose tail lies alongside as far as the claw of Scorpio, but the
head as far as claw of Câncer. Above it stands the Lesser1 2 Bear, and the
head of Serpens, which Ophiuchos holds, stretches down along the line.3
Dolphin, Lyra, and Zeugma, Júpiter Cygnus except for the bright star on its
rump, and the head of Pegasus set from the north.
These zones are subject to Leo: in the head, Celtica and the
contiguous places; the foreparts, Bithynia; the right side, Macedonia and
the contiguous places; the left side, Propontis;5 the feet, Galatia; for the
belly, Celtica; to the shoulders, Thrace; to the flanks, Phoenicia, the
Adriatic, Libya; in the middle, Phrygia, Syria; to the tail, Pisinous.6 7
Virgo is the house of Hermes, feminine, winged, human in. form,
fastidious, set in the shape of Justice, bicorporeal, barren, pertaining to
freedman, unfruitful, descending, earthy, common, semi-vocal and mute,
corporeal, incomplete, changeable, pertaining to those who practice a
handicraft, dual-natured.
Those who are so born are good, modest, involved with the
mysteries, full of care, those who lead a diverse life, managers of the
property of others, faithful, good at domestic affairs, writers, those who
are supported by speeches and calculations, hypocritical, curious,
initiates into occult matters, those who spend their initial resources but 1 Lacuna.
, ^
2 So says the text, but this must be the Greater Bear.
3 Presumably, the equator. Júpiter Unknown constellation. The name means “something which connects or
joins.”
5 The Sea of Marmora.
6 A region of Umbria.
7 With an overtonc of meddlesome. 13 prosper in middle age.8
Libra is the house of Aphrodite, masculine, tropical, human in form,
ascending, airy, effeminate, vocal, good, changeable, diminishing of
one's belongings, the subterraneous zõidion of the cosmos, public, a
place for eclipses, productive of fruits, wines, olives, unguents, of
balances, measures, pertaining to those who practice handicrafts.
Those so bom are good and just, though malicious,1 2 desirous of the
goods of others, moderate, those who lose what they have first acquired
and those who have their ups and downs, those who live irregularly,
those who oversee measures and weights or supplies.
Scorpio is the house of Ares, feminine, solid, watery, prolific,
destructive, descending, mute, slavish, unchangeable, cause of foul
smells, subtractive of one's belongings, a place for eclipses, diverse.
Those so bom are treacherous, knavish, rapacious, murderous,
traitors, unchangeable, those who are liable to have their belongings
taken away, secretive plotters, thieves, perjured, desirous of the things
of others, privy to murders or sorcery or malicious doings, haters of
their own families.
Sagittarius is the house of Zeus, masculine, fiery, ascending, vocal, very
watery because of Argo, good, winged, changeable, bicorporeal, dualnatured, enigmatical, barren, semi-complete, authoritative, kingly.
Those so bom are good, just, great-souled, criticai, generous, fond
of brothers and friends, those who diminish what they first acquired but
acquire them again, those who prevail over enemies, lovers of
reputation, versatile, notable, those who weave matters in a riddling
fashion.
Capricorn is the house of Kronos, feminine, tropical, earthy, destructive,
unfruitful, descending, chilled, mute, cause of evils, licentious, servile,
enigmatical, dual-natured, very watery, semi-complete, a zõidion for 1 A fali and parallel treatment of Virgo is lacking in the text. The
meteorological discussion, the description of the constellation itself, and the li st
of countries subject to it, are all missing. This is also true of Libra, Scorpio, and
Sagittarius in the upeoming discussion.
2 sic. [RH] 14 hunchbacks and cripples, the setting of the cosmos, indicator of toil and
trouble, a zõidion for stone-cutters and farmers.
Those so bom will be bad, of different sorts, good and simple at
exposition,1 hardworking, full of care, sleepless, fond of laughter,
planners of great works, those who make bad mistakes, fickle, mischievous, liars, culpable, shameful.2
It is temperate toward both sides. By parts, the first parts are
destructive; the second very wet, having to do with thimder-storms,
exciting motion; the middle parts are fiery; the last parts are destructive.
It has . . .3 stars. According to the doctrine of spherics, Cassiopia
and the right side of Pegasus rise ffom the north. The rear of Centaurus
and the claws of Hydra as far as the Cup set ffom the south. The gods
are Aphrodite, Selene, Demeter, Hermes. There is nothing from the
north.
These zones are subject to Capricorn: the West and all the South;
for the ribs, the Aegean Sea and the nations dwelling around it and
Corinth; for the belt, Sicyon; Júpiter for the back, the Great Sea; for the tail,
Ibéria; for the head, the Tyrrhenic Sea;5 for the belly, the middle of
Egypt, Syria.
Aquarius is a masculine zõidion in the heavens, solid, human in shape,
pertaining to waterside trades, one of a kind; it is mute, very cold, tree,
ascending, effeminate, unchangeable, bad, barren, cause of troubles
through struggle, or of burdens and working in hard materiais,
pertaining to those who practice handicrafts, public.
Those so bom are malicious and haters of their own families,
unchangeable, single-minded, deceitful, treacherous, those who conceal
everything, misanthropists, impious, accusers, betrayers of opinion and
truth, begrudging, concerned with trifles, at times generous through the
efflux of water, incontinent.6
It is entirely wet. The first parts are very wet, the upper parts fiery,
the lower parts undistinguished and unserviceable. 1 Or perhaps, good and open in their style of performing.
2 Or perhaps ugly.
2 Lacuna Júpiter A town of Peloponnesus, now Basilico.
5 Part of the Mediterranean along the coast of Etruna.
6 Note how different this is from the modem view of Aquarius. This is
truly a sign of Satum, and a fairiy malevolent Satum at that. [RH] 15 ít has . . stars. According to the doctrine of spherics, some of the middle part of the right side of Andromeda co-rises from the north, as
well as the remainder of Pegasus. The Southern fish ot Pisces except for
the head co-rises from the south. It is of Hera, Heracles, Hephaistos,
Kronos. Nothing sets from the north, but the remainder of Centaurus
and the remainder of Hydra as far as Corvus set from the south.
According to the doctrine of spherics, the river down to the south
pole, the so-called Eridanus, lies near it; also the great Fish which
touches the tail of Capricom. The so-called Cygnus is in the northern
places within the north pole, beyond which stretches Sagitta, where the
so-called Bear is looking closely al the Dog's Tail1 2 toward the north.
[These zones lie near to it:] The zõidion lies in the west wind. It
lies near the zone of Egypt and the nearby cities. From its Southern
parts as far as Pselcheus3 and Dodekaschonos4 and Sycaminon,5 from
the parts toward the west as far as the Ammoniac region and the nearby
cities, from the parts to the east as far as the Red Sea which it touches,
from the parts to the north of it as far as the places of Sebennytus6 and
the mouth of Heraclea.
[These zones are subject to Aquarius:] the front, Syria; the middle,
Euphrates and Tigris, Egypt and Libya and the contiguous rivers of
Egypt and the Indus river; for the middle of the pitcher, Tanais7 and the
remaining rivers from the Hyperborei8 flowing to the Southwest. Mercúrio Pisces is a feminine zõidion in the heavens, very wet, pertaining to
waterside trades, bicorporeal, prolific, full of eruptions, scaly, sinewy,
humped, leprous, of twin form, mute, restless, rough, opposed to itself
because of being both in the south and in the north. It is also very wet,
descending, slavish, changeable, prolific, bicorporeal, sociable,
mutilated, a cause of wandering, complicated.10
Those so bom are inconstant, of two minds, those who change from
bad to good, erotic, servile, licentious, prolific, popular. 1 Lacuna.
2 Ursa Minor. 3 We have not been able to locate this region. Júpiter District in Egypt.
5 A city of the Pnoenicians.
6 A town of the Nile Delta.
7 A river of Scythia, now called the Don.
8 A nation in the northern parts of Europe and Asia. Mercúrio In the text, this whole paragraph occurs two paragraphs earlier.
10 Literally, many-colored. Metaphorically, complicated, perhaps subtle. 16 lt is entirely cooling, full of breezes. By parts, the first are
temperate; the middle, very wet; the last, destructive and undistinguished.
It has . . .l stars. The remaining parts of Andromeda and the
remainder of Perseus on the right side and the Triangle beyond Aries
co-rise from the north, while the head of the Southern fish of Pisces
co-rises from the south. It is of Poseidon, Ares, Hermes, Aphrodite,
Zeus. Ara and the remaining parts of Hydra set from the south, while
nothing sets from the north.
It lies near the north wind. It lies near the zone of the Red Sea,
which has not a few islands along it, beyond which índia and the
so-called Indian Ocean lie. In its eastern parts it touches Parthia and the
Indian region and the Eastern Ocean. From its northern parts it touches
the Scythian region. From the parts toward the West it touches the
Mouse harbor2 and the harbor of Orthos and the nearby cities.
In accordance with the doctrine of spherics, there lies near to the
northern part of Pisces Aquila which is cut by the north pole3 and for
a certain part Sagitta, but within the north pole not much is divided. The
so-called Pegasus is within the arctic pole. The arctic pole, lying in the
middle of everything, is far from the whole sections, having in itself the
Bear that carries the so-called Dog's Taií from the north to the east, at
times also from the south, and the other so-called Great Bear which
rises in the middle of the night. The so-called Bootes holds them fast
while carrying a peritasis4 for the two Bears. It is invisible for the
issuing forth of the two Bears; for, the one looks directly at the north,
the other at the south.
These are the zones subject to it by part; the front, Euphrates and
Tigris; the middle, Syria, Red Sea, the Indian Sea, the middle of Pérsia
and the contiguous places; [under the back], the Arabian Sea and the
Borysthenes5 river; for the knot, in the north Thrace, in the south, Asia
and Sardinia. 1 Lacuna.
2 sic.
3 i.e., polar region. [RH] Júpiter This word is cited in this particular instance by Liddell and Scott as
beine of dubious meaning. We cannot improve upon that. [RH]
* The Dnieper. 17 3. Concerning the Sixty Boundaries1
The first 6 degrees of Aries, those of Zeus, are temperate, robust,
abundant in seed, benefic. The 6 degrees of Aphrodite are cheerful,
skillful, radiant,2 even, pure, well-colored. The 8 degrees possessed by
Hermes are ambiguous, changeable and well-grown, immovable, windy,
fuil of hail and thunder, hurling thunderbolts. The 5 degrees of Ares are
bearers of destruction, intensely hot, unstable due to the mischief of
men, or rash and. . .3 The next 5 degrees of Kronos are very cold,
{barren], malicious, injurious.
The first 8 degrees of Taurus, those of Aphrodite, are abundant in seed,
prolific, wet, prone to vice, allowing of conviction, hating strife. The
next 6 degrees of Hermes are sagacious, prudent, mischievous, deficient
in seed, short-sighted, Júpiter death-bringing. The next 8 degrees of Zeus are
high minded, manly, fortunate,5 pertaining to rulers and benefactors,
great souled, temperated, modesty-loving. The fourth group of degrees,
the 5 of Kronos, are very barren, sterile, pertaining to eunuchs,
vagabond, blameworthy, theatrical, joyless, toilsome. The final 3
degrees, those of Ares, are masculine, tyrannical, fiery, harsh,
murderous, sacrilegious, thoroughly depraved, but not unnotable, except
that they are destructive and not long lived.
The first 6 degrees of Gemini, those of Hermes, are temperate, mild,
sagacious, skillful, knowledgeable, practical, sung about, abundant in
seed. The next 6 degrees of Zeus are contentious, temperate, mild,
abundant in seed, well-fed, beneficent. The 3rd group of degrees, the 5
of Aphrodite, are flowery, musical, acroamatic,6 poetic, crown-wearing,
popular, merry, abundant in seed. The 4th group of degrees, those 7 of 1 For the most part, the system of boundaries followed here is the Egyptian
as found in Ptolemy. The few exceptions are noted.
2 Or possibly translucent.
3 Lacuna in text. Júpiter Or perhaps sinister.
5 euermês. Literally, favored by Hermes.
6 Belíeve or not this is an English word. It is very close to the Greek it
translates. The reason we have not translated it into more conventional English
is that there is no simple synonym. Here is the Universal Oxford English
Dictionary entry. “adj. orally communicated; esoteric secret.” [RH] 18 Ares, are toilsome, brotherless, with few children, staying at home,
resourceful, destructive, raw, meddlesome. Finally, the next group of
degrees, the 6 of Kronos, are temperate, administrative, acquisitive,
noetic, erudite, notable, distinguished in sagacity, able to succeed at
great things, highly esteemed.
The first 7 degrees of Câncer, those of Ares, have to do with the
hurling of thunderbolts, and are distracted, irregular, of contrary
purpose, full of madness, abundant in seed, lacking, destructive, bad for
completion. The next 6 degrees of Aphrodite are abundant in seed,
blameworthy, pure, changeable, artistic, popular and mixed of many
types. The following 6 degrees are precisely those of Hermes, thievish,
leading in public matters, pertaining to tax-farming, popular, resource¬
ful, bring surplus. The fourth group of degrees, the 7 of Zeus, are
kingly, autonomous, esteemed, litigious, high-minded, temperate,
pertaining to rulers and the good of the whole. The final degrees, the Júpiter of Kronos— since the whole is water—are very wet and lacking in
properties and deficient for accomplishment.
The first 6 degrees of Leo, those of Zeus, are experienced, masculine,
autonomous, always domineering, practical, eminent, having no
depression. The next 5 degrees, those of Aphrodite, are rather
temperate, consecrated, very wise, devoted to enjoyment. The third
group of degrees, the 7 of Kronos, are much experienced, timid, natural,
well-grown, narrow, secret, with many children, inquisitive about occult
matters, but [barren] and unsown. The next degrees, the 6 of Hermes,
are acroamatic, popular, professional, [educative], legal, sagacious—
these are also unsown, but of long-lived men. The final degrees, the 6
of Ares, are most base, monstrous, destructive, injurious, slothful,
blameworthy and unfortunate.
The first 7 degrees of Virgo, those of Hermes, are most-exalted,
administrative, very orderly, quite wise, fitting, ordaining great things,
most sagacious, noble and eminent in all things, unfortunate only in
regard to matters of love—in general the whole of Virgo, but especially
these degrees and those of Aphrodite; for, these degrees are open to
accusation, while those of Aphrodite go astray in all things. They
especially yield eminence in education. The next 10 degrees of
Aphrodite are blameworthy, erring in matters of marriage, encountering
bad things because of these, fortunate in theatrical matters, most 19 shameful in relation to the passions, especially when Kronos is
co-testifying, and they pertain to adulterers when Hermes is
co-testifying, and to a multitude of errors combined when Zeus is
co-testifying, and furthermore condemnations and ciandestine actions
when the Sun is, deterrents and political oppositions when the Moon is,
and if it should be seen by the malefics, it causes prostitution. The third
degrees, the Júpiter of Zeus, are fond of farming, fitting, of those who have
withdrawn, not uneducated; they are also protective and abundant in
seed and preservative. The fourth degrees, the 7 of Ares, are male,
harsh, popular, crowd-pleasing and wandering about at night, secretive,
counterfeiting, adventitious. These degrees themselves commit outrages
on men and lead them into bondage and mutilation and tortures and
custody. The remaining 2 degrees of Kronos are monstrous, very cold,
destructive, short-lived, of men who are defrauded.
The first 6 degrees of Libra, those of Kronos, are kingly, exalted,
practical, and especially so by day, but overly exacting by night; they
are sterile, very wet, destructive. The next 5 degrees of Hermes are
mercantile, pertaining to handicrafts, commercial, able to draw up
contracts and to total up numbers; in general, legally correct, sagacious.
The third group of degrees, the 8 of Zeus, are productive of wealth, but
at least when Zeus is upon them, they are degrees of ill-faring, joyless,
degrees of things being hoarded, of insignificant and sordid life, with
no love of beauty, of the censorious, nor even blest with children. The
4th group, the 7 degrees of Aphrodite, are those of the love of beauty,
love of the arts, or even those of artistry (for example, plastering,
painting, relief carving; in general, they are degrees of those who are
rhythmical, religious, mild, who gradually have good fortune, who
advance by their own efforts, and those who are greatly fortunate in the
area of marriage, being blest in every regard. The remaining Júpiter degrees,
those of Ares, are of those who are dominant, of squadron commanders,
of those who are fortunate in such matters and in every art of Ares, and
of the easy-going and the steadfast and those who hold tast and of the
high-minded, but not of those who are favored in their brothers or those
with manv brothers.1 1 Although the order of planets here is that of the Egyptian boundaries, the
degree assignments belong to no recognized system. According to Ptolemy, they
should be 6, 8, 7, 7, and 2, respectively. 20 The first 7 degrees of Scorpio, those of Ares, are uproarious, fickle,
inconstant, irascible, free of speech, high-minded, with few children,
many brothers, irregular in fortune, extremely fiery, fit for births related
to military Service and going away from home. The next Júpiter , those of
Aphrodite, are degrees of those fortunate in marriage, of the religious,
of those loved by all, of those who love of the arts, of those
well-provided, of those chosen by all, of sweet life. The third degrees,
the 8 of Hermes, are those pertaining to arms, contentious, degrees of
those who bear crowns and of those who are sharp of speech, of matters
pertaining to contest, of those who are not to be despised; these are also
abundant in seed, and in general, degrees of those who are busy with
thoughts of mischief, especially in respect of those who seek to tempt
or those who perpetrate wickednesses. The 4th group, the 5 of Zeus, are
degrees of the resourceful, the fortunate, of archpriests, of those being
distinguished with gold, with purple, with offices in accordance with the
specifíc magnitude of the births, of the beneficent; in general, of those
who love man and the gods. Finally, the 6 of Kronos are degrees of the
punitive, of those with few children, with few brothers, of those who
hate their own families, of poisoners, of the melancholic, of
misogynists, of those having hidden injuries; in general, of the most
punitive, of the most querulous; they are also hated by gods and by
men, they offer resistance to those in authority, and they are despised
by those of low estate.
The first 12 degrees of Sagittarius, those of Zeus, are degrees of
practical men; they are wet along with being temperate, quite versatile
in every art and activity, abundant in seed and with many children and
many brothers, but poor. The next 5 degrees of Aphrodite are temperate,
esteemed, conducive to victory, crown-bearing, religious, degrees of
those who are honored by men in crowds and by rulers, graced with
children and brothers, used to being more around women. The third
group, the Júpiter of Hermes, are degrees of lovers of discourse, of the
eccentric, of the practical, of those bom with a title for life, of
philosophers—in general, of those who are preeminent in knowledge
and wisdom, of those fond of learning when Hermes should incline
[toward it],1 fond of weapons and tactics when Ares should so incline.
The next 5 of Kronos inflict, are sterile and injurious, very cold, hurtful, 1 prosneuseuõ. When the other planet should approach it? 21 degrees of base men and those who are unfortunate in everything. The
next Júpiter of Ares are fervid, foolhardy, haughty, shameless, destructive,
except that they are those who are restless in everything; all the degrees
in Sagittarius are diverse in all things.
The first 7 degrees of Capricorn, those of Hermes, are theatrical,
satyr-like, imitative, mendacious, pertaining to prostitutes, given to
pandering, desirous of the things of others, and disreputable, though
well-disposed for everything and agreeable and successful, yet not
proud. The next 7 degrees of Zeus are those that make for ups and
downs of reputation and disrepute, of wealth and poverty, of charitable
contributions and theatrical displays, sterile degrees, with a tendency to
female or monstrous offspring, petty, private. The next 8 degrees of
Aphrodite are those of the hopeless, of the lecherous and vice-prone,
without judgment, culpable, changeable in relation to goals, neither
dying well nor sound in the area of marriage. The fourth group of
degrees, the Júpiter of Kronos, are severe, cheerless, eccentric, unfortunate
in children, and in brothers, crude, destructive, exceeding cold,
incompatible, malicious, inclined to procrastination, treacherous. The
final group of degrees, the Júpiter of Ares, are exalted, authoritative,
tyrannical, degrees that confer hegemony over everything, poor in
relatives and homicidal, fond of travelling, fond of solitude, contentious
to the end.
The first 7 degrees of Aquarius, those of Hermes, are for the wealthy,
the lovers of treasure, those who contentedly save up against the
mediocrity of birth, degrees of the intelligent, the legalistic, those who
give an exact accounting of everything, those who are commanding,
small-souled, care- laden, those who love children and are highly skilled
in every art, degrees of the administrative, the economical, the
philanthropist. The next six degrees of Aphrodite are of those who are
well loved, of the religious, of those who are successful without trouble,
degrees of those who have strokes of good luck, of the successful, of
those given to seafaring; these are the prolific degrees, but it happens
that he who is bom in them copulates with old or diseased women or
eunuchs, while he is advanced by those without seed or those who have
succeeded. The next 7 degrees, those of Zeus, are fortunate, concemed
with trifles, stay-at-home, not caring about reputation, without
ostentation, blest with children, not fond of one's brothers. The next 5
of Ares are injurious (especialiy in the middle), are occupied with
22 lawsuits, degrees of worthless men, of the feeble, of those who fail,
except that they are degrees of those who quickly set their hand to
villainy. The remaining 5 of Kronos are sterile, very wet, difficult of
conception, injurious (and especially for membranes and the forais
inside and dropsy and convulsions) lacking, with few brothers, few
children, envious, not fortunate up to the end.
The first degrees of Pisces, the 12 of Aphrodite, are cheerful, abundant
in seed, prone to vice, dedicated to enjoyment, living pleasantly,
hilarious, lovable, agreeable, seeing to one's own advancement, dear to
the gods. The next Júpiter of Zeus are those of the lo ver of discourse, of the
scientific, of those who are conspicuous in a crowd and those who
prevail over all in arguments, the degrees for having many brothers,
degrees which are prolific, with many children, with extra limbs, with
a huge number of brothers. The next 3 of Hermes are abundant in seed,
the first of those held in honor, bounteous, fond of nurture, merciful,
god-loving, temperate. The next 10 of Ares are practical, for sea battles,
guides, and pleasantly cool, poetic concerning the things that cannot be
said, rapacious and yet generous, di verse, not dying a natural death. The
final degrees, the 2 of Kronos, are injurious, very wet, convulsive,
unfortunate in every regard.1
Having set out in an instructive manner, then, what it produces for each
single degree, when its ruler lies upon it, it will produce its base or
good property.
And now we will do an exposition of the Hõroskopos. 1 The degree assignments for Hermes and Kronos are incorrect, according
to Ptolemy's list of the Egyptian terms. They should be Mercúrio and 2, respectively. 23 Júpiter . Concerning the Horoskopos1
When you leam exactly how many degrees the Sun is at for a birth, see
where the twelfth-part ceases. And the left triangle of the zõidion where
it ceases will mark the birth hour, or the corresponding masculine or
feminine zõidia [will mark it], keeping in mind the difference between
night and day.
For example, let the Sun be at the 22nd degree of Aquarius. This
twelfth part leaves off at Scorpio.2 The left triangle of this is Pisces. If,
then, the birth was in the day, it was necessary that Pisces marked the
birth hour, or else Taurus or Câncer.3 But if it was at night, then it must_.
have been those diametrically opposite to them; Virgo will mark the
hour at the First hour. Júpiter Knowing5 exactly the number of degrees that the Sun has, add the
ascension6 of the zõidion in which the Sun happens to be, and depart
from the natal Moon, giving one degree apiece to each zõidion. And
wherever it should leave off, there will be the Horoskopos, or (as
above) it will be in relation to the corresponding zõidia.
By night, having added the ascension of the lunar zõidion, depart 1 The foliowing chapter is very difficult. It is not clear that the text is in
good condition. We have done the best that we can to explicate this passage but
the obscurity is very much in the original. For example, there appear to be
paragraphs out of their logical sequence. We hope that other texts will allow us
to cross-reference the techniques contained in this chapter so that we can make
them clearer.
The whole chapter is not so much about computing Ascendants as getting
correct ones. These methods, whatever they may be, are similar in kind to
methods given by Paulus (chapter 33) and to the better known Animodar of
Ptolemy (Tetrabiblos, Book III) and the Trutine of Hermes. [RH]
2 This is our old friend the dõdekatêmorion. In this case it is computed by
the 13th harmonic method, rather than the dwadasamsa method, i.e., the
longitude in the sign is multiplied by 12 then the result is added to the original
longitude in the sign. The result is equivalem of multiplying the entire longitude
as measured from 0o T. This is a bit confusing because iater on in the text
Valens refers to the dwadasamsa type of twelfth-part. [RH]
3 The use of the signs that follow by sextile and trine appears to be a
“fudge factor.” Valens does not make it clear when one should use these. [RH]
. Presumably of life, rather than the first hour of the night.
3 This appears to be the beginning of a second method. [RH]
6 See chapter 6 and its footnotes for a discussion of ascensions. [RH] 24 from the natal Sun. That is, in the present example, with the Sun at the
22nd degree of Aquarius, the Moon is in Scorpio. I have added 36, the
ascension of the zõidion. The result is 58. I departed with these ffom
the Sun. It Ieft off in Virgo. There is the Hõroskopos.
After1 totaling up the number from Thoth2 up to the birth day and
multiplying the hours by fifteen and adding this to the first number,
depart by day from Virgo at 30 each; but by night from Pisces. Or
again,3 after multiplying the hours by 15, [and adding the degrees of the
Sun], depart in the diumal case ffom the Sun itself with the ascension
for the natal zone; but in the nocturnal case from the diametrical
opposite for the ascension. Júpiter Thus is found the mystic and necessitated
Hõroskopos.5 For a diurnal birth the seeding6 triangle of the Sun or the
hexagons of this triangle wiil mark the birth hour; for a nocturnal birth,
the zõidia diametricalíy opposite to these. Thus, even without the hours,
you can fmd the zõidion that marks the hour, if you know whether it
was a day or a night birth.
For7 finding the minutes and degrees of the Hõroskopos, [proceed]
thus. After multiplying the natal hours by the course of the Moon,
depart in the diurnal case from the degree of the Sun, but in the
nocturnal case from the diametricalíy opposite degree. And wherever it
should leave off, the Hõroskopos will be judged to be of just so many
degrees. For an illustration, let it be the 4th year of Hadrian, the 13th
of Mechir, at the lst hour of the night. The Sun is at the 22nd degree
of Aquarius, the Moon at the 7th degree of Scorpio, the course of the
Moon in the 204th day from the epoch8 13;52 degrees. I consulted the
present table9 for the 14 degrees in the first line, and undemeath I found 1 This paragraph is in rough shape and appears to use the results of the
previous paragraphs to do yet something else. [RH]
2 Thoth is New Year in the Alexandrian calendar. [RH]
3 A second method. Júpiter i.e., the ascension of the opposing zõidion. [RH]
5 'Necessitated' is anankastikos. Which ascendent is this.
6 i.e., conception from a masculine point of view. [RH]
7 The previous paragraphs have found only the sign of the Ascendant. This
and the following paragraphs look for the degrees. [RH]
8 The epoch referred to here seems to be around the 25th Epiphi referred
to two paragraphs below. Note the splendid, linear organization of the
paragraphs. May some scribe or scribes rot in Hell! [RH] Mercúrio This appears to be a table of the lengths of diumal and nocturnal hours
according to the degree of the Sun. 25 16 for the fírst hour. I departed with these Ifom the 22nd degree of Leo,
the degree diametrically opposite to the Sun. It left off in Virgo at about
the 8th degree. If it should somehow be found to be of more or fewer
degrees by means of the ascensional method, it will be known by the
present method whether the hour requires addition or subtraction.1
For diurnal births, after having combined the remaining degrees of
the Sun2 with the number of degrees possessed by the Moon, cast out
by thirties, and the remaining degrees will mark the birth hour. But for
noctumal births, combine together the remaining degrees of the Moon
with the number of degrees possessed by the Sun. If the number should
be more than the calculated hour, as many degrees as come later [up to]
30 degrees or [up to] the magnitude of the hour, such will mark the
birth hour.
Calculate the days from the 25th of Epiphi to the natal day along
with the epagomenal days,3 and add 22 degrees to the number; depart
with the number by 30's, from Câncer in the diurnal case, from
Capricorn in the noctumal case. Wherever the number should leave off,
there will be the Hõwskopos. And whatever the number of degrees,
these will mark the birth hour.
The horoscopic pointer. Júpiter After taking the degrees of the Sun for the
horoscopic times by day, the degrees of the diametrically opposed point
sj4, by night, multiply them by ten. And again, multiply the resultant
quantity by the hours which have issued forth, either diurnal or
noctumal, the whole hours or else the whole hours with partial hours.
And casting out whole circles, consider the remainder to be the
horoscopic pointer. For the 2nd zone, 2nd hour of the day, Sun at 21 st 1 The next paragraph would seem to exemplify this paragraph, but in fact
introduces something else again. The actual paragraphs that do exemplify the
this method are the ones that begin five paragraphs below.
2 From a later example this appears to mean the number of degrees left in
the sign between the Sun and the next sign.
rThc Alexandrian calendar has twelve 30 day months with five days
tagged on the end. These are the epagomenal days. [RH] Júpiter hõroskopikos gnõmõn. “pertaining to the Hõroskopos.” This is not the
degree and minute in the correct sign, merely the degree and minute in some
sign. The sign is ascertained by other techniqucs. This is the same practice as
in the Animodar. The use of the word 'pointer' throughout this section refers to
positions that have the same degrees and minutes as something else, but not
necessarily the same sign. [RH] 26 degree of Câncer, Moon at 22nd degree of Aries. The horoscopic times1
of the degree of the Sun are 22;242. Ten times these result in 224.
Twice these become 88 with a circle. This is the horoscopic pointer.
For example,3 let the Sun be at the 19th degree of Capricorn.
Someone was bom at the third nocturnal hour. The course4 of the Moon
is 12;34 degrees. I consult the table for the third hour. Lying next to 12
degrees of course are 41V2 degrees; next to 13 degrees of course are
V2 degrees. The excess of 44!/2 in relation to 41V2 is 3 degrees. The
34 minutes of these become 1;12. I add these to the 41l/2 degrees 44 because the course of the Moon was of 12;34 degrees. Together, then,
43;12 result. Add the 19 degrees of the Sun to these. Together they
become 62; 12 degrees. I departed with these from Câncer since the birth
is nocturnal, and the Hõroskopos left off at the 2nd degree, 12 minutes
of Virgo. The Hõroskopos ífom the Canon was the 3rd degree of Virgo.
For synodic conjunctions, it will be necessary to investigate the
boundary5 of the conjunction, and the lord of the zõidion. And the one
of these that has degrees close to the hour,6 7 those degrees will mark the
hour. For the Whole Moon, it will be necessary to compare the
boundary of the Whole Moon and the lord of the zõidion?
By day, it is necessary to take the degrees of the Sun and the
remaining degrees of the Moon, and to cast out by thirties, contributing
the degrees left over to the ascensional determination, and to multiply 1 This value is functionally equivalent to the number of degrees of obliqúe
ascension between the Sun and the beginning of Câncer. According to chapter
6 Câncer rises in 32 times, i.e. degrees of motion of R.A.M.C. We have the
proportion 2I/3o = 22aVn. [RH]
2 The text in this instance has 22lh4. This is clearly an error. Some editor
or scribe has confused Greek fractional notation with sexagesimal notation. The
surrounding math makes the need for the change obvious. [RH]
3 This appears to refer to the paragraph above that begins, “For finding the
minutes and degrees of the Hõroskopos . . Júpiter i.e., diumal motion. [RH]
5 i.e., terms. [RH]
6 This refers to an unadjusted Ascendant. The degree of the pointer is
supposed to be the exact Ascendant. [RH]
7 This paragraph is in fact a variation on the Animodar. See page 25, note
1. [RH] 27 the adjacent magnitude8 in the solar zõidion by the degrees of the Sun,
and additionally adding the solar degrees, to depart by thirties. The
number of degrees left will be the solar pointer. Noting this down for
ourselves, we will also make the pointer of the Moon, as follows.
Doubling the degrees that the Moon has, we subtract by thirties.
Multiplying the degrees left over by twelve, and additionally adding the
degrees of the Moon, we subtract by thirties. And the remaining degrees
will be the [pointer] of the Moon.
By night, after combining the remaining degrees of the Moon and
the degrees that the Sun has, and casting out by thirties in relation to
the ascensional [determination], we contribute the remaining degrees to
the solar zõidion. And additionally knowing the hourly magnitude,1 2 we
multiply the degrees of the Sun. And after adding the number of
degrees that the Sun has, we subtract by thirties. And the left over
degrees will be the solar [pointer]. If, then, the [pointer] of the Sun
should exceed that of the Moon, the hour has a subtraction. But if the
[pointer] of the Moon exceeds, [the number of the excess has addition].
And if they are equal, it has neither an addition nor a subtraction.
Similarly also, if it is beyond or within the 15 degrees, the left over
degrees have addition or subtraction.
After getting to know zodiacally the zõidion that marks the birth
hour, we will fmd the degree thus. By learning the year of the four-year
period as it is laid down, adding the appended hours to the natal hour,
and calculating how much the Moon is, we will consider such to be the
Hõroskopos. The first year has 1 hour, the second 6 hours, the third 12
hours, the fourth 6 hours. The year of the four-year period is associated
with the arising of the dog-star. For the first year of the four-year
period, it [the Hõroskopos] rises in Câncer at the first diurnal hour. For
the second year, it rises in Libra at the 6th diurnal hour. For the third
year, it rises in Capricorn at the 12th diurnal hour. For the fourth, it
rises in Aries at the 6th noctumal hour. Thus also, the Hõroskopos is 1 We believe from the context that this phrase refers to excess over 1 or
deficiency from 1, of the motion of the rising sign, during Io of motion of the
R.A.M.C. So the practice is to combine the total excess or deficiency with the
longitude of the Sun to get an ascensional position of the Sun in its sign.
2 horary time, i.e., the number of degrees contained in an unequal hour.
The horary time of an equinoctial is by defmition 15 degrees. [RH] 28 useful for the successive nativities,3 with the hours of the four-year
period added in accordance with the sought year, and with the [degrees]
being [discarded] from the natal hour. With regard to the type of
semi-cirde that it ceases at (either noctumal or diuraal), it is there that
the Hõroskopos is considered to be, and [it is necessaryl to compare the
pi votai1 2 stars for that season in relation to the nativity.3 5. Concerning the Midheaven
To find the Midheaven roughly, thus. After taking [the degrees] from
the setting degree up to the degree diametrically opposed to it, in
accordance with the ascensions of the zone, depart with half of these
from the setting degree; wherever it should cease, such will be the
Midheaven. Júpiter For example, let the Hõroskopos be at the 15th degree of
Capricorn according the second zone. I took from the setting
degree—15th degree of Câncer—up to the 15th degree of Capricorn.
214 ascensions are assembled. Half of these is 107. Having added to
these the 15 degrees of Capricorn, I departed from the same. It left off
in the 2nd degree of Scorpio, where the Midheaven is. Similarly also
for the remaining zõidia.
And if you should want to additionally know the magnitude of the
diurnal hours, always combining the ascensions from the solar degree
up to the degree diametrically opposite and taking a Visth of them, you 1 Evidently, these are solar retums.
2 Stars upon a pivot-point, i.e., angle. [Additional by RH] This passage
gives a bit of advice with which modem astrologers are familiar, namely, that
one should compare the planets that are angular in the retum to the positions
in the natal chart.
3 In this section we have manipulations based on the fact that the year is
approximately 365.25 days long. Thus each successive year at a solar retum, or
ingress or heliacal rising, the sidereal time advances by approximately 6 hrs.
and thus the Ascendant and M.C. move forward by approximately 90°, the
Ascendant very approximately. Júpiter Basically this amounts to taking the diurnal semi-arc of the Ascendant
and using it to compute the Midheaven, a perfectly legitimate procedure. The
only deficiency of the method as presented here is that it ignores the difference
between longitude and right ascension. This is only an approximate method.
[RH] 29 wíll know the magnitude. For example, suppose the present setting
degree at the 15th degree of Câncer to be the solar degree. Then, there
are 214 ascensions up to the diametrically opposed degree. Visth of
these is 14 with a remainder of Júpiter , which is 16 parts of an hour. Then,
for the zone of Syria, when the Sun is in Câncer around the 15th
degree, the day will be of 14:16 hours. And if you wish to know the
magnitude of the nocturna! hour, after having combined the ascensions
from the degree diametrically opposite the Sun up to the degree which
it has, you proceed. And similarly for the remaining zõidia. 6. Concerning the Ascension of the Zoidia1
One must know the number of hours in which each zõidion ascends
from the ascension of each. For example, since Aries ascends in 20 1 The system of sign ascensions as taught here is basic Babylonian
astrology. Where we, following Ptolemy, would use some kind of spherical
trigonometric system to compute the rising times of the signs, the Babylonians
and Vaíens, following them, computed the rising times of the signs by
computing the time of the shortest and longest rising times and then doing a
straight interpolation for the values between. This results in a very crude
approxiniation. The following table shows the difference (computed for
approximately 32’/2° latitude, Babylon). T-H n-r> O-/ Sol ■ Til Hf - ^ Modern 20 29 23 49 29 40 34 42 36 00 35 20 Valens 20 00 24 00 28 00 32 00 36 00 40 00 As one can readily see, the results are quite different. Part of the problcm stems
from the misconception that rising times of opposite signs should add up to 60°.
This is not the case. However, it is true that the total for both rows do add up
to 180°. The system employed here is the one usually referred to as “System
A,” however, according to Neugebauer on page 174 of Greek Horoscopes,
Valens combined the rising times of System Á with the vemal point value of
System B, System A having the vemal point at 10°T and System B 8°T. See
my preface for a further discussion of this issue. [RH] 30 times,2 while the hour has 15 equipartite degrees,3 if you subtract the 15
degrees from the 20 times, there are 5 remaining, which are the third
sj part of 15 degrees. Aries will ascend, then, in 1 and a third hours.
You will know how much time each degree is worth, thusly.
Double the ascension of each zõidion, and take six times these. 240
result. The degree is 8 months. Júpiter One must know how much addition or subtraction of the ascension
each zõidion has, thusly. Since Aries ascends in 20 times. Libra ascends
in 40 in order to fill up the 60 times. For, in comparison to the number
of times in which each zõidion ascends, the zõidion diametrically
opposite takes a number that fills up 60 times. And in comparison to the
number of hours for each zõidion, the hours for the zõidion diametri¬
cally opposite fill up Júpiter hours. And in comparison to the number of days
and months, the zõidion opposite takes a number that fills up two years.
For, the amount by which each zõidion exceeds, the diametrically
opposite zõidion is lacking.
Subtract, then, the least from the present greatest, that is, the 20
times from the 40. The remainder is 20. l/s of these becomes Júpiter . The
addition or subtraction of each zõidion is four. If, then, we add Júpiter to the
20 ascensions, 24 ascensions result. Taurus will ascend in these times.
Gemini in 28, Câncer in 32, Leo in 36, Virgo in 40, Libra in 40. Then
similarly, from Scorpio you subtract Júpiter up to Pisces. Inquiring thus, you
will get to know the ascensions for each zone.
Otherwise. Let it be the case that Leo ascends in 36 and similarly
also for Scorpio, Taurus and Aquarius in 24. The remainder is 12, a
third of these being Júpiter . The addition or subtraction is the same. By
seeking in this manner, you will also get to know the ascensions for
each zone. 1 Equinoctial time. [Additional by RH] The terms “times” and “ascensional
times” as used here and in other works refers to degrees of what we would call
right ascension on the M.C. The ascension of a sign refers to the number of
degrees that will pass over the R.A.M.C. as the sign rises.
2 i.e., equal degrees being Aeoth of a circle. [RH]
3 These are equal, or equinoctial hours. [RH] Júpiter When a year (12 months) corresponds to a degree, since 240 is 2/3 of
360, 240 corresponds to 2/3 of a year or 8 months. [Additional by RH] This is
based on the nearly universal idea (among the Greeks) that one year is
equivalent to a degree of R.A.M.C., however, a degree on the horizon may rise
in more or less than the time it takes for 1 degree to pass over the R.A.M.C. 31 The difference and parallel lengthening of the zones is known thus.
Since in the first zone 210 ascensions are assembled frorn Câncer to
Sagittarius, Vó becomes 35. Leo will ascend in these ascensional times.
And similarly, according to the method before us, if you should subtract
the 25 ascensions of Aquarius and take lh of the remainder, you will
get to know the ascensions of the zõidia. Since, then, there happen to
be 7 zones, while in the 7th zone 234 ascensions are assembled from
Câncer, if we should subtract the 210 of the first zone, 24 will be left
over in excess. Ve of these (since there happen to be 6 zones in
between) become Júpiter . The lengthening of each zone in relation to the
fixing of the ascensional [time] is the same, there being 210 ascensions
in the first zone from Câncer to Sagittarius, in the 2nd zone 214, in the
3rd zone 218, in the 4th zone 222, in the 5th zone 226, in the 6th zone
230, in the 7th zone 234. 7. Concerning the Zõidia that See and Hear
Similarly, one must come to an understanding of the hexagonal hearing
and seeing zõidia by means of the ascensions, thusly. For example,
Pisces looks at Taurus. For the second zone, the ascensions of 6 zõidia
from Pisces become 160, and from Taurus to Libra 200. Pisces
becomes1 less than Taurus and hears it. And the ascensions of the 2
Zõidia amount to 360.2 Similarly, there are 212 ascensions from Gemini
to Scorpio , and 212 from Leo to Capricorn. Gemini and Leo, then, are
equal ascensional and hear one another. Again, there are 200 ascensions
from Virgo to Aquarius, and 160 from Scorpio to Aries. [It] looks.
From Libra to Pisces there are 180 ascensions. [lacuna] From
Sagittarius to Taurus 148, from Aquarius to Câncer 148. They hear and
are equal ascensional. Similarly also for the remaining zõidia.
íf you should want to get to know the magnitude of the hours of 1 Possible pun on gegonasin, makes itself heard.
2 The logic of this leads to something a bit different from what Valens
says. It is not that the sign Pisces as a whole “hears” Taurus as a whole, but
that 0o M has a diumal arc which complements that of 0o b, that is, they add
up to 360°. In fact this leads directly to contra-antiscia, degrees whose midpoint
falis on the 0o T - ^ axis. Correspondingly the next passage describes antiscia,
points whose midpoint falis at 0o G - Ia). [RH] 32 the day, by always combining the ascensions from the solar degree to
the degree diametrically opposite, and taking Vis of these,1 you will
know the magnitude. For example, suppose that the present setting
degree, the 15th of Câncer, is the solar degree. Then the ascensions up
to the degree diametrically opposite become 214. Vis of these is 14 with
a remainder of Júpiter , which is the 16th part of an hour. The day, then,
when the Sun is in Câncer at the 15th degree, will be of 14:16 hours.
And if you want to know the magnitude of the night, after combining
the ascensions from the degree diametrically opposite the Sun to the
degree which it occupies, follow the procedure. Similarly also for the
remaining zõidia. 8. Synodic Conjunctions and Whole Moons, Roughly
To fínd the synodic conjunction and the Whole Moon roughly. By
taking [the interval] from the solar degree to the lunar degree, and
knowing how many 12 degree intervals there are, run back from the
solar degree; and there you will find the synodic conjunction. Also, the
Moon will be just as many days from conjunction as there are 12
degree intervals. For births at the Whole Moon, take the [interval] from
the degree opposing the Sun up to the Moon, and knowing how many
12 degree intervals there are, subtract from the degree opposing the
Sun; and there you will fmd the Whole Moon. If you should add 15 to
the degree of the Whole Moon, you will fínd the upcoming conjunction.
Similarly also, if you should add 15 to the synodic degree, you will fínd
the upcoming Whole Moon.
For example, 2nd of Mesori, Sun at the 5th degree of Leo, Moon
at the 26th degree of Libra. The interval from the Sun to the Moon
becomes 81 degrees, which are nearest to 7 12 degree intervals. The
Moon, then, will be 7 days from conjunction. Again, go back the seven
12 degree intervals from the solar degree. It leaves off at the 28th
degree of Câncer. That is where the conjunction took place. And go
back the 7 days from the 2nd of Mesori. It was the 25th of Epiphi. If,
then, we add 15 to the 28 of Câncer, 13 of Leo results. The Whole
Moon, then, will be at the 13th degree of Aquarius.
Thus for the Whole Moon. Let it be the 13 of Mechir, Sun at the 1 to convert degrees to hours. [RH] 33 22nd degree of Aquarius, Moon at the 7th degree of Scorpio. I took the
interval from the degree diametrically opposite the Sun—the 22nd of
Leo—up to the lunar degree. 75 degrees result. There are, then, six 12
degree intervals, which I subtract ffom the 22nd degree of Leo. 16
degrees remain, in which the Whole Moon took place. Again, subtract
the 6 days from the 13th of Mechir; it was the 7th of Mechir. Similarly,
since there are 15 days from the conjunction up to the Whole Moon, I
have added 61 to these. 21 days result. The Moon will be just so many
days from the conjunction. Mercúrio . Concerning the Seven-Zoned [Sphere or Sabbatical day],
Roughly2
Concerning the week [and Sabbatical day], thusly. Total up the full
years from Augustus and the intercalary days, also add the days from
Thoth until the natal day, and subtract 7's from these until they run out.
[Start] the remainder from the Sun.
For the star at which it leaves off, it will be its day. The order of
the stars in relation to the days holds as follows: Sun, Moon, Ares,
Hermes, Zeus, Aphrodite, Kronos. The arrangement of the zones holds
as follows: Kronos, Zeus, Ares, Sun, Aphrodite, Hermes, Moon. The
hours are designated from this arrangement, while the day of the next
star is designated from the hours.
v. For example, 4th year of Hadrian, 13th of Mechir by the Alexândrian calendar, lst hour of the night. The full years from
Augustus are 148, and 36 intercalary days, and there are 163 days from
Thoth to the 13th of Mechir. They come to 347. Subtract 49 weeks. The
remainder will be Júpiter . [Starting] from the Sun, it will leave off at the day
of Hermes.
And the lst hour of the day belongs to Hermes, the 2nd to the
Moon, the 3rd to Kronos, the 4th to Zeus, the 5th to Ares, the 6th to the
Sun, the 7th to Aphrodite, the 8th to Hermes, the 9th to the Moon, the
10th to Kronos, the llth to Zeus, the 12th to Ares; the lst nocturnal
hour belongs to the Sun, the 2nd to Aphrodite, the 3rd to Hermes, the 1 Text has 8, an obvious error.
2 This section computes the day of the week which is needed for
computíng planetary hours. [RH] 34 4th to the Moon, the 5th to Kronos, the 6th to Zeus, the 7th to Ares, the
8th to the Sun, the 9th to Aphrodite, the 10th to Hermes, the 1 lth to the
Moon, and the 12th to Kronos. Next is the succeeding day, that is, the
14th of Mechir; and the lst hour will belong to Zeus. 10. Concerning the Ruler of the Year1
If you also wish to get to know the ruler of the year, it is in the same
fashion. For example, for the same illustration, the full years from
Augustus 148, and the intercalary days 36, and the lst of Thoth. They
come to 185. Subtract from these 26 weeks, 3 remain. [Start] these from
the Sun. The year runs out in Ares. When, then, you should know the
lord of the year, you also find the lord of the month as follows, using
the arrangement of the zones in an upward fashion.
For example, Thoth will belong to Ares. Since, then, the 29th of
Thoth again runs out in Ares, the 30th belongs to Hermes, the first of
Phaophi will belong to Zeus, the 30 to Aphrodite, the lst of Athyr to
Kronos, the lst of Choiak to the Moon, the lst of Tybi to Hermes, the
lst of Mechir to Aphrodite. Since, then, the lord of the year is Ares, the
lord of the month Aphrodite, the lord of the day Hermes, the lord of the
hour the Sun, for these it will be necessary to investigate how they are
situated in a nativity. For in brief, they are indicative of the choice of
what one does, and especially whenever the lord of the year should
happen to be transiting the current year, the lord of the month the
current month, and the lord of the day the current day. But if the should
somehow fali amiss, or should be testified to by malefics, they are
indicative of interferences and upheavals.
It seemed to be more natural to take the full years and intercalary
days from Augustus, just as at present, and the days from Thoth up to
the natal day, and to cast out by sevens, and to depart with the
remainder from the Sun, and to judge that star where the number ran
out the lord of the day. For the first of the month of each birth will
have the natal day. It does not seem to be reasonable for the natives in 1 This section computes the ruler of the year according to which day of the
week it falis on. Similarly one can compute a ruler for a month. This gives us
a ruler of the year, month, day and hour. Valens advocates looking at these
planets in the natal chart. [RH] 35 the same year to be ordered by one ruler. Generally, then, the ancients
took the ruler of the year and of the cosmic motions from the first of
Thoth (for that is where they made the beginning of the year), more
naturally from the arising of Sirius. 11. Concerning Masculine and Feminine Degrees
Concerning masculine and feminine degrees, thusly.1 The first 2lh
degrees of the masculine zõidia will be masculine, the next 2[ Saturno degrees
will be feminine. The first 2xii degrees of feminine zõidia will be
femininef and the next 2lh degrees will be masculine, the next feminine.
The degree of the conjunction, then, will clarify synodic matters, while
the degree of the Whole Moon will clarify matters pertaining to the
Whole Moon; those in which degree the Hõroskopos or Moon. . .2 12. Concerning the Lights of the Moon
The lights of the Moon are as follows. For when it is the first day, it
appears for 0:51 hour; the second day, for 1:36 hours. And always by
multiplying the number of days there are by four, then taking a fifth,
you reveal the hour. For example, it is the 15th day of the Moon. Four
times these come to 60, l/s of which is 12. Therefore, it appears to be
missing3 for 12 hours.
For, on the first day, it appears for 0:51 hour, the second for 1:36
hour, the 3rd for 2:24 hours, the 4th for 3:12 hours, the 5th for Júpiter hours,
the 6th for Júpiter :48 hours, the 7th for 5:36 hours, the 8th for 6:24 hours,
the 9th for 7:12 hours, the 10th for 8 hours, the 1 lth for 8:48 hours, the 1 The system that is taught here is completely different from the one that
was used in the Middle Ages and Renaissance. Those are more or less random
intervals of degrees altemating between the masculine and feminine. These are
clearíy based on the 21/?. degree or dwadasamsa system of dõdekatêmoiria
described in Paulus and elsewhere. The sexual polarity of the degrees is simply
the sexual polarity of the dõdekatêmoirion in which they are located. [RH]
2 Text breaks off here.
3 Circumlocution strikes! lf the Moon is missing for 12 hours, then it is
also visible for 12 hours. [RH] 36 12th for Mercúrio :36 hours, the 13th for 10:24 hours, the 14th for 11:12 hours,
the 15th for 12 hours. Similarly, the 16th day is in relation to
subtraction as from the lst up to the 15th days. And the month of the
Moon is of 2972 days,1 its year is of 359 days. 13. Concerning the Concealment of the Moon
As it is being carried to conjunction, the Moon becomes invisible at a
certain degree in each zõidion, thusly. Wherever the Sun should be
found, take half the ascension of its zõidion. There is where the Moon
will be missing.2
For example, the Sun in Aries for the second zone: The ascension
of the zõidion is 20, half of which is 10. When the 10 are subtracted
from the 30, the Moon is invisible in Pisces around 20 degrees. The
Sun in Taurus: Half of the ascension will be 12. The Moon will be
invisible in Aries around the 18 degrees. The Sun in Gemini: Half the
ascension of the zõidion is 14. The Moon, then, will be invisible around
16 degrees of Taurus. The Sun in Câncer: Half the ascension is 16. The
Moon will be invisible in Gemini around 14 degrees. The Sun in Leo:
Half the ascension is 18. The Moon will be invisible in Câncer around
12 degrees. The Sun is Virgo: Half the ascension is 20. The Moon will
be invisible in Leo around 10 degrees. Similarly also for the remaining Zõidia. 14. Concerning the 3rd, 7th, and 40th day of the Moon
Concerning the third and seventh and fortieth days of the Moon, thusly.
Let the Moon be at the 7th degree of Scorpio. The third day it will be
at the 7th degree of Sagittarius. For one must inquire about the days as
follows: The 7th degree of Sagittarius is established as the third day
above all. The seventh day will be found, in relation to the effectdescription, in the square side around 7 degrees of Aquarius, the fortieth
around 7 degrees of Taurus. Some add 160 to the degrees of the Moon 1 The modem value is 29.530589 days. [RH]
2 This passage contains a somewhat primitive system for computing the
heliacal setting of the Moon each month. [RH] 37 at birth and depart from the lunar zõidion. [Others, by adding and
calculating the lunar natal degree along with the 3 and 7 and 40 days,
reckon the Moon to be there.]
Generally, then, fortunate and unfortunate and medíocre births are
indicated by the 3rd and 7th and 40th days. For, if these places are
contemplated by benefics in places where dealings can be conducted,
and are not contemplated by malefics, you reveal very fortunate and
great births. If two of the places are regarded by benefics, and the other
by a malefic, you reveal medíocre births. And if the three places are
regarded by malefics alone, with the benefics being ih aversion to them,
you reveal unfortunate births. If they should be mixed, call them
medíocre. 15. To Roughly Find the Ascending [Node]
To find, roughly, the ascending [node]. Taking the full years from
Augustus, multiply them by 19’/3, and combining each Egyptian month
at 1 degree, 35 minutes apiece, and each day at 3 minutes apiece,
subtract the circles at 360 apiece. Give the number left over to each
zõidion upward from Câncer at 30 apiece. And wherever it should leave
off, there will be the Ascending Node.
For example, the 4th year of Hadrian, 19th of Phamenoth. The full
years from Augustus are 148. When these are multiplied by 19 and a
third, they come to 2862. And 3 0 degrees are assembled from Thoth up
to Phamenoth. Together they come to 2872. Subtract 7 circles from
these at 360 apiece. 352 are left over. [Start] upward with these from
Câncer. It leaves off at the 8th degree of Leo. The eçliptic place, then,
will be there, while the' Descending Node will be in the place
diametrically opposite.
It will be necessary, then, to consider whether there are benefics in
these places, and especially on the Ascending Node. For, the birth will
be successful and practical. Even if the birth should be found in
middling circumstances or in subjugation, it will be raised up and come
into reputation. The malefics, however, produce banishment1 and accusations.
The Ascending Node and the zõidion of the latitude will be found
from the lunar epochs and the days, thusly. For example, in the birth in 1 Or possibly, Toss' in a rnorc general sense. 38 froní of us, in the 4th year of Hadrian, 19th of Phamenoth, the interval
from the epoch up to the natal day comes to 204. And there are 12; 18
steps of latitude adjacent to the epoch, while there are 11 ;37 steps of
latitude for the 204. Together, these come to 23;55. Multiply these by
15. They come to 358;45. I depart from Leo in accordance with the
succession. It leaves off at the 28;45th degree of Câncer.
Otherwise, in more abridged form. I depart with the 23;55 from
Leo, giving them to each at 2 apiece. Up to Gemini, then, they come to
22, and the remainder is 1;55.1 multiply these by 15. They become the
28;45th degree of Câncer.1
Then I always take the interval from Taurus at 1 degree up to the
degree at which it quits. They come to 89, approximately. I depart with
these from the lunar degree, which is the 7th of Scorpio. The Ascending
Node leaves off at the 8th degree of Leo. It will also be necessary to
investigate in this manner for the remaining births.
And if also I want to know the zõidion of the latitude, I will do as
follows. I multiply only the 12; 18 degrees of the latitude, those that are
adjacent to the epoch, by 15. They come to 184;30. I depart from Leo.
It leaves off at the Júpiter ;30th degree of Aquarius; Then I multiply the 11 ;37
degrees of latitude, those which are adjacent to the 204 of the day, by
15. They come to 174;15. Having added the Júpiter ;30 degrees of Aquarius
to these, I departed from it. It left off at the 28;45th degree of Câncer.
Similarly, we will also find the zõidion of the latitude for the remaining
epochs. 16. Concerning the Finding of Steps and Winds2 of the Moon
We will find the step3 and the wind thusly. From Leo to Libra the 1 This paragraph up to the end of this chapter is bracketed by the text
editors, since it is fully omitted from one of the principal manuscripts.
2 The word 'wind' here is used in Greek in connection with declinations
and celestial latitudes. It has no obvious connection with moving air. Scholars
are not clear why such a terminology is used. However, it is possible that the
term 'wind' may have been used to describe the azimuth (direction on horizon)
of a body's rising and setting. This in tum is a function of its declination and
indirectly of its latitude. [RH]
3 bathmos. 39 Moon comes down while northem; from Scorpio to Capricorn in comes
down while Southern; from Aquarius to Aries it goes up while Southern;
from Taurus to Câncer it goes up while northern. The steps are found
thusly. Since each step is of 15 degrees, while the zõidion has 30
degrees, each single zõidion has two steps. Starting from Leo, then, we
will find the step of latitude. Since, then, in the birth in front of us the
latitude was found to be 23;45, departing from Leo at two degrees
apiece, we will fmd the 1 ;45 degree of Câncer. We know that the Moon
goes up while northem for the 6th step of the wind. 17. After Hipparchus, Concerning the Calculation of the Zoidion
of the Moon
I can also roughly fmd in what zõidion the Moon is, thusly. By
adjoining the increment of each king to the year in question, you divide
them into three parts, not recording the number of the remainder, but by
keeping it back. For, if 1 should be left over, add 10 to the number; if
2, 20; if 3, nothing. For, the number is even. Then, taking '/i of the
months from Thoth up to the natal month, and adding the days as well
to the first number, and subtracting (if it is possible) by thirties, depart
with the remainder from the solar zõidion. If it should be in the
beginning, at 2lh apiece, while in the later, the epiballon.1 And
wherever it should leave off, there will be the Moon.
Similarly, to fmd the day in the same fashion, having posited the
birth. Having added the increment to the year in question, and having
divided it (as above) into three parts, and having added xh of the
months as well, you make a note of the number. Then, withdrawing the
interval from the Sun up to the Moon at 2' Saturno for each zõidion, compare
how full the number is. For, if the interval from the Sun up to the
Moon should be in excess, subtract the total number from these; And
the degrees which are left over will indicate the day. But if the degrees
of the interval should be less, after having added an additional 30
degrees to these, subtract the number totaled beforehand. And if the two
numbers should come to 30, the Moon will be conjunct the Sun.
For example, the 28 day of Athyr of the 3rd year of Hadrian. To 1 The example is not helpful in determining what this means. We leave it
untranslated. 40 the 3rd year, I have added the 2 years which have been added to the
king by convention. They come to 5.1 divided them into 3 parts. [The
remainder is 2,] instead of which I adjoin 20. They come to 25. Also,
V2 of the months—IV2—and the 28th day. They come to 5472. I
subtract one interval of 30. The remainder is 2472. The Moon will be
just so many days from conjunction. I depart with these from the solar
zõidion—Sagittarius—at 272 per zõidion} The Moon leaves off in Virgo
on the day in ffont of us.
And the day, thusly. Again, to the 3rd year I have added the 2, and
I divided by 3. The remainder is 2, instead of which 1 add 20. They
come to 25. And 72 of the months—1 xh. They come to 2672. Then,
withdrawing the interval from the Sun to the Moon—that is, from
Sagittarius to Virgo—it is of 2472 days. Since, then, it is not possible
to subtract from these the 2672 days totalled up before hand, I have
added 30 to them. They come to 5472.1 subtracted the 2672 from these.
The remainder was 28, which reveal the natal day.
The number conventionally added to each king is the one appended
by means of the following reduction.
To Augustus 1, and he was king for 43 years; it comes to 44; I
subtract 30; the remainder is 14. I add these to Tiberius and the 22
years of Tiberius’ reign; they come to 36; I subtract 30; the remainder
is six. I add these to Gaius, and he ruled for Júpiter years; they come to 10.
I have added them to Claudius, and he was king for 14 years; they
come to 24, from which I subtract nineteen; the remainder is 5. These
to Nero, and he was king for 14 years; they come to 19. The nineteen
year period is full, and this [changes]. We add then, for filling up of 30, Gêmeos for Vespasian, and he was king for 10 years; it comes to 21; I
subtracted 19 years; the remainder is 2. These to Titus, and the 3 of his
reign; it becomes 5. These to Domitian, and the 15 of his reign; it
comes to 20, from which I subtract 19; the remainder is 1. This is the
addition for Nerva, and he reigned for l year; it becomes 2. These to
Trajan, and the 19 for which he reigned; it comes to 21. Subtracting the
nineteen year term, 2 will be left o ver. These are for Hadrian, and the
21 years that he reigned as king; they come to 23, from which I subtract
the nineteen year term; the remainder is Júpiter . To Antoninus; similarly, I
add the 23 years that he reigned; they come to 27, from which I 1 Here again is the dwadasamsa form of the dõdekatemorion performing
its astronomical function. See my introduction. [RH] 41 subtract 19; the remainder is 8. These will be added to Antoninus and
Lucius Cominodus, and the 32 years they reigned; it comes to 40, from
which I subtract 30. The remainder is 10. These belong to Severus and
Antoninus, and they reigned for 25 years; it comes to 35, from which
I subtract 30; the remainder is 5. To Antoninus, and the Júpiter years he
reigned; it comes to Mercúrio . To Alexander, and the 13 years he reigned; it
comes to 22, from which I subtract the nineteen year term; the
remainder is Júpiter . This is the addition of Maximinus, and the 3 years that
he reigned; it comes to 7. And the 6 of Gordian and the 6 of Philippus;
together they come to 19. The nineteen year term is full.' 18. Concerning the Calculation of the Other Planets
You will get to know the degree of the Sun, thusly. To the natal day,
always add 8 degrees from Thoth up to Phamenoth, and you will find
the Sun at just so many degrees. To Pharmouthi, 7 degrees; to Pachon,
6; to Payni, 5; to Epiphi, Júpiter ; to Mesori, 3. For example, in the 6th of
Phaophi, I have added 8; they come to 14; the Sun is at just so many
degrees in Leo. In the 6th of Pachon, also 6; they come to 12; the Sun
will be just that many degrees in Taurus.
Since some lovers of learning are more eager for instruction in
numbers, for these it is also necessary to append the rough [calculations] of the remaining stars, so that, by taking up a degree-teaching
that is pleasant to practice and precise, they will make an examination 1 The chronology from Antoninus through Alexander above is a bit
difficult to reconcile with the current accepted chronology of this period.
Marcus Aurelius would seem to be missing, but he may be the second of the
various Antoninus's mentioned above, his full name having been Marcus
Aurelius Antoninus. The period after Lucius Commodus, his son, was one of
extreme chãos in which the empire almost feil 200 years earlier than at least the
Western half actually did. However, this chronology also raises questions about
the dating of Valens. If he was really a “younger contemporary” of Ptolemy,
then he could not have known about these later emperors. On the other hand
this passage may be an interpolation, which given the condition of the text
cannot be discounted. 42 of the more important selections1 2 with all zeal.
One must caiculate Kronos thusly. Taking the full years from
Augustus, cast out 30 as many times as it sets.2 Multiply the left-overs
by 12, and take 5 for as many circuits of thirty years3 as you have cast
out, and take the days months from Thoth at 1 for each, and each day
at 2 minutes each. And after totalling, depart from Câncer following the
succession [of zõidia] at 30 apiece. And wherever it should leave off,
there the star will be.
Zeus thusly. Divide the full years from Caesar by 12. Júpiter Multiply
what is left over by 12, and take together with these as many twelve
year terms as you have cast out at 1 for each Circuit, and take 1 for
each month, and 2 minutes for each day. And after totalling, depart
from Taurus at 12 for each zõidion.
Ares thusly. Taking the years from Augustus up to the year in
question, cast out 30 as many times as it sets. Determine whether the
number left over is even or odd in order that you should make your
departure from Aries if you should find it to be even, but from Libra if
odd. After recognizing this, then, double the number, and by taking in
addition 2’/2 for each month—if they go beyond 60, take the remainder—depart from Libra or Aries, giving 5 to each zõidion. And noting
down the zõidion where it should leave off, see in what zõidion the Sun
is. If it should be found higher, the star will go back from the zõidion
so found, while if it should be found lower, it will go forth—that is,
always make it from the zõidion found nearer the Sun. And the
remaining stars, which are carried with the mean motion of the Sun,
will have the same power, and especially Aphrodite.
Aphrodite thusly. Taking the years from Caesar up to the year in
question, divide by 8. Consider whether the number left over, smaller
than 8, has the epoch of a station, and making use of it, take the
number of days up to the day in questions, if indeed it admits of this.
But if not, I use the one above just as for the Moon. For, if the epoch 1 The word here is hairesis. It can hardly mean sect as an astrological
term. If it does not refer to the selection of birth charts, it may refer to different
astrological systems.
2 Evidently as many times as the planet makes a full Circuit around the
zodiac counted in terms of helical settings which occur once per Sun-Satum
synodic year.
3 Roughly the period of Kronos. Júpiter Roughly the period of Zeus. 43 should be found before the birth, one must use it; if after the birth, one
must use the one above. And collecting together the total, and
subtracting the epoch of the zõidion, depart with the 120 degrees of
each zõidion—that is, the remaining degrees of the station from the
Zõidion being occupied—depart from the epoch, giving 25 to each
zõidion. And wherever the number should íeave off, there will be
Aphrodite. The epochs of the stations will be manifest ahead of time
from the days left over. If, for example, 1 should be left, or 3, Júpiter , 6, or
7, it will be a station; but if 2 or 5, it will be making its way. 1, then,
will have the epoch at the 10 of Phamenoth, in Taurus; 3 the 10th of
Phaophi, in Sagittarius, Júpiter the 22nd of Payni, in Leo; 6 the 8th of Tybi,
in Pisces; 7 the 14th of Mesori, in Libra; in the 8th year it will occupy
the station.
One must caiculate Hermes thusly. Taking the days from Thoth up
to the natal day, and always adding an additional 162 to these from
outside, and totalling, if it should be beyond 360, after subtracting a
circle, depart with the remainder from Aries, giving 30 to each zõidion.
And wherever it should Íeave off, there is the star. Always, then, make
it nearest the Sun. For example, if the Sun should be in the beginning
of the zõidion, it is possible to fmd it in the zõidion in the rear, while
if it is in the end of the zõidion, in the next zõidion.
As an illustration, let it be the 13th year of Trajan, the 18th of
Phamenoth. The full years from Augustus are 138. From these I
subtracted Júpiter thiríy year terms, instead of which I take 5 for each circuit;
they come to 20. I multiply the 18 left over by 12; they come to 216.
And from Thoth up to Phamenoth at 1 a month; they come to 7.
Al together they are 243. Then, I depart with these from Câncer at 30
apiece. It leaves off in Pisces. There is Kronos.
Again, I divide the 138 years by 12; 11, with a remainder of 6
results. Multiplying these by 12, they come to 72, and having cast out
1 for each circuit, they come to 11, and 7 for the months. Altogether
they come to 90.1 depart with these from Taurus at 12 apiece. It leaves
off in Sagittarius. There is Zeus.
Then thus for Ares. From Caesar up to the year in question comes
to 139. I subtracted 30 of these Júpiter times; the remainder is 11.' Since, 1 Apparently for reasons that are not clear he is actually subtracting from
150, not subtracting 120 from 139. The text as we have it is quite clear,
unfortunately. [RH] 44 then, the left-over number was found to be odd, I knew that it is
necessary for me to make the subtraction ffom Libra. So I doubled
these; they come to 22. And for each month up to Phamenoth they
come to 17. Altogether they are 39. I depart with these ffom Libra,
giving 5 to each zõidia. It leaves off at Taurus. There is Ares.
Aphrodite thus. I divide the 139 by 8. The remainder is 3, which
signify a station, for the epoch the lüth of Phaophi, in Sagittarius. I take
instead the remaining 20 days of Phaophi, while from Athyr up to
Mechir is 120, and the 18 of Phamenoth. Together they come to 158.
I subtract from these the 120 of the station and Sagittarius; the
remainder is 38, with which I depart from Capricorn at 35 apiece. It
leaves off in Aquarius. There is Aphrodite.
But since there seems to be much [confusion] surrounding
Aphrodite, we will also do an exposition for another birth. The 4th of
Hadrian, 30th of Athyr. The days from Augustus come to 148, which
I divide by 8; the remainder is Júpiter , which signify the epoch the 12th of
Payni, in Leo. Since, then, the epoch itself is not useful since it is found
to be beyond the birth, I run back to the former one, which is for three,
the 10th of Phaophi, in Sagittarius. I take the remaining 20 of Phaophi,
and 300 from Athyr to Mesori, and 5 epagomenal days. They come to
325 of the days taken ahead of time. And of the same adduced year,
from Thoth up to the 30th of Athyr is 90. Altogether these come to 415.
From these I subtract the 120 of the station and the zõidion Sagittarius;
the remainder is 295. I depart with these from Capricorn at 25 apiece.
It leaves off at the 20th of Sagittarius. There is the star.
Otherwise. Let it be the 4th of Hadrian, the 13th of Mechir. From
Augustus there are 149 days. Divide by 8; the remainder is 5, which
signify neither a station nor an epoch. I run back to the former epoch,
which is 22nd of Payni, in Leo. I take the remaining 8 days of Payni,
and the 60 of Epiphi and Mesori, and the 5 epagomenal days; they
come to 73. And for the adduced year, lfom Thoth up to the 13th of
Mechir comes to 163. Together they come to 236. From these I subtract
the 120 of the station and of the zõidion Leo; the remainder is 116. I
depart with these from Virgo at 25 apiece. They will leave off at the
16th degree of Capricorn. There is Aphrodite.
Similarly, I have calculated Hermes for the same birth. I took the
163 days from Thoth up to the 13th of Mechir, and I have set 162 from
without. Together they are 365. I departed with these from Aries at 30
apiece. It left off at the 25th degree of Aquarius. There is the star. 45 [Concerning Ingresses].1 The second and the 6th and the 12th of the
Sun will be fine, while the 7th and the 4th will be rotten. The 3rd and
the 8th and the 9th of the Moon will be rotten, while the 5th and the
l lth and the 12th will be fine. The 4th and the I0th of Kronos will be
rotten, while the 6th and the 8th and the 12th will be fine. The 3rd, the
9th, the 10th, and the 1 lth of Zeus will be fine, while the 4th and the
7th will be rotten. The 3rd, the 4th, and the 9th of Ares will be fine,
while the 7th and the lOth will be rotten. The 3rd and the 7th and the
8th of Aphrodite will be fine, while the 5th will be rotten. The 2nd, the
5th, and the 11 th of Hermes will be rotten, while the 7th and 8th and
9th will be fine. The remaining ingresses for each star are irregular.
When the stars come to be in the aforesaid places by ingress and
especially when they are masters of the times,2 if they should be in
profitable places and witnessed by benefics or malefics, they will be the
bestowers of good and bad things, depending upon which is in excess.
But if the rnalefics and benefics are of the same [number], the foul
things and good ones will be all mixed up at the genesis of each,
whence for transits it is always necessary to observe the places in
relation to an exact estimate of the times.3 19. Concerning the Commixtures of the Stars
We will also subjoin the co-presences and commixtures of each star. So
when Kronos and Zeus are present together, then, they are sympathetic
to each other, producing benefits from legacies, adoptions, lords of real
estate, trustees, administrators of the property of others, heads of the
household, tax-collectors.
Kronos and Ares, then, are hostile, productive of deterrents and
demolition. For, they introduce seditions at home and malevolences and
enmities, slaves and plots and malefactions and accusations (except that 1 These last two paragraphs about ingresses are bracketed by the text editor
without comment as not beíonging here. The word translated here as ingress is
epembasis, meaning to step onto something.
2 The chronocrators, the planets that rule over a certain period of human
life.
3 Presumably, the times at which the good or bad things will be bestowed. 46 if they fali in their own zõidia or in profitable zõidia, Júpiter and they are
witnessed by benefics, they furnish notable and bright nativities),
unreliability in prosperity, and unexpected dangers or betrayals.
Kronos and Hermes, then, are harmonious and practical, except
they introduce slanders concerning private matters, accusations and
debts, disturbances because of legal documents or monies paid, those
who are neither helpless nor witless, those who are highly experienced
and erudite or prescient, fond of learning, curious, initiates of the
mysteries, those who are pious toward the divine, those who have a bad
conscience.
Kronos and Aphrodite, then, are harmonious for occupations,
shrewd at weaving and fitting things together, sympathetic and
beneficiai not to all the way to the end, but only for a certain length of
time, whereupon they produce censures and separations and instabilities
or death, and often times they produce those who cause the lack oí
issue or even entanglements in public matters, and those who encounter
harm or accusations.
Kronos and the Moon, then, are beneficiai, able to procure
possessions and foundations, productive of benefit from voyages and
from fatality, especially when the Moon should happen to be making its
course from rising1 2 and should be witnessed by benefics. For, it
produces alliances with superiors and gifts and the lessening oí
enmities, except that it produces unreliability in getting things, and
instabilities in the area concerning the wife, and those who are dispirited
through certain separations and hatreds and sorrows. It also introduces
bodily suffering and sudden seizures and painful sensations of the
predominant places3 Júpiter or the sinews, and the deaths of necessary persons.
Kronos and the Sun, then, are disharmonious, fumishing jealousies
over possessions and deprivation of friends, whence, those who are bom
under such a position, harboring secret enmities and threats toward
superior persons, and being designed against by some, go through their
lives invidiously up to the very end; and, gaining advantage by
pretence, Júpiter they prevail over most, except that they are with resources; 1 There is no explicit listing of “profitable” zõidia. It is probably to be
deduced from the overall State of the sign. [RH]
2 Presumably, this mean when it is waxing.
3 Probably the head. [RH! Júpiter or perhaps, by the power of good speaking. 47 and they are easiiy disturbed and long-suffering, self-controlled when
adversity is inflicted upon them.
When Zeus and the Sun, then, are together, they produce those who
are briiliant, esteemed, sovereign, dominant, tyrannical, capabie, honored
and well spoken of by the crowd, but successful and weaithy and those
who arrange things with the most ostentation,1 except that, for certain
periods, when the star reverses opinion with irregularities and jealousies
and (especiaily it should also be foünd to have just set)2 greater
ostentations, it causes truths.3
Zeus and the Moon, then, are good, acquisitive, producing masters
of ornament and of bodies, and furnishing notable leaders and those
who are helped by women and notable persons, those who have
kindnesses done to them by relatives or children, and those who are
deemed worthy of gifts or honors, those entrusted with the guarding of
money or those who are loaned large sums, and the fmders of treasures,
those good at business.
Zeus, Ares—those who are esteemed, full of ostentation, friends of
their superiors or of kings, those who are military, notable, and
recipients of stipends, those who make a life in civic or military affairs,
and those deemed worthy of honor and repute, but who have
irregularities in their life and habits and throw away what they have
acquired.
Zeus and Aphrodite are good, harmonious, procurative of repute
and benefits, promoting further acquisitions, gifts, ornaments, mastery
of bodies, begetting of children, archpriestships, position at the head of
the crowd, the wearing of crowns and of gold, those being deemed
worthy of statues and images, but they produce irregularities conceming
marriage and children.
Zeus and Hermes are good, harmonious, administrative; they
produce managers of things, those who become trustees or financial
managers, those who are fit to be guardians, those who make their
living fròm arguments and calculations, and those who are distinguished 1 phantasia. This word more simply means “appearance” or “imagination.”
2 hupodusin. heliacally set.
3 alêíheia. This Greek word for truth literally means “unconcealment.”
Here agaín we have the same play between truth and appearance that we found
in Ptolcmy's Phases (see General Note to our translation), again in the context
of heliacal phenomena. 48 in education, but dear to many and easy to befriend, those who are
deemed worthy of reward and stipend. And if they should be found in
profitable zõidia, they also produce finders of treasures and those who
are helped in ioans [by deposits].
Aphrodite and the Sun are harmonious and likely [to occur]1 and
bestowers of good things, bringing about unions of male and female,
gifts and enrollments, and those who are successfiil in their plans; at
times [they produce] those who accept popular preferments or assume
trusteeships, and those who stand in the forefront in other areas, and
those who are deemed worthy of stipends, but who are also not without
sorrow in the area conceming wife and children, and especially if the
star should happen to be have just set.2
Aphrodite and the Moon are good for reputation and acquisitions
and for the instigation of matters,3 but unstable for cohabitations and
friendships and wedlock, bringing in rivalries and enmities and the
malefactions of relatives or the upheavals of friends, and similarly also
it is not good for the area conceming children or the body, making one's
acquisitions transitory and introducing mental distress.
Aphrodite and Ares are disharmonious; for, they produce those who
are inconstant and impotent in their resolves, those who are jealous and
murderous, but dear to all or culpable, Júpiter shameful, fickle and indifferent
to the couplings of male and female, those who are acquainted with
villainy or sorcery, those who abide neither the good or the base, those
who are reproached and reviled for their friendships, liberal in expense,
those who just scratch the surface of their occupations and lust after
many things, those who are wronged by females or those who suffer
from accusations and upheavals and indebtedness on their account.
Aphrodite and Hermes are harmonious; for, they make those who
are sociable, fond of their friends and fond of pleasure, those who have
their mind on education and temperance, and those who receive honors
and gifts, while for those who have come into a little luck, they produce
receipts and purchases and commercial dealings and impart a shameful
mode of living, and in the area that concerns the wife, it produces those
who are unstable and indifferent and fickle about the marriage. 1 The Sun and Venus are frequently in the same sign because of the
limited elongation of Venus from the Sun. [RH]
2 Again heliacally.
3 Refers to persons who instigate not times for instigatmg. [RH] Júpiter sic. 49 Hermes and the Sun make those who are dear to all and those who
are have a good verbal delivery, those who have diverse and even
sovereign concerns in civil areas, those who are cleanly, very wise,
criticai, admirerers of fine things, erudite, initiates of divine matters,
beneficent, fond of one's own associates, self-reliant, braggarts, those
who bear the accidents of fortune nobly, those who are ineffective at
achieving fame and irregular in their mode of living, with ups and
downs, not helpless, but cíimbing up in accordance with the support1 of
their birth.
Hermes and the Moon are good for the unions and reputations of
males and females, and for the power of speech and educadon, and for
the other such undertakings and commercial dealings; they produce
those who are social and mechanical and highly experienced and
curious, and those who are led on by greater goals, those who are
restless and do not stick long with activities or resolves for the future,
those who are noble in relation to things base, but irregular in their
mode of living.
Hermes and Ares are not good, producing enmities, accusations,
oppositions, maligning, betrayals, and those who are wronged by their
betters or their own underlings, and some who are athletic, militant or
leaders, those who are beneficent, curious, those who go about their
lives in diverse fashion; but, falling into scandals with pledges and
loans, they engage in forgeries for the sake of stealing, raping, and
plundering, or they resort to screaming.2 But if the figure should
somehow be afflicted, those who are held responsible or in complicity
experience the loss or reduction of what they have acquired.
The Sun and the Moon are good; for, they procure alliances with
superiors and reputations, the acquisition of foundations and possessions
and money and omament, and the things that are opportune and useful
for the application of things. And if the support3 should be great, those
who are fit for the rule of cities will be born, those who are set over
things, those who stand at the head of the crowd, those with great
imagination, those who are munificent, dominant, tyrannical, insubordinate, those who possess the kingly estate and mind or those who climb 1 hupostasis. The support of other planeis etc., that is, the support of the
birth chart.
2 sic.
3 of the bírthchart? 50 up from a modest fortune and upon becoming prosperous are
pronounced truly happy, unless the good fortune does not belong
lastingly to such people because of the waning figure of the Moon.
[The combinations of Ares and the Sun, and Ares and the Moon are
lacking in the text.] 20. Commixture of Three Stars
[The combinations missing from this chapter are Kronos/Sun/Moon,
Kronos/Hermes/Sun, Kronos/Hermes/Moon.j
Kronos, Zeus, and the Sun—are irregular and unreliable for acquisitions
and friendships and the remaining applications of things (for, they cause
the throwing away of what has been acquired and those who encounter
invidious allegations), and they point to benefits from unexpected
sources or from mortalities, enhancing purity of reputation or perfecting
the reasons for it, while they point to unexpected dangers and plots; and
they produce leaderships and executorships, tributes or rents from the
things of others, on whose account they furnish disturbances Or
judgments, and support1 which is irregular and timid.
Kronos, Zeus, the Moon—are harmonious, procuring reputation and
benefits and alliances with superiors and gifts, but they2 come to live
abroad and they make a success of their activities (not only their own
but those of others) upon foreign soii or with the help of foreigners; and
they are shown kindness from females and, coming into possession of
foundations, they are masters of regions; some, then, getting into the
shipping trade, increase their livelihood, or manage their livelihood by
pursuing all the trades that are united by water.
Kronos, Zeus, Ares produce commixtures of good things, some who
are esteemed, fit to be archpriests, dominant, fit to be guardians, those
who stand at the forefront of crowds and regions or military affairs,
those who exhort and those who are heard, not so much those who do
honor to the fantasy of life, but those who are tossed and turned by
impediments and accusations and violent matters, and those who pass again birthchart support?
2 The change of subject here from the planets to the natives would seem
lo indicate some missing antecedent text.
51 their lives in fear, yet they do produce some who have conferred honor
iipon the reality of life, and those who are masters of possessions and
foundations, and those who have benefited from deaths, but those who
are inferior in reputation—whence, the matters wili be judged from the
setting in the places1 and the energies of the zõidia.
Kronos, Zeus, Aphrodite are good and beneficiai for occupations,
acquisitive, producing unions of male and female and friendships and
promotions, as well as kindnesses from the dead, and in the matter of
intercourse producing those who are malicious and jealous and irregular
about wedlock, those who experience difficulties2 for a time and
enmities and judgments, except they are fond of society and easy to live
with, those who take delight in novelty and many friendships, but in the
matter concerning children and the body they are not those who are
steadfast through all, nor do they endure without distress.
When Kronos, Zeus, Hermes are configured, they produce those
who are practical, economical, trusty, those who stand at the forefront
of crowds, those who exhort and those who are heard, managers of
money and those who set things right; and such people are those
possessing a frank and polished manner, who, at times appearing
villainous and knavish, will become desirous of the things of others and
recommend themselves3 and claim more than is their due, on which
account they experience disturbances and judgments and indebtedness
and popular scandals; at other times comporting themselves with a
healthy enthusiasm for their work, and being held in trust, they receive
benefits, and having been deemed worthy of gifts and honors by their
superiors, and if they should possess a figure4 that is generous, they will
be a benefactor to their own superiors and those of others, and they will
participate in the mysteries and the secrets of others, and though
curious5 about the remainder, those who display this area will have their
minds aimed at simplicity.
Kronos and Ares and the Sun are indicative of violent and alien and
dangerous matters; for, they produce those who are rash and ambitious
in their occupations, who are villainous, impious, traitors, insubordinate, i.e., topoi, houses.
2 Literally, 'coolings,' something çne would expect from Kronos.
3 Acceptmg the manuscript vanation here. Júpiter schêma. Presumably referring to their chart.
5 may also mean superstitious.
52 those who hate their own families, those who are parted from them,
those who dwell with another tribe, those who engage in insults and
hazardous activity, those who undergo falis from heights or from
quadrupeds or have fears about buming, those who are laborious in their
undertakings, not looking out for what they have acquired, those who
are desirous of the things of others, those who profit by villainous
means, unless the figure should happen to be military or athletic, and
then it is full of toil, but not ineffective.
Kronos, and Ares and the Moon produce those who are reckless
about throwing themselves into their work, and those who are highminded but ineffective in their occupations and those diverted by
impediments and by violent matters. For, they become violent, solitary,
villainous, rapacious, those who have a piratical manner, those who
encounter apologies or judgments, those who make a proof of constant
accusations unless the native should somehow happen to be fond of the
gymnasium or fond of weapons in order that the figure of the
oppression may be placated and kept at bay in this manner. Some, then,
if they are also subject to injury, or emotional, will have a violent end.
Kronos, Ares, Aphrodite are serviceable for occupations and
friendships or reconciliations on behalf of rulers, producing benefits,
reputation and alliances, while they later become easily disturbed and
subject to legal proceedings because of certain rivalries and betrayals,
on account of which they make accusations and harbor enmities toward
male and female persons and are diverted into shameful and adulterous
behavior, and they are subject to scandals and exposures. Some, then,
pay no heed to illegal and indiscriminate unions, while, becoming
accomplices or being involved in plots of villainy and sorcery, they
experience no ordinary fear.
Kronos, Ares, Hermes produce villainies and slaves, judgments and
disturbances; they are those who, after having been upset with securities
and loans on account of legal documents or mystical matters, experience
struggles which do not go right and reductions; otherwise, they produce
those who are sharp and quite sagacious about occupations, those whose
lives are complex, and those who are reviled by some because of certain
violent or illegal actions; so there are times, then, when they are also
engaged in laborious or dangerous activities, and when they encounter
poverty, they blame their own luck, and they blaspheme the gods or
they become forswom and impious. And if the stars should fali
improperly, they make for accusations and oppressions, but if they are
in profitable places or should happen to be in their own places, then
53 those who undergo a struggle beyond ali others will prevail over most,
or those who have also been helped by arguments or calculations or
military Service will add to their livelihood.
Kronos, Aphrodite, the Sun are indicative of alliances with
superiors and of honors and of occupations, and they are the causes ot
distinction and popular preeminence; but they are actually transitory in
relation to possession and other such items; they divert things into
irreguiarity, and the dissolve friendships, and they make for the
reduction of livelihood and exposures or fines on account of female
personages, betrayals of secret matters, while they make those who are
unreliable and indiscriminate in the matters of wedlock and intercourse.
Kronos, Aphrodite, the Moon bring in irregularities and instabilities
in one's life, and especially in the area concerning wife and mother and
children; for, they inflict a bad disposition and lack of grace, and
furthermore rivalries and factions, separations, faults, exposures, lawless
unions, and concerning occupations they make those who are not
helpless, but who have acumen and engage in acquisition, those who are
helped by mortalities, except that they do not take care, but are plotted
against by many, or who are even accomplices to villainy or sorcery,
seducers of women.
Kronos, Aphrodite, Hermes produce those who are sagacious,
intellectual, naturally clever at instigating activity, and shrewd, but those
whose initial enthusiasm for their work does not last, but who quickly
become desirous of other employment, those who are very learned,
curious, diverse, medicai, those who take delight in novelty and change
and the exotic. If the figure should be afflicted when these planets are
so situated, or Ares should regard it, they will encounter disturbances
and judgments on account of sorcery or females or allegations about
deaths, or even, undergoing injustice at the hands of women, they
submit to a reduction of their livelihood and noxious accusations; in
general, they will become unreliable and distressed in areas concerning
wife and children and body.
Zeus, the Sun, the Moon produce those who are esteemed, brilliant,
erudite, who stand at the forefront of public, political, and royal affairs,
those who are dominant, fit for command, insubordinate, tyrannical, but
those who are also regarded with jealousy and reviled and betrayed by
some, those who hate their own families, who are fickle, diverse and
inconstant in their resolves, those who are haughty, conceited and who
have their ups and downs, but who confer honor upon the fantasy of
life; yet they are not those who continue in prosperity up ío the end, but
54 those who trip up on something, or even have a painfui ending.
Zeus, Ares, the Sun indicate those who are liable to be alarmed and
those who are in danger, and those who are hot-headed and successfully
apply themselves to their work, and those who share in reputation, those
who are militant, dominant, those who stand at the forefront of public
affairs, those who are prone to fali through the jealousies, threats,
betrayals, domestic plots, and accusations that pursue their superiors; for
indeed, after some have climbed up from a low estate in life along with
the promotion of their superiors, they are pulled back down.
Zeus, Ares, the Moon produce those who are on-target, rash, public,
dear to many, those who come into advancement and those who are
exalted from a low estate and those deemed worthy of trust, those who
are martial, athletic, esteemed, dominant, those standing in the forefront
of crowds and local affairs, those who partake of honors and stipends
or the priesthood, but those who encounter impediments and accusa¬
tions, and those who are betrayed by their own people or by females,
and those who suffer a reduction of what they have acquired, and those
who acquire later from mystical and unexpected sources.
Zeus, Ares, Hermes produce those who are practical, hot-headed,
those who are agitated, those who work for wages in public areas or
hold a rank in the military, or those who manage royal or political
affairs, but those who are irregular in their mode of living and those
who waste what they acquire, those who are intelligent and trustworthy,
those who are stewards, those who readily correct errors and who
attribute the responsibility for them to others, those who are reviled and
those who encounter impediments; they produce some, then, who are
athletic, crown-wearers, or even body trainers, who are very leamed,
fond of traveling, or those who profit upon foreign soil but fail in their
own.
Zeus, Ares, Aphrodite produce those who are dear to many and
fond of society, those who are deemed worthy of alliances with
superiors and benefits, those who come into promotion, those who are
advanced by women; they produce some, then, who are of the line of
archpriests, who are crown-wearers, athletic or those who stand in the
forefront of the priests or those who are crowd-pleasers, and those who
for a time pass their lives unstably and irregularly, and who are
blameworthy and indiscriminate toward the marriage union, those who
endure betrayals and being put to shame, and those who are distressed
in the are a of children and the body, those who take their pleasure in
newer intercourse, and those who undergo separations from women.
55 Zeus, Hermes, the Sun produce those who set things right in their
application to their work, and those who are loved by many, those who
are deemed worthy of trusts, honors, and public revenues, as well as
alliances with superiors and promotions, and those who climb up from
a lowly estate, and those who have become ornaments, but as for
acquisitions which are transitory and easily obtained, they produce those
who come into want of them for a time and those gain much for
themselves mystically, though they are never without a living but are
helped from unexpected sources and from superiors.
Zeus, Hermes, the Moon are produce those who are good,
acquisitive, and those who are shrewd in regard to occupations, those
who tend to bring things together, those who have a share in gifts and
trusts, those who are mystical, sagacious, logical, guardians of money
and deposits, those who make a living by speeches and calculations,
those who are concemed with loans, tax-collectors, tax-farmers, those
who are loved by many, those who are erudite, fit for guardianship,
administrators of things, generous; they produce some, then, who are
athletic, crown-wearers, those deemed worthy of honors, images,
statues. And if these planets should somehow happen to be in profitable
places, they make those who are finders of treasures, and those who
stand over priests and temples; they rebuild and transplant, and by
conferring honor upon a places, they have prepared a lasting name for
themselves.
Zeus, Hermes, Aphrodite, are good, producing the acquisition of a
livelihood and success at one’s occupation; and they become sagacious,
frank, generous, sweet, fond of cohabiting, cheerful, participants in
education and music, cleanly, comely, those who are deemed worthy of
honor and reputation, those who go about with their superiors and who
have a share in trusts and public revenue, those who are an ornament
in their mode of living, and, being fond of manners and exercise, they
are masters of the body and they raise some who are child-like, and
they are beneficent, and from the gods they know the future ahead of
time, being truly pious, but they will become unstable or depressed
about the area that concems wife and children.
Zeus, Aphrodite, the Sun make those who are highly imaginative
and those who are esteemed, but who are obsessed with details and
irregular in their resolves, those who are haughty, sometimes those who
are liberal and generous but fickle, other times those who are exalted in
the opinions of others and in acquisitions and those who climb up from
a lowly fate; and they also become archpriests, crown-wearers,
56 sovereign, dominant, those who stand in the forefront of public affairs
and who precede the crowd, those who are deemed worthy of honors
and gifts and who are omaments in their mode of living, but those who
will become lawless or culpable in relation to sexual union. But if these
planets should somehow happen to be rising or in profitable places, the
natives will be gladdened with wife and children.
Zeus, Aphrodite, the Moon produce those who are practical and
esteemed, those who are archpriests, crown-wearers, those who stand at
the forefront of priests and temples, those who are munificent,
fame-loving, those who are crowd-pleasers, those who receive the trust
of cities and regions, and who are deemed worthy of honors, and who
are well spoken of and emulated by relatives and ífiendly personages,
those who endure enmities and confrontations, but those who are
unstable and contentious in the area conceming wife and intimacy, those
who pass life with rivalries and separations and subject to necessity,
who are distracted;1 2 so then, at times they also join together with their
relatives and do not see to it that the co-habitation3 is thus undisturbed4;
at other times they engage in partnerships; nevertheless, they will
become highly imaginative in the realities concerning life, being not so
much filíed with the truth as with illusion.
Aphrodite, the Sun, the Moon produce those who are esteemed and
practical, those who engage in ostentation, but those with bad and
culpable habits, those who are calumniated by most and envied by
superior and friendly personages, those who come into promotion and
acquisition and those who are exalted in their fortunes, but those who
are irregular in the matter concerning wife and children; otherwise, they
are fond of their friends, being those who come to live abroad, and
those who are fortunate upon foreign soil.
Aphrodite, Ares, the Moon make those who are neither helpless nor
impractical, but diverse and unstable in their resolves, those who are
great-souled, those who spend indiscriminately and those who [do not]5
put an end to matters, who are ambitious, despisers, wanderers, those
who are rash, public servants, military, those indifferent6 to the intimacy 1 as in absent-minded.
2 or couple.
3 or marriage or intercourse. Júpiter lit. runs smoothly.
5 Supplied by the editor of the Greek text from a supporting text.
6 Or perhaps undiscriminating. 57 of male and female, but those who are reviled and engage in insults and
criticisms, and those who turn friendships into enmities instigated by
villainies, those who are tripped up in their mode of life.
Hermes, the Sun, the Moon produce those who are august, pure,
who play their part well, who are economical, those who partake of
trust and rank, who are benefícent, participants in the mysteries, those
who set things right, those who have the most ostentatious display of
property; but they also become bodyguards, ushers, those who are set
over money, writings, calculations; and the relationship of such planets
is also strong for counsel or teaching.
Hermes, the Sun, Aphrodite produce those who are very leamed,
much experienced, good, those who take the lead in arts and Sciences
and those who are deemed worthy of trust and rank, those who are
fickle in regard to what gets done, having their ups and downs at the
time, and those who are restless or take delight in the complete change
of occupation, those who are much loved, erudite, those who come into
promotions ffom their superiors and those who are an ornament in their
mode of living and in their reputation, even though blameworthy.
Hermes, the Moon, Aphrodite produce those who are good, those
who co-habit well, those who are simple, generous, fond of laughter,
political, participants in education or training,1 mechanical, much
experienced, decorous, cleanly, well-grown, those who are privy to
secret matters, those who are subordinate, those who are emulated and
envied, but those who are irregular in their mode of living and
indifferent toward the intercourse of women and men, but those who are
successful and able to bring things together.
When Hermes, Ares, and Aphrodite are configured, they produce
benefits and reputation and occupations, those who are shrewd and
economical with giving and receiving and the remaining undertakings,
but cunning and much experienced, those who make a living from
writings or exercises, who are culpable, prodigal, and give ffeely, those
who are involved in securities and loans, and those who are wronged,
those who steal the money of others, seducers, those who charmingly
deceive, but those who are successful and malicious, fickle about what
gets done.
Ares, the Sun, the Moon produce those who are rash, manly. 1 Literally, rhythms, but hruthmizo also means to bring into proper measure or time, thus, to educate or train. 58 courageous, practical; for, they become athletic and martial, sovereign,
dominant, those who earn their living fforn violent and hostile matters
and from menial crafts or working in hard materiais, but they are those
who are diverted by impediments and dangerous matters, and who
encounter enmities and charges from their superiors, unless the benefics,
figuring them in some way, should keep the support from being
weakened.
Ares, the Sun, Aphrodite produce those who are loved by many and
who are erudite, those deemed worthy or alliances and honors,
successful, fond of society, but culpable and notorious, those who do
not last long in friendships and who are unstable in their occupations,
those who are desirous of much, extravagant, those who mistreat
women, those with a tendency to vandalism, those who are diverted by
impediments and enmities due to the dubious reasons in their
arguments.
Ares, the Sun, Hermes produce those who are much experienced,
who are inventive at ways of instigating activity, those who are full of
care and ineffective in what they desire to argue, but who prevail
unexpectedly, whence such become irregular in their resolves,
courageous, practical, quick to anger, and sometimes those who adopt
a vile and contemptible manner, who hold fast and play a part and make
themselves less in relation to matters in which it is not necessary to do
so, but those who live their life irregularly for the most part, and who,
by coming under someone's thumb, lessen their own fortunes.
Ares, the Moon, Hermes produce those who are skillful,
mechanical, those who are easily stirred into activity and those who are
restless, those who wish to act with dispatch, those who are liable to
omit things, curious, initiates in the mysteries and those who are privy
to secret matters, maltreaters, those who are violent, insubordinate,
covetous, those who encounter accusations and injuries as weil as
judgments and dangerous matters, those who experience disturbances
owing to legal documents or taxes, except that they produce those who
succeed and those who are extravagant, but those who are off-target in
their mode of living.
Our exposition of these matters aimed at distinguishing them into
unique and universal types, but when a different commixture is also
added in, either in accordance with presence or co-testimony, the power
of these things will be altered in accordance with the nature of the star.
For, I did not want to compile the commixtures at great length and with
many subdivisions, since the ancients have already made their
59 arrangements concerning them. The synoptic manner, then, which is
easily taken in at a glance from the natural activity of each star and
zõidion, will be preferred by those who can see. And there is found in
this treatise the grounds upon which the placement1 of each star—that
is, the manner in which it was figured—must be determined (either
upon a pivot point or rising, lord of a lot, of the Hõroskopos, or of a
trigon). Similarly also, the zõidia in which they occur (either their
house, or their own sect while being witnessed by other stars). And in
such manner the effects are revealed to be steady. But if the planets
should fali amiss in unprofitable places, the effects of their activity and
the effects of fortune will become less. 21. Concerning Conception2
With these things being so, we must also speak of conception,3 for those
who repudiate complicity4 and those who harbor jealousy. There being
three terms—a least, a middle, and a greatest—the excess of each is
[15] days. If we should add or subtract these ffom any one term, one of
the other terms5 will be taken. And the least term is 258, which will be
assigned after the setting degree (that is, when the Moon is in the
post-descensional place). The middle term is 273, which is preestablished when the Moon is in the Hõroskopos. The greatest is 289, which
is preestablished when the Moon is in the setting place. For, if we
should measure the 15 days of excess in relation to the hemisphere from
Hõroskopos to setting, we will find 2lh days applying to each zõidion.
Let it be the case, then, that Câncer is marking the birth hour while
Capricorn is setting. If the Moon should be found above the setting
pivot point, the conception will be 258 days; if in Aquarius, 26072 days;
if in Pisces, 263; if in Aries, 26572; if in Taurus, 268; if in Gemini,
270V2; if in Câncer (the Hõroskopos), 273; if in Leo, 275 V2; if in Virgo,
278; if in Libra, 28072; if in Scorpio, 283; if in Sagittarius, 28572; if in
Capricorn, 289. 1 topothesia. Literally 'place-setting.'
2 This Valens' version of the Trutine of Hermes. [RH]
3 The Greek term, spora, actually means seeding or begetting rather than
conceiving, consistent with the usual male perspective of the Greeks. Júpiter i.e., claim no£ to be the father. [RH]
5 not to be confused with boundaries. [RH]
60 For an illustration, let it be the 8th ycar of Nero, the 11 th hour of
the 6th to the 7th of Mesori. The Moon is in Libra, the Hõroskopos in
Câncer. Then, since the Moon is found on the pivot point, the birth was
brought about after 280 days and 12 hours. Then, it will be necessary
to subtract these from the 365 days of the year. The remainder will be
84 days, 12 hours. If, then, we should add 84 to the 6th of Mesori, it
will be the 27th of Phaophi at the 23rd hour, which will be the
conception day. And again, if we take the time from the 27th of
Phaophi to the 6th of Mesori, there will be 280 days.
We can also illustrate with many strategies, which all involve one
straight path. Assuming the birth ahead of time, we come to know how
after how many days it was brought about. If the Moon should be found
in the hemisphere above the earth, by reckoning the degrees from the
setting degree up to the lunar degree, and taking 2xh days for each
thirty degrees, you add these to the least term (258 days), and you will
find the conception at so many days. By going back with these from the
natal day to the day in which they leave off, you will find the
conception day.
If you want an altemative, by reckoning from the lunar degree up
to the Hõroskopos and taking 2lh days for each thirty degrees, subtract
these from the middle term (273 days), and the conception will be so
many days back.
And similarly, if the Moon should be found in the hemisphere
under the earth, by reckoning from the degree marking the birth hour
up to the lunar degree and casting out 2 lh days for each 30 degrees and
summing them up, you will add them to the middle term, to the 273
days. And the conception will be so many days back. And by taking the
interval from the lunar degree up to the setting degree, and knowing
how many days are assembled from the quantity of the days cast out at
2lh days per thirty degrees, you will subtract them from 289, and the
conception will be just so many days back.
Let there be yet another illustration, in order that those who have
intercourse may understand this matter more clearly, Let it be the 4th
year of Kadrian, the lst noctumal hour of the 13th to the 14th of
Mechir; the Moon is at the 7th degree of Scorpio, the Hõroskopos at the
7th degree of Virgo. Since the Moon is found in the hemisphere under
the earth, I take the degrees from the degree marking the birth hour up
to the lunar degree. They come to 60. I reckon at 2xh days for each 30
degrees. They come to 5 days. And I add these to the middle term, the 61 273 days. They come to 278 days. The conception was so many days
back. I go back, then, with the 278 days from the natal day. The
conception day leaves off at the 1 lth of Pachon.
Or again, í subtract the 5 days of the interval from 92. 87 remain
(for, since the middle term is 273, the remainder of these from 365 is
92). If, then, we should add the 87 days to the 14th of Mechir, and we
should depart from the natal day, it will leave off at the 1 lth of Pachon.
But if you should reckon from the lunar degree up to the setting degree
(which is 7th degree of Pisces), 120 are assembled. By taking these at
2 xh days per thirty degrees, 10 days result. If I should subtract these
from the greatest term (289 days), the remainder will be 279 days. Run
these back from the natal day; after calculating, you will fínd the Moon
upon the Hõroskopos at birth.
And if the Moon should be found in the hemisphere above the
earth, by taking the degree interval from it up to the degree which
marks the birth hour, and casting out at 2lh days per thirty degrees, and
knowing how many days are assembled, if you should want to add to
the 120 days and to depart from the natal day in accordance with the
succession of days, you will fínd the conception day at the place where
it leaves off. And again, by reckoning from the same day found up to
the natal day in accordance with the succession of days, you will fínd
the number of the days.
And if the Moon should be found in the hemisphere under the
earth, you will reckon from the degree that marks the birth hour up to
the lunar degree; and knowing the degrees of the interval, you will
portion out Th days per thirty degrees. Subtract these from the 120
days, and add the remaining days to the natal day, and depart from it
in the sequence of days; and there will be the conception day. Having
added this to the term (273 days), run back from the natal day.
For another illustration, let it be the 17th year of Trajan, the 2nd of
Mesori, the 11 ‘Ath noctumal hour; the Sun at the 5th degree of Leo, the
Moon at the 27th degree of Libra, the Hõroskopos at the 24th degree of
Capricom. Then, since the Moon is found in the hemisphere above the
earth, I take the interval from its degree up to the degree marking the
birth hour; they come to 90 days approximateiy. I take 2lh days from
each thirty degrees, and Th days result. I add these to the 92 days; they
come to 99‘/2 days. I depart with these from the natal day in accordance
with the succession of days. It leaves off at the 6th degree of Athyr.
Again, from the 6th degree of Athyr up to the degree of the birth in the 62 succession of days, 266 days are assembled. The conception was so
many degrees back.
But if I do not want to add the 7 days to the 92, I subtraet them
from 273; and the remainder will be 266. By going back with these
from the natal day, and by calculating, I found the Moon to be in the
Hõroskopos, Capricorn.
The Moon at birth will indicate the hour of conception in respect
of the zõion1 in which it took place, while the hõroskopos of conception
will have as many degrees as the Moon has at birth.
Others calculate by doubling the degrees of the Moon of the natal
hour, and again, by taking XU of the degrees of the Sun at birth,
believing the antecedent triangle of each to be the Hõroskopos of the
conception. Those who investigate the selection in front of us and the
remaining ones with this procedure will not go astray. 22. Concernmg Children Born in the Seventh-Month
We will also append, in a different manner, whether someone spent the
full time in the womb or less, and in what manner there come to be
destructions and abortions and painful deliveries and deaths, or offspring
born in the seventh month. This will be found as follows.
I always take the year prior to birth and the natal month and day,
and I calculate the Moon. And knowing in what zõidion it is found, I
read the signs. And similarly also after the birth—namely, for two
years—also taking the month and the day, I again calculate the Moon.
And finding it, I compare it with the first year. And if I fmd the Moon
in a triangle with the natal Moon in both years, I declare that the
conception is complete.2 And if the Moons in the two years should be
found in a square with the natal Moon, the offspring will spend the time
of the least conception, that is, 258 days. And if the Moon of the first
year should be found to be in a triangle, while the second is in a square,
the offspring have a duration in the womb within 269 days. And if the
Moon of the first year is in a square, while that of the second in a
triangle, the offspring will have the same time within 269 days. And if 1 Note that the stem word is used instead of zõidion. See Translatofs Preface.
2 Runs the full term. 63 the Moon of the first year is in square, while that of the second is in
aversion, the offspring will have its conception eight months earlier and
will be dead. And similarly, if the Moon of the first year should be
found in a triangle, while that of the second in aversion, the offspring
will not be reared. And if the Moons in the two times should be found
to be unconnected in any way to the Moon of the birth, the offspring
will be dead in the womb or will be cut up in the womb and will put
the mother in jeopardy. And if the Moons of the two years should be
found to be harmonious due to a diametrical opposition, the offspring
will be seven months old. And if the Moon of the first year should be
diametrically opposed, while that of the second should be in a triangle
with either the Hõroskopos or it, the offspring will be seven months old.
It will also be the same if it should be in a square. And if the Moon of
the first year should be in a square, while that of the second should be
diametrically opposed, the offspring will be seven months old. The Sun
will also produce similar things when it diametrically opposes the
zõidion in which the conjunction took place. The ancients outlined this
area mysteriously and obscurely, but we more clearly.
End of Book I Appendix I
Translation Conventions
The following words consistently translate the indicated Greek word.
ruler, rulership: oikodespotês, oikodespoteia
ruler: kurios
master, mastership: despotês, despoteia
-lord: -kratõr (as in horatokratõr, lord of boundaries)
-steward: -dektõr (as in oikodektõr, steward of the house)
zõidion: zõidion (See General Notes in Paulus Alexandrinus and Vettius Valens Book I.)
place: topos (See General Note in Paulus Alexandrinus.)
sect: hairesis
boundaries: horta
face: prosõpon
trigon: trigõnon, i.e, triplicity.
house: oikos
dwelling: oikotêr
exaltation: hupsõma
depression: tapeinõma
figure: schêma
to figure: schêmatizõ
to configure: suschêmatizõ
to come to the attention of (by application, etc): hupodedeiktai
superiority: kathuperterêsis
to contemplate: theõreõ
to regard: epitheõreõ
to scrutinize: katopteuõ
to testify or bear witness to: epimarturõ
All four of the above words appear to refer to aspect relationships. The
words theoreõ and katopteuõ refer to aspects in either direction, i.e.,
into preceding and succeeding signs. However, katopteuõ seems to have
a negative overtone suggesting that it refers particularly to difficult 65 aspects, The word epitheoreo is limited to aspects into the succeeding
signs but, like theoreõ, can refer to both difficult and good aspects.
hõroskopos: hõroskopos
to mark the birth-hour: horoskõpeõ
to divide the hour: Hõronomeõ See the General Note to the Anony- mous.
midheaven: mesouranema
to culminate: mesoumneõ
pivot: kentron
pre-ascension: proanophora
post-ascension: epanophora
decline: apoklima
rise: anatellõ
arise: epitellõ
set: duneõ
hide: kruptõ
co-rise: paranatellõ See General Note in the Anonymous.
ascend, (of nodes): anabibazõ
descend, (of nodes): katabibazõ
contact: kollêsis
application: sunaphê
separation: apporoia
circumambulation: peripatos
degree: moira (See General Notes in Paulus Alexandrinus and Vettius
Valens Book I.)
monomoiria: monomoiria (See the sections in Paulus Alexandrinus on
monomoiria.) crisis: klimaklêr
to take delight in, rejoice: chairõ
to have dealings with: chrêmatizõ
Such dealings evidently include any or all of the adminislrative or 66 governing functions (i.e., dispositions) performed by the planetary ruler.
master, lord or steward. Possibly the planefs role as spear bearer, and
any configuration it enters into.
illustration: hupodeigma
A somewhat irregular word for 'example', that has just a trace of 'sign'
or 'token.'
image: eikõn
Another irregular word for example that may have the sense of a
visualization.
occupancy: Epochê See the General Note in the Anonymous.
under bond: sundesmos.
Literally, that which ties together. Evidently a more general kind of
connection than conjunction (sunodos). See Paulus, Chapter 35.
commencement: katarchê
beginning: archê 67 - • • • r I