Dorotheus,
Orpheus, Anubio,
& Pseudo-Valens Teachings on
Transits
Translated
by Robert Schmidt
Edited
by Robert Hand Project Hindsight
Greek Track
Volume IX Dorotheus, Orpheus,
ANÜBIO, & PSEUDOValens Teachings on Transits
Translated by
Robert Schmidt
Edited by
Robert Hand Project Hindsight
Greek Track
Volume IX PROJECT HINDSIGHT is entirely funded
by the astrological community through
subscriptions and donations. ©Copyright 1995 by
Robert Schmidt Published by The Golden Hind Press, Plutão .O. Box 002,
Berkeley Springs, WV 25411. Table of Contents
Introduction by Robert Hand .i
The Hierarchy of Predictive Techniques .i
The Malefic Sun and Seemingly Strange Transit
Interpretations .vi
Translator's Preface to Teachings on Transits
by Robert Schmidt. x
The importance of Transits in Greek Astrology . x
The Context for the Employment of Transits. xii
The Principie behind the Delineations.xiii
General Note.xiv
Teachings on Transits. 1
1. Dorotheus . 1
2. Orpheus. 7
3. Passage Attributed to Anubio.12 Júpiter . Material Attributed to Valens.14
Appendix I — A Comparative Listing of the Ingress Delineations
.24
Appendix Gêmeos — Pseudo-Valens' Ingresses upon the Nativity.52
Glossary .56 Introduction
by Robert Hand
This introduction and Robert Schmidfs preface have a certain amount
of overlap which is unavoidable. I ask the reader's indulgence and wish
to suggest that our attacking the same problems from a different angle
may assist the reader in getting a clearer idea of the importance of
certain issues.
In this introduction I wish to take up first the hierarchy of
predictive techniques, i.e., the proper relationship of directions,
planetary periods and chronocrators, and transits or ingresses to each
other. Then I would like to point out to the reader some of the stranger
aspects of the delineations themselves. The Hierarchy of Predictive Techniques
Modem astrology has a rather wide variety of predictive techniques, but
there is no clear set of principies that structures their relationship to
each other. For example, when does one use secondary directions, as
opposed to transits, tertiary directions, or other types of direction? When
does one use primary directions and for what purposes? The usual
answer seems to be to use whatever is perceived to “work.” Of course
there are some practical considerations. One cannot use the transits of
inner planets and the Moon for long-range prediction for the simple
reason that they happen too often and have too short a period of
influence. Similarly one cannot do very much with the secondary
directions of the outer planets because they hardly move at all in the
course of a normal lifetime. This gives transits and secondary directions
an obvious complementarity, but not a real distinction as to their
purpose and usefulness. When should one use forward or normal
directions as opposed to backward or converse directions? It is not
enough, as many astrologers do, to proliferate predictive techniques until
everything is explained (after the fact, of course), with every event,
every characteristic period in a native’s life explained using a different
astrological technique. Not only is such an approach chaotic from an
esthetic point of view, but lacking method, it cannot describe events
before the fact even in general terms. Also the proliferation of methods
means that many apparent “hits” by these techniques are really quite i accidental and have no basis in astrological principie. They certainly do
not “prove” that astrology “works.”
Also our use of transits as exemplifíed in modern works (including
a certain work by your editor) does not have any way of determining
which transits are important and which are not. We certainly know that
some transits have enormous impact upon natives and others do not. We
also know that those transits which are strong and those which are weak
varies from native to native.
The ancient methods address both of these problems directly, and
while we do not know at this time how effective they would be in
modern practice, at least the ancients believed they could make such
distinctions. The following passages from the ancient and Medieval
writers illustrate the basic outlines of the system. The first is from
Ptolemy, and includes a passage which Schmidt also refers to in his
preface. We have printed it in both places so as to save the reader the
necessity of turning pages back and forth.
“We will take the general chronocrators in the said fashion [i.e., by
primary directions described in the previous paragraph of the
Tetrabibíos]. And we will take the annual chronocrators by
extending the number of years since the nativity from each of the
aphetic places, extending them in the direction of the succeeding
zõidia at one year per zõidion, and adopting the ruler of the zõidion
where it fmishes off. We will also do the same thing for the
months, again extending the number of months since the birth
month from the places that take the lordship of the year, though at
28 days per zõidion. Similarly too for the days; for we will extend
the days since the birthday from the places of the months at two
and a third days per zõidion.
“We must also heed the ingresses made to the places of the
times, since they make no ordinary contribution to the effects of the
life-periods, and especially ingresses of Kronos relative to the
general places of the times, to those of Zeus relative to the places
of the years, to those of the Sun and Ares and Aphrodite and
Hermes relative to the places of the months, and to the transits of
the moon relative to the places of the days. This is because the
general chronocrators are more authoritative for the accomplishment
of the effect, while the particular chronocrators cooperate or thwart
in accordance with the congeniality or uncongeniality of their ii natures; but the ingresses finish off the intensification or reiaxation
of the event. For the aphetic place and the lord of the general times
together with the lord of the bounds signify the general property of
the quality and the prolongation of the time. .
The second passage is based on the Ptolemy passage cited above above
but is from Stephen the Philosopheris summary of the Dorotheus on
transits.
“One need not examine the ingresses of all of the stars, but rather
only those of the time-lords or those of the encounterer [promittor]
and bound-lord. For Ptolemy says [that] should the same stars have
authority o ver the times and the ingresses, the effect is unmixed.
And we have found, following our constant trials, that the ingresses
themselves contribute greatly to the effects of the time-periods, not
only the ingresses of those stars that come onto the places that are
authoritative at the fixing [the nativity], but also those ingresses that
are found upon the place of the times by circumambulations
[primary directions]. We have found that Ptolemy is surety for this
in the 2nd, 3rd, and 4th book of the Apotelesmatics.
And these techniques did not disappear in Medieval and Renaissance
astrology. Schoener in the Opusculum Astrologicum, Book IV, Canon
XII says the following:
“First consider the five Hylegs, the Ascendant, the Sun, the Moon,
Part of Fortune and the Médium Coeli, and the cpnjunction or
opposition which immediately preceded the nativity. Then consider
the directions of these to malefics and benefics. These immediately
induce an effect which lasts until the [significators] appíy to
another place. And this is called the universal period, which you
must observe in connection with the directing of the individual
significators mentioned above.
“Under this universal period is placed another particular period,
which exists because the direction of the significator is now in one
bound of a sign and then in another. This is called a division, and
this period adds to or subtracts from the influence of the First
period, accordingly as it agrees or disagrees with the signification
of the first period. m “The third period is the profection of the significator, which is
changed every single year from one sign to another. And in this
period another disposition is impressed, good or bad which,
considered in its own way, either strong or weak, increases or
diminishes the significations of the years of the preceding periods.
“Also, there is the transit of the planets through the requisite
places, which is also to be considered in its own way. For in [the
case of] Saturn we consider the transit of his body according to the
places of the universal periods. In [the case of] Júpiter the transit
of his body is considered according the places of the year, that is,
according to the sign of the annual profection. However, [in the
cases of] Mars, the Sun, Venus and Mercury, their transits are
considered according the places of the monthly profections, and [in
the case of the] Moon according to the diumal profections.
“The goodness or evil of an accident is considered according
to the disposition of the planets governing such periods. If they are
good and in harmony with a matter, they signify good according to
the nature of that planet. If evil and inharmonious, they signify evil
according to the nature of that evil planet. And the accident will
appear more strongly when that planet which is the dispositor of
that matter in the radix of the nativity rules the disposition of the
period.
“For example, in the disposition of universal period Saturn was
lord conceming the disposition of the condition of the body, for it
was the dispositor of the body due to its location in the Ascendant.
Therefore at this time the accident will appear more strongly than
if it were only the ruler of the universal period. Also at this time,
that which is signified will appear more strongly when several
[indications] are in harmony, or directions come together in
harmony at one time, whether to the good or to the bad.”
Here is a summary of what the three passages tell us. The overall
planetary period rulers are found from the primary directions of the
major significators. The same list appears in Ptolemy and Schoener
except that Schoener adds the place of the prenatal New or Full Moon
as a point to be directed. Each of the significators governs an area of
life, and as it is directed, it makes aspects to the planets. These are the
promittors. When a promittor is contacted by a significator, its natal
house and the house it rules become most important, and it becomes the
major chronocrator with regard to whatever the significator signifies.
iv The transits of Saturn-Kronos to these places are the most important
along with the transits of and to the rulers of the periods and their
houses.
Then immediately below these major periods and their rulers in
significance according to Schoener and Dorotheus are the rulers of the
bounds through which each significator moves as it is directed. These
are to be taken into consideration along with, but subordinate to, the
major rulers and periods indicated by the directions of the significators
to the promittors. Ptolemy omits this layer of rulers and periods.
Then we have the annual profections of each of the significators at
the rate of one sign per year. The rulers of the signs as the profection
moves through them gives rise to another layer of chronocrators, the
periods being simply the year. The transits of Jupiter-Zeus are especially
significaht with regard to the houses ruled and occupied by the signrulers of the profected positions. It is also probable that the houses
themselves were reckoned not from the natal first house, but from the
profected first house. Thus a native's natal first house is truly a first
house for predictive purposes only every twelve years when the annual
profections retum to their natal positions.
Below this are two more layers of profections with their rulers. The
monthly profections go completely around the chart in one year in such
a way that they precisely coincide with the annual profection at the
birthday. Since the annual profection moves at the rate of one sign per
year, the monthly profections have to go at the rate of thirteen signs per
year in order to keep up. If one divides the length of the year by
thirteen, one gets a little over 28 days. This is the basis of the 28 day
per sign figure for monthly profections given by Ptolemy. This provides
a change of chronocratorship every 28 days. Houses are also to be
counted from the profected first house in the monthly profections in the
same manner as the annual profections, and the movements of the f as ter
planets, Mars-Ares, the Sun, Venus-Aphrodite, and Mercury-Hermes,
are to be reckoned according to these houses. Again the houses
occupied by and ruled by the chronocrators are the most significant.
Finally we have the so-called diumal profections. But these are not
really diumal, but move at the rate of approximately 2lh days per sign,
a rate needed to make the “diumal” profections meet up with the
monthly profections at the beginning of every 28 day period. For these
profections the transits of the Moon are most important, and the signrulers of the diumal profections are the lowest levei and final v chronocrators.
In Schmidt’s preface he introduces a possible theory based on the
Greek words used for all of this which suggests that the transits or
ingresses add intensity to the background qualities signified by the
layers of chronocrators. And the passages quoted above tell us that the
only important transits are ones that involve either the places ruled or
occupied by the chronocrators of the time. Although it is not stated in
a manner completely ffee of ambiguity, it does seem evident that the
general period rulers, the ones indicated by directions to promittors, are
the most important, possibly followed by the division lords, followed by
the several profection lords.
Here is our hierarchy of various predictive techniques, and here is
our theory of why some transits appear essentially dumb. I believe that
a serious mistake may ha ve been made when later Renaissance and 19th
Century astrologers stopped regarding primary directions as a source of
period rulerships and began using them solely as a method of timing
events. A further mistake may have been made when all astrologers
with a few interesting exceptions1 ceased using profections. These two
changes destroyed our understanding of the proper use and function of
planetary periods rulers or chronocrators. Then the situation was
compounded by the creation of many new techniques brought into a
framework that had been shattered by the failure to comprehend exactly
what the ancients were trying to do. However, I must conclude this
section by saying that the elegance of these ancient techniques must also
prove to be workable and effective. But even if the details of the
ancient method do not hold up in practice, any new method must be
something like it in structure. 1 Among these exceptions was someone who appears to have been at first
sight an arch-modemist, Alfred Witte, the founder of the Hamburg School. He
was not actually so much of a modemist. Rather it was his intention to
rationalize and codify the tradition according to general principies which made
sense to him. Given the State of knowledge of traditional astrology at the time
he did his work, it is not surprising that he went so far afield from it. This may
not have been his intention. vi The Malefic Sun and Seemingly Strange Transit Interpretations
In Western astrology the Sun is not commonly regarded as a malefic in
the same way that Mars and Saturn are. The Sun is only considered a
malefic in traditional Western astrology when it is conjunct a planet.
This is the State known as combustion. But in Hindu astrology the Sun
is considered a malefic in much the same way as Mars and Saturn..
This has always been cited as one of the distinguishing marks between
the two traditions. However, it is becoming clear that this distinction is
not quite as clear as many have thought.
First of all I refer the reader to the translation of Julius Firmicus
Matemus by Jean Rhys Bram. In this work aspects and other
placements involving the Sun are consistently described as if the Sun
were a malefic. Of course this could be a curious exception to the rule
except that now we have these new texts on ingresses involving the
Sun. And here again we see malefic manifestations associated with the
Sun. Here are a couple of examples. First ffom Orpheus:
“Zeus onto the Sun gives sluggishness to actions and ruins the
home, or causes illness or the destruction of possessions, and a vain
and contrary end to one's labors.”
This is Jupiter-Zeus to the Sun, a transit usually regarded as benevolent
by later astrologers. And here is the same transit from Pseudo-Valens:
“Having come upon the Sun, it [Zeus] effects serious illnesses,
dangers from the water and shipwrecks, and deflux of rheum; and
it introduces expeditions that are not conducive and distresses in
matters pertaining to life.”
From Orpheus again:
“The Sun onto itself or the Moon causes sickness and want of
money, and it causes movement ffom one’s own places; often, too,
it brings wealth out of oppression. The Sun onto Aphrodite is a
cause of unsettlement, troubles the domestic felicity of women, but
it provides profits in regard to gifts. The Sun onto Hermes causes
the mind to wander and hurts the soul, is one to deceive and causes
frivolous spending. The Sun onto the pivots removes one to other vii places and causes sickness and is grievous for the body. .
And from Pseudo-Valens again:
“When the Sun comes to be in the Hõroskopos, it causes weakness,
upheaval, dangers, movements; but it strengthens those who had
already been sick before it came to this very place. . .
.. When it [the Sun] arrives at its own place, it causes cares
and afflictions of the soul, disturbances, empty fears, and
movements [originating in] domestic matters. Having come to
Kronos, it works dangers from water and ailments or defluxes of
rheum; and it is effective in relation to actions. Arriving at Zeus,
it is unpleasant in relation to the multitude and those who are
superior; and friends. . . and censures and calumnies; and for
succeeding at the activities of ones life.”
And there are other instances. [See Appendix I where the ingresses are
all listed in order.] All of these examples and many of the others given
in the texts do not seem to follow anything like the modern Western
idea of the Sun's nature.
In his preface Robert Schmidt discusses principies that could result
in symbolism that is quite different from what we would expect by the
conventional blending of the symbolism of the kind employed in
modem transit interpretations. If he is correct, then we should not
expect transits to have effects such as we would get merely by deriving
the interpretation from a mixing of the symbolism. I refer the reader to
his preface.
However, there are other indications that we are also dealing with
a time when Western astrology and Hindu astrologer were much closer.
I think that these delineations, those of Firmicus', and the ancient idea
of combustion itself, which modem astroiogers tend not to take very
seriously, are all survivals from a time in which the Sun was regarded
as being much more of a malefic than it is now. And see Appendix Gêmeos for a discussion of what may be another connection between ancient
Western and Hindu astrology.
Otherwise it is true that many of the other interpretations given for
ingresses in these writings are quite similar in content to modern ones.
For example, modem astroiogers consider Jupiter-Saturn contacts in
either direction to have a strong effect upon one's occupation both good viii and bad. Our ancient writers say much the same thing. But then there
are also combinations such as the ones Schmidt refers to in his preface,
Mars-Ares to Satum-Kronos, which is delineated favorably, and VenusAphrodite to Jupiter-Zeus which is very unfavorable. (Jupiter-Zeus to
Venus-Aphrodite is quite favorable, by the way.) Here again we need
to keep Schmidt's hypotheses in mind as we study these ancient
delineations. Many of them are not what we would expect. Translator's Preface to Teachings on Transits
by Robert Schmidt
The four treatises contained in this booklet have preserved the Greek
doctrine of ingresses (or transits) for us. They are the only delineative
texts conceming these that survive from Hellenistic astrology. The first
three occur one after the other in a collection attributed to Stephen the
Philosopher (7th Century C.E.). They are all prose paraphrases of verse
texts that no longer survive. The fourth treatise is assigned to Valens in
the manuscript, although Pingree doubts the attribution (as do I). The
doctrine, however, is quite consistent with the other treatises and has the
feeling of old material.
This material raises a number of questions: 1) How important were
ingresses in Greek astrology? 2) In what context were they used? 3)
What is the principie behind the delineations? In this preface we will
only give a few thoughts related to each of these questions. The importance of Transits in Greek Astrology
Judging from the scarcity of treatments and invocations of transits in
Hellenistic astrology, we might be inclined to regard them as being of
minor importance. However, the following brief passage from a genuine
work by Valens should serve to counteract that opinion. It also indicates
that transits should only be taken into account under certain circumstances. The (Anthology) of Valens, Book VI, 5:
“Ingresses of the stars, then, will be judged to be sufficiently
intense1 whenever they should ingress upon the places (or should
be squares or diameters to them) while they are masters of the
times.2 In like manner, each of the stars also has sufficient tension
to preserve or destroy when making its ingress upon those planets
that have obtained the sovereignty or leadership at the hour allotted
the ingress. And no one planet can prevent the threat of [this 1 eutonos. Literally, ‘well-stretched,’ ‘taut’.
2 When they are one of the chronocraiors, or time-lords. x ingressing planei] for certain ones1 or its good Service to them,
even if it should tíappen to be much stronger for family, life, or
reputation, but it yields to the laws of the life-period until the
[ingressing planet] lays aside the sovereignty. When it completes
[its] time, handing over the leadership to another, it reverts to being
without tension2 in relation to good or bad. . .
In a passage near the very end of the Tetrabiblos, Ptolemy concurs in
the issue of their importance. He says,
“We must also heed the ingresses made to the places of the times,
since they make no ordinary contribution to the effects of the
life-periods,3 and especially ingresses of Kronos relative to the
general places of the times, to those of Zeus relative to the places
of the years, to those of the Sun and Ares and Aphrodite and
Hermes relative to the places of the months, and to the transits4 of
the moon relative to the places of the days. This is because the
general chronocrators are more authoritative for the accomplishment
of the effect, while the particular chronocrators cooperate or thwart
in accordance with the congeniality or uncongeniality of their
natures; but the ingresses finish off the intensification or relaxation5
of the event. For the aphetic place and the lord of the general times
together with the lord of the bounds signify the general property of
the quality and the prolongation6 of the time. .
And Ptolemy, too, singles out the case where the same planet is both a
time-lord and making an ingress.
“And if the same stars have authority over both the times and the
ingresses, the nature of the effect becomes excessive and unmixed,
whether it should incline to the good or to the foul.” 1 Planets or persons?
2 atonos. That is, slack.
3 kairos. This is not seasons of the year, but the seasons or special periods of one's life. Júpiter parodos.
5 epitasis kai anesis.
6 paratasis. xi Corning from Valens on the one hand, and Ptolemy on the other, we
may infer that this was the prevailing opinion amongst the Greek
astrologers as to the importance of these ingresses. The Context for the Employment of Transits
Modern transit doctrine concentrates on the transits of one planet to the
degree occupied by another planet (or other significant point in the natal
chart). This may be only a small subset of the field occupied by the
Greek concept of an ingress. First of all, the Greek concept clearly
includes transits to the zõidion occupied by the planet, which is
regarded as the place occupied by the planet in the whole-sign System
of houses. And as a matter of fact, we have no unequivocal references
to degree transits in any of the material here translated, although it is
possible that they are being considered as a special case in all of the
delineations given. We do not yet know whether this most basic kind
of ingress was applied to transits of mundane houses, which are the
places occupied by the planets in a different sense.
Secondly, the Greek ingress concept may include transits to natal
places that are more abstractly characterized, such as places defined by
profection. Here, too, it seems that the emphasis is more on the zõidion
ruled (but not necessarily occupied) by planets that assume importance
from time to time by becoming chronocrators.
Thirdly, we know that ingresses were used in the solar retum since
the Dorotheus piece is unequivocally in such a context, and the one
attributed to Valens may have such a connection. Paulus mentions
ingress in the context of circumambulations (directions). As a matter of
fact, nowhere in the few scattered references to ingresses in the rest of
Valens and Hephaistio do we fmd transits mentioned in isolation from
directions, chronocratorship, profections, or solar returns. Thus, on the
precedent of Greek usage alone, it is hard to justify the employment of
transits as an autonomous concept.
I have analyzed the four texts grammatically to see whether one of
these scenarios is favored by the subtleties of language. I can only
conclude that the Greek writers were almost perverse in their language
in including all these possibilities of transit. Thus we should not
probably not generalize the ingress concept from any of the special
cases mentioned above (including simple transits to the natal chart), but xii we should rather try to find some broader conceptualization that
includes them all. Which brings us to the next question. The Principie behind the Delineations
I venture to say that anyone familiar with modern transit interpretations,
who reads these delineations will find some that sound completely
wrong to him. Let me just mention the Ares transit to Kronos, which is
regarded as very favorable by all the writers; and the Aphrodite transit
to Zeus, which is regarded as quite unpleasant by them. Clearly, if these
transits are not just the result of a very different astrological experience,
and have any constructive side to them, they cannot derive from the
same “mixing of energies” that we find in aspects. In fact, the Greeks
regarded Ares-Kronos aspects in a nativity more or less as we would in
modem astrology, as quite terrible; and the Aphrodite-Zeus aspects are
quite predictably favorable. So we cannot just rely on such a principie,
In this context, it is interesting to look at what Abu Mashar says
about the principie behind transits in solar retums in his work on solar
revolutions. I translate from Pingree's edition of the medieval Greek
translation of this work, Book V, section 1.
“The ingresses of the stars in the revolution of the years to their
own fixed places1 and to those of the other siars has certam
ineffable significations for good and bad things. It is necessary,
then, to examine their places. For, in the revolution of the year, the
star often comes down to its own fixed degree, and often to the
zõidion yet not the degree. At the times in the revolution of the
year when it should come down to the degree in which it was at
the fixing or to the bound in which it was, its signification will be
perfect. And if the star in the revolution of the time is in a certain
zõidion, then retrogrades back to its place at the fixing, it also has
some signification in this way. But when it should come down to
the place of another star, one must investigate in a threefold
manner. 1 epi tous kata pêxin autõn topous. As we will see in the upcoming Dorotheus excerpt, this expression seems to refer to the fixing of the positions
of the stars in the nativity.
Xlil First it is necessary to mix the signification of both the planets
when they look upon each other, then [second] to investigate the
natures of these. For, just as it is benefic whenever it should come
to the place of a benefic, also a benefic at the place of a malefic
makes the activity of the malefic beneficent. And if a malefic
should come down to the place of a benefic, it ruins the activity of
the benefic, while if a malefic comes down to the place of a
malefic, it intensifies the malevolence of it. Third, it is necessary
to examine the zõidion in which the star was at the fixing, and
make this be like a Hõroskopos and make its effects in accordance
with it.”
This mixing of energies has a very modem ring about it, but I don't see
how the pair of delineations referred to above can in anyway be derived
frorn such a simplistic principie. So how does Abu Mashar delineate
these two transits? Consistently enough with his own principie, but not
fully in accord with the tradition, he has moderated the positive quality
of the Ares-Kronos transit, and reversed the negative character of the
Aphrodite-Zeus transit.
“Ares making an ingress to Kronos in the time of the return causes
the addition of siblings and friends and makes stays away frorn
home that are nearby. If Ares has a relationship to the year, it
indicates idleness and sluggishness; if Kronos should have a
relationship to the year, it will sicken [one] frorn a blow.
“If [Aphrodite] occupies the place of Zeus, it indicates much
trust and joumeys away frorn home to priestly places. And it gives
wealth through inheritance, and going abroad to friends, and
acquiring new friends who are rulers, and it will cause sickness and
health.”
It seems to me that we have lost the thread somewhere. In the interest
of trying to find it, I will offer a short linguistic analysis of the word
epembasis to see what might be of use. General Note
Epembasis is an abstract noun formed frorn the verb epembainõ. The xiv root of this word is the common Greek verb bainõ, which simply means
‘to walk’. It has the prepositional compound epern prefixed to it, which
is constructed from the proposition epi, which means ‘on’, ‘upon’, ‘up
to’, etc., along with the proposition en, which means ‘in\ or ‘among’.
The resulting verb, then, means ‘to step onto, into, up onto, over’, etc.
In a figurative context, it very often has the hostile overtones ‘to
trample on’, ‘to attack’, ‘to approach’. However, when synonyms are
used in the upcoming transit texts, more neutral words are chosen
(sometimes quite deliberately, it seems to me) to counteract any
suggestion of hostility. And sometimes parodos, the Greek semantic
equivalent to our English word ‘transit’, is used in conjunction with
epembasis to make this meaning more specific.
There is a second figurative usage that is in a temporal context: ‘to
embark’ or ‘to commence’, the first deriving ífom the idea of stepping
on board a boat or craft In preparation for a voyage, the second from
the notion of stepping onto a period of one's life. Now, we know that
the word epembasis in occasionally used as a synonym for paradosis
kai paralêpsis, the moment of handing over and taking up which
signifies the entry into a new period of chronocratorship, and we know
that the ingress is enhanced (or even made possible) when the
ingressing planet is also a chronocrator. Thus, there is a close and
intrinsic bond between these two concepts.
Ptolemy has himself pointed to their root connection at the end of
his first quotation abo ve. The chronocrator indicates the specific
character and the prolongation, paratasis, of a certain period of time,
while the ingress produces an intensification or relaxation epitasis kai
anesis in the effect. Paratasis and epitasis both come from the same
root verb teinõ, which simply means ‘to stretch’. The first has the
meaning ‘to stretch along’, as in the expression “the wall stretches along
the road,” the second ‘to stretch to a certain poinf as in the expression
“the line is stretched tight.” Again, the first is related to extension, the
second to intension.
Now, remember that the stretching of a string to different tensions
(the second sense) will produce the discrete tones of the musical scale
that we call “steps” (gradus in Latin, from the root of the verb for
‘ingress’ ingredior), while the Greek word we translate as ‘ingress’,
concretely means ‘to step onto’. Thus, in Ptolemy’s mind at least, there
must be a connection between the concept of ingress, epembasis, and
the concept of intensification, epitasis, lying in the idea that a planetary xv ingress takes lhe fundamental “pitch” of the chronocrator a few steps
higher or lower—that is, it brings about a certain intensification of the
event that produces a well-defmed “step” or “tone” characteristic of the
planet receiving the ingress. In this way the very same word that
describes a physical occurrence in the heavens expresses the nature of
its effect on an event of this world. This doubleness of meaning seems
to be characteristic of astrological language in general.
Valens too appears to be using this string-stretching metaphor in the
first quotation of this preface, although he is applying it somewhat
differently. We can also produce different tones on a string of given
tension by varying the sounding lengths. However, without an
underlying tension to the string no tones can be produced. Valens likens
the effect of the chronocrator to the tenseness of the string, and argues
that no “tones” could be produced by ingress if the string itself were
slack. Incidentally, these two different metaphors seem to play on the
two different senses of the Greek word eutoneõ, which can mean either
‘to tense sufficiently’, or ‘to tense properly’.
It is perhaps also worth mentioning that the Persians associated the
different strings on the seven-stringed lyre with the seven planets. Thus,
we might liken the effect of an Ares ingress onto Kronos when Ares is
a chronocrator to the production of the tone of Kronos on the string of
Ares.
We can also see here the intimate connection between the concept
of ingress and the concept of chronocratorship. In Ptolemy's version of
the metaphor, the ingress is the tension of the string while the
chronocratorship is its length—and we all know the interrelationships
between the length, tension, and pitch of a string.
This metaphor of the tensing and relaxing of a string is of crucial
importance in Greek philosophy. The Greeks regularly used it to
characterize the manner in which the intensity of a quality can change
while the quality remains the same. For example, redness can vary in
intensity or “degree” (a word that means ‘step’, by the way) while
remaining red. Such change was conceptualized as resulting from a
varying tension of opposites “pulling” against one another. This
metaphor accounts for both the continuity of different intensities and the
existence of discrete “steps” or “degrees” of the quality, corresponding
to the different tones produced by the tensing of a string.
This was regarded as the fundamental way of understanding the
changing of all qualities, such as color, weight, and even speed. But xvi what is quite surprising in the present discussion is that the astrologers
are employing these concepts in a temporal context, as characteristics
of an event. This may seem puzzling to us at first because our own
understanding of events is highly conditioned by the paradigmatic
example of a collision of two bodies, which happens more or less
instantaneously. What could be meant by the intensification and
relaxation of an event? Evidently, the event is understood to take place
over a period of time. This takes us back to the fundamental meaning
of the usual Greek word for ‘event’, apotelesma.
In our earlier translations, we have usually understood this word as
the effect caused or brought about by the planet—what the planet has
done, as it were. But here also we may have been too influenced by
concepts from modem physics. We have thought too much in terms of
the efficient cause, the cause that pushes and pulls and acts more or less
instantaneously. Something that happens over a period of time is
conceptualized as a series of events each of which happens in a
moment. But the Greek word apotelesma refers just as much to the
activity of accomplishing a goal or an end (telos) as that goal or end
itself, much as our English word accomplishment does. And the activity
of accomplishment may very well be something that takes place through
time. In the Ptolemy passage above, that accomplishment is understood
as having a certain characteristic quality of prolongation—not just a
length of time; for example, it may happen in fits and starts, or
frenetically, or steadily and rhythmically. And the quality of prolonga¬
tion itself can have different intensities while remaining the same
quality, going from the extremes of keenness of activity to
sluggishness.1 Then, in the context of chronocratorship and ingresses,
the entire prolongation and intensity of accomplishment has a planetary
character—not just the achieved result itself, while it must be possible
to correlate each type of prolongation and intensification to a certain
planet.
If this analysis in correct, then it means that we cannot get to the
heart of the Greek ingress delineations by a simple mixing of planetary
energies, as if they were just a kind of aspect; for one of the planets
represents the prolongation while the other represents the intensification.
Nor can we merely consider the effects brought about by planetary
energies; we must in addition learn to delineate the character of these 1 Cf. Paulus, chapter 26.
XVII planetary energies while they are at work, and thus understand the
authentic temporal dimensíon to astrological causation.
In view of the above discussion, we have chosen to translate
epembasis by the latinate word ‘ingress’, (from ingredior), which is the
perfect cognate, and has had throughout history largely the same range
of meanings. It is also more general (and therefore less misleading) than
our English word ‘transit’. Teachings on Transits
1. Dorotheus
Introduction
The reader may wish to compare the following prose paraphrase of the
Dorotheus text in Greek with Pingree’s translation of the same material
from the Arabic version (Book IV, 1, p. 258 ff.), which is evidently
transiated from a non-extant Persian translation of the Greek. In my
opinion, the Greek text reads as if it is much closer to the original since
the delineations are usually sharper and more specific. If this is so, it
could give us some idea of just how far the Arabic translation of
Dorotheus has drifted from the original.
Regarding the ambiguity mentioned above in the translator's preface
as to the nature of the transits, the upcoming Dorotheus passage does
not regularly use verbal forms of the word epembainõ as the next two
treatises do, but uses the basic verb erchomai which means ‘to come’
or ‘to go’. It usually employs them with a preposition ‘onto’, eis or ‘to’
epi. [CCAG 2; 195-198]
Translation
It is also necessary to pay attention to the ingresses1 of the stars. For
when Kronos is coming to Zeus, it hinders whatever Zeus provides and
quells every activity and impulse; Kronos onto Zeus also [causes] fines
and damages what is being completed.2 Kronos to the place3 of Ares
makes those who are discouraged and not eager. Kronos onto the Sun
brings dangers and judgments from the magistracy, and especially when
it is stationing. Kronos to Aphrodite harms the goods of Aphrodite.
Kronos to Hermes harms the things which are being offered by Hermes.
Kronos onto the Moon is likewise bad, for it brings censures and 1 epembasis. See the translatofs general note to this volume.
2 Following the variant reading here,
3 It is not clear whether the degree or the zõidion is indicated by this
expression.
1 reproaches, and it is worse when Kronos is stationing. Kronos
diametrical to the Moon is bad and especially when it is under the
beams, for it brings disease; and it is also so when Ares sees the Moon.1
Zeus to Kronos provides an alleviation of a preexistent distress;
such [natives] manage the work of another and they will spend freely.
Zeus to Ares provides both activity and favor, and will increase
everything, and bring enemies into subjugation. Zeus onto the square of
Ares or of Kronos likewise indicates good things; so also Aphrodite; for
when the good planets are coming onto the square of destructive
planets, they provide pleasure and health and honor.
When Ares has come to the Sun or Zeus, it is base, more so in the
day, and even more when it is setting; and if it is also stationing, it is
dangerous as well; for as far as the ancients are concemed, it signifies
corporeal dangers and judgments. Ares also does the same when it has
come onto the diameter of the Sun and Zeus; however, when the Sun
or Zeus step on Ares by transit,2 or they are diametrical, it also does the
same thing. And among these ingresses, if the malefic was by fixation
trine to a zõidion in which the harm due to the ingress took place, the
affliction is lighter, since the diametrical figure is loftier than all the
others, and the square figure is more powerful than the bodily figures.3
And of the square figures, examine the one on the right more, which is
also said to be in superior position; for when the malefícs step onto
these and have a superior position o ver the stars, they cause harm more
powerfully, while the benefics in the squares give wealth, good cheer
and honor. Júpiter The good planets in the triangular places work even more
good, while the malefícs work in a more blunted fashion. 1 It is not clear whether Ares is in transit or in the natal chart. [RH]
2 empembainõn tõi Arei kata parodon. Without a preposition, the verb
epembainõ with a dative could suggest that the one planet attacks or tramples
the other. The phrase “by transit” may have been added to counteract this
suggestion and point to the idea of an ingress. The word parodos is the
semantic equivalent of our word ‘transit’.
3 This probably means conjunction, in which the planets involved do not
“see” one another at a distance, but are rather bodily co-present in the same
zõidion. Júpiter The reader should note that squares and diameters (oppositions) are not
represented as intrinsically malefic. It depends completeiy upon the planets
involved. However, in the next sentence it is clear that trines do blunt the
effects of malefícs. [RH] 2 When Kronos and Ares are in ingresses in relation to the Sun, the
Moon, and Zeus, both bodily and in those by square and diameter, and
similarly also the recurrences1 and anti-recurrences2 (that is, whenever
they should come to their own fixed places, or to the diameters), they
become more harmful, if they were in fact poorly situated from the
beginning. However, Ares is lighter after 45 years have elapsed, and
Kronos is more gentle after 30 years have elapsed.3 Similarly also, the
destmctive stars are distressing when they step onto the Júpiter pivots or onto
the lights. However, if they were in good and congenial places at the
beginning, it makes the affliction by transit blunter, just as the good
stars which are disposed in base places at the beginning become weaker
by transit. Júpiter One must know that the occupancies of the stars by fixation keep
still, but the occupancies of the stars by ingress are always figured in
relation to the initial occupancies, such as triangles, squares, diameters.5
The chapter about saying when the significations happen is
necessary. Every star is base when diametrical to itself by transit, and
it is bad when coming upon its fixed place,6 and more if Ares should
see the Sun by transit in a diurnal nativity, but for noctumal nativities
if Kronos should see the Moon.7 And stations in such ingresses by
transit are also worse. When Ares trines the Sun or Zeus not by transit 1 A recurrence apokatastasis is a planet making an ingress upon its own
natal position.
2 antapokatastasis.
3 The 30 years suggests the Iesser period of Kronos, but the 45 years
associated with Ares remains a mystery. [RH] Júpiter This is ancient doctrine that reappears all through the history of
astrological literature, but is all too often neglected in modem astrology. The
natal condition of a planet strongly affects how it operates in transits. [RH]
5 A reasonable paraphrase of this sentence would say that the positions of
the planets in the chart are a constant and must be throughly understood,
whereas the transitting planets must be understood in relation to their positions
in the chart and the aspects they make to the positions in the chart. [RH]
6 It is easy to see from modem doctrine why a planet opposing its own
place would be difficult, but here the author seems to be saying that planets
retuming to their own places is not vey good either. [RH]
7 Ares is noctumal and so works badly in diurnal nativities, likewise
Kronos in noctumal nativities. [RH] 3 but by fixation, later in the ingresses to them it will not be bad at all.1
When Ares has come to Kronos, it makes those who are resolute
and ready and effective, and it separates with enmities. Ares to Zeus
and Aphrodite and Hermes tums what they provide for the worse. Ares
to the Sun, if in addition it should also be found under the beams by
transit, subjugates by fire, or gives a loss by fire. If someone has a
father, it destroys either him or the older man having the role of father,
and it is bad for great men and diffícult in every work, especially in
public matters. Ares onto the Moon provides bodily illness or financial
harm and charitable Service with toil; and they will only watch over
enemies, that is, they will have power over enemies. Ares to Aphrodite
causes irregularities for the sake of erotic matters. Ares to Hermes
makes slaves, suspicions, want of form,2 and causes enmities between
friends, the flight of slaves or thefts; also, the reduction of one's
livelihood or doings, for it pre-eminently diminishes the livelihood and
undoes one's doings.
Aphrodite onto Kronos is fine for doing and for everything, just as
Ares coming to Kronos is good. Aphrodite onto Zeus disturbs and
troubles through women, and plays one's hopes false, and nothing of
what one intends comes to pass. Aphrodite to the Sun provides
continuous association with women and censure on account of women;
and it also disturbs the soul and causes unsettlement in domestic
matters. Aphrodite to Hermes augments what Hermes makes or
provides. Aphrodite onto the Moon is cheerful and effectual, yet it
brings suffering or censure on account of a woman.
Hermes to Zeus is best for everything, and especially for those who
wish to come into power. Hermes onto Ares makes those who are
daring, inventive, and excited about things. Hermes onto Aphrodite is
stimulating in regard to erotic matters, and it is also beneficiai for one's
actions and for the rest of his works. Hermes to the Moon provides
health and strengthening, and gives power to the body parts.
The luminaries in the places of benefics are beneficiai, but in the
places of malefics, harmful. A malefic coming onto the pivots is quite 1 There is an interesting suggestion here that favorable aspects in the
nativity fortify the planets against bad transits. [Additional by RH] This is in
accord with modern understanding of transits as weli.
2 aschémosunê. This includes physical disfigurement, awkwardness,
indecomm, etc. Júpiter harmful; for the Hõroskopos obtains the whole of life as its lot; the
Midheaven, doings and children1 and reputation; the Descendant,
marriage and old age; the subterraneous pivot, the hidden mold2 of the
body,3 and foundations and creation and markets.
When the Moon has come onto its own place, it makes thoughts
rise to the surface. Júpiter And if it should chance to be in a tropical zõidion,
[the native] changes from one occupation5 to another. And if it should
happen to be with Aphrodite and Zeus by fixation,6 it provides much
good cheer. When the Moon has come onto the Sun in Leo, it is fine
for unions. When the Moon has come to Ares, it signifies unforeseen
dangers if no benefic should look at it. Similarly also, when the Moon
has come onto the Sun while Ares looks on. The Sun onto Ares or Ares
onto the Sun, and the Sun or Ares onto the Moon while the Sun is copresent, signify bloodshed or harm from fire. The Moon onto Aphrodite
while no malefics look on is a good time; and if Ares is co-present with
the Moon or with Aphrodite, it signifies intercourse with women. The
Moon to Kronos is cold, and when it is in its own trigon, [the native]
is benefited by those who are ruling: The Moon to Hermes when he is
beneficent indicates good things, but difficult things when he is
maleficent. The Moon to the Hõroskopos elevates the soul.7 Having
come to the Midheaven, it makes for promotions and reputation; and
you may know the kind of reputation from the star testifying to the
Moon. The Moon to the Descendant is fine for plots against enemies.
Similarly also, having come to the subterraneous pivot, it is fine for
slaves and the plots of enemies and matters clandestine and hidden, and
for the association of such. 1 ln ancient íore the the Midheaven is associated with children just as
much as the fifth house. [RH]
2 This is ‘mold’ as in ‘to cast’ not ‘fungus’. [RH]
3 tous kruphious tupous íou sõmatos. I am not sure what this is referring
to. Júpiter meteõrismon dianoias parechei. This is also a way of referring to mental
discomposure, although it is not clear that this negative connotation is intended
here. Rut compare this statement to the note on Moon ingresses in the treatise
attributed to Valens, page 23, note 1.
5 praxis.
6 That is, in the original chart.
7 Compare this statement to the note to the first sentence of this paragraph. 5 One need not examine the ingresses of all of the stars, but rather
oniy those of the time-lords1 or those of the encounterer2 and boundlord.3 For Ptolemy says [that] should the same stars have authority o ver
the times and the ingresses, the effect is unmixed. Júpiter And we5 have found,
following our constant trials, that the ingresses themselves contribute
greatly to the effects of the time-periods,6 not only the ingresses of
those stars that come onto the places that are authoritative at the fixing,7
but also those ingresses that are found upon the place of the times8 by
circumambulations. Mercúrio We have found that Ptolemy is surety for this in
the 2nd, 3rd, and 4th book of the Apotelesmatics.10 1 Chronocrators or rulers of planetary periods. [RH]
2 hupantêtõr. This is the body that encounters the apheta in the course of
a direction. The Latinate term for such an encounter was occourse. [Additional
by RH] This is what later astrology knew as a promittor or promissor. There is
material in Rhetorius [translated in Neugebauer and Van Hoesen, Greek
Horoscopes, charts number L 401, and L488] which illustrates the direction of
the apheta past other planets or their aspect positions. These are also planetary
period rulers of a kind as well, and as such their transits are especially
important.
3 Movement of the apheta or other significators through the bounds are
called divisions in later Latin literature. Unfortunately it is not entirely clear
whether that term is not also used for other kinds of temporal periods. See
Schoener, Opusculum Astrologicum, p. 92. “And under this universal period is
placed another particular period, which exists because the direction of the
signifícator is now in one bound of a sign and then in another, which is called
a division. . .” [RH] Júpiter Cf. toward the end of Book IV, chapter 10 of the Tetrabiblos.
5 This would appear to be the epitomist speaking.
6 kairos. I think this is season in the more general sense of the periods of
time subject to a planetary time-lord—-the seasons of one's life.
7 For example, the places that are important at the nativity,
8 The places (zõidia) found by profection from the Hõroskopos, whose
lords become the annua! and monthly time-lords. Mercúrio Recall that circumambulation means direction. [RH]
10 The actual name of what we caíl the Tetrabiblos. [RH] 6 2. Orpheus
Introduction
The following passage is attributed to the legendary Greek poet
Orpheus, who is also credited with a work on Jupiter's twelve year
cycle, and one on earthquakes (also sometimes attributed to Hermes).
It was originally in verse, and the text editor has flagged the passages
that retain the original meter or poetic vocabulary and seem to be direct
quotations. These are put in quotation marks here.
As far as the issue of transits is concemed, this piece begins with
the prepositionless expression “Kronos having stepped on Zeus” Kronos
epembasas Dii, and then immediately changes to the verbless formulation “Kronos into (or onto) Ares” Kronos eis Ares, which is
retained without change throughout the piece, which is presumably
intended to mean the same thing.
The entry “Hermes onto the Sun” may possibly be making a
distinction between the zõidion and the actual degree of the transited
body. However, this passage can also be interpreted without that
distinction being implied. [CCAG 2; 198-202]
Translation
And this is Dorotheus. Also, Orpheus has the following to say about
ingresses. When Kronos has stepped on Zeus, it causes missteps1 in
one's mode of living and is a destroyer of possessions; it causes the
marriage of a woman to disperse, and it is harmful for every deed.
Kronos onto Ares is a cause of constraints, of bondage, of disease, and
it causes pain on account of children, signifies the ruination of
possessions; it makes some [natives] fugitives from the fatherland or
hirelings and poor. Kronos onto the Sun brings actions to completion
with a blow; and one must also avoid sailing and joumeys because of
fear of robbers. Kronos onto Aphrodite makes reíatives and friends
hostile, brings deception, disturbance and penalties, and he who has a 1 sphalma. 1 wonder if this is playing on the idea of stepping present in the
Greek word epembasis. 1 wife will be dishonored by her lust. Kronos onto Hermes signifies
contention and judgments, and penalties, disturbances, and unjust deaths
of relatives; and one must avoid the market and communicating one's
actions to others; for it causes the weaving of wiles and deceptions.
Kronos onto the Moon causes rebellions against the land or occasional
sickness or the destruction and loss of possessions. Kronos onto itself
signifies removais and wanderings in foreign lands, and disturbances
and enclosure and bondage, the death of parents, the disappearance of
home and money. Kronos onto the Hõroskopos removes one to another
land, and also causes deceptions, penalties, dangers. Kronos onto the
Midheaven leads one to a foreign country and gives reputation, but it
causes distress on account of debt. Kronos onto the Descendant and the
subterraneous pivot drives one away ffom his family and home and
possessions, or leads him away to another country, or causes captivity,
or kills slaves.
Zeus onto Kronos makes what one does for a living irregular, at
times giving the acquisition of lands and foundations and dwellings, or
managing anothefs living, other times causing them to be deprived of
their former work and activities, bringing expenditures and losses and
major illness to others. Zeus onto itself redeems as many oppressions
of these sorts as it should find, and “provides profit, brings fame both
empty and noisy,” if it should not happen to be in its own house at the
fixation. Zeus onto the Sun gives sluggishness to actions and ruins the
home, or causes illness or the destruction of possessions, and a vain and
contrary end to one's labors.1 Zeus onto Ares is good; for if it should
find someone under affliction and constraint and oppression, it releases
him from all; and if it should find one to be living in joy, it gives
greater good cheer, and makes him ffiends with greater persons, and
provides acquisitions, and distresses his enemies, and bestows profits
and reputation. Zeus onto Aphrodite signifies unexpected wealth and
shows one to be stronger than his enemies, and marriage for the unwed;
and it provides children for those in wedlock and puts an end to
actions.2 Zeus onto Hermes makes one friends of great men, whose 1 This delineation seems rather strange in view of other teachings on the subject. Hówever, it would be consistent with a tradition that regards the Sun
as a malefic. This tradition is reflected in the Julius Firmicus Matemus and is
also the dominant tradition in índia. [RH]
2 praxis. Actions of all sorts in general. [RH] 8 property he is also entrusted to manage, and they enlarge their own
home; and it provides gifts from friends; and these [natives] enjoy
themselves; but they cause pain to their enemies; and if they have a just
case, they conquer, though the beneficence of Hermes is required. Zeus
onto the Moon causes child-bearing for those in wedlock, and provides
good fortune and profit to him who is tried, except that “after having
harmed him a little eariier,” it provides victory and success later; and
occasionally it adoms some [natives] with gold chains. Zeus onto the
Hõroskopos and the Descendant is for both good and bad, at times bringing on judgments and struggles and penalties and enmities, but at
other times it redeems these and gives profits and acquisition, still other
times it signifies ffiendship, and again intimacy and nuptials of
shameful notoriety, and disturbance due to these; and often, too, it
makes for murder of kinfolk and provides an inheritance from these,
and leads the wanderer back to his fatherland. And onto the Midheaven
and the subterraneous pivot, it causes the deaths of the parents and
diseases and blows and oppressions; and it provides marriage for others;
it removes others from the fatherland; and the end of their activities will
be toilsome.
Ares onto Kronos preserves whatever Kronos is accustomed to
harm; for it makes sickness and pain cease, and gives wealth and
victory and good cheer. Ares onto Zeus is ruinous and harsh, and there
will be frivolous expenditures of money; also, it is harmful in lawsuits
and rouses up enemies; and the foetus is destroyed in pregnant women,
or it dies immediately upon birth; it signifies harm and insolence and
causes removais from one’s place; and it renders actions futile and
causes pain on account of children or a woman, and it gives enmities
from rulers and bitter anger from the district. Ares onto itself removes
one from his place or causes illness or makes bloody with iron or sets
one on fire, “yet it bestows action and good fame in one's life.” Ares
onto the Sun diminishes possessions if it should also be bad for actions,
causes pain and harms the mind, and pains some [natives] on account
of hidden deeds; and if it should also make a station, it calls forth more
difficult tumults and battles for things, and gives paternal hatred over
ancient matters, and it brings betrayals and enmities from friends. Ares
onto Aphrodite is apprehensive of a fight and bitter hatred from a
woman; for they cause long separation and adulterous suspicions;
sometimes also it strips everything away from men. Ares onto Hermes
causes penalties and lawsuits and more falsity, treachery, shame over Mercúrio hidden deeds, frauds, perjury, betrayals, flights, and bondage. Ares onto
the Moon, if the zõidion is feminine, is about the fear of abiding illness,
and especially of the eyes; and if the zõidion is masculine, it disturbs
what one does for a living. And if it should also make a station, still
more; for it deprives of children and causes death for the siblings,
introduces dangers and tumult, and it leads away to another's country or
changes one's dwelling, and gives some work for another work, if the
zõidion should not happen to be Kronos' and should not prevent these things. In the pivots it is difficult for everything, bringing instabilities
and disturbances in the family and pain in life, and in the Descendant
especially through a woman; for it also causes premature childbirth.
And onto the Midheaven, they1 dishonor the marriage bed of those in
wedlock, or it also provides sickness in this pivot.
‘The Sun onto Kronos brings memories of ancient matters” and
brings wealth and joy to one's life. The Sun onto Zeus “bestows great
renown” and good fame and good cheer, and causes manifestation of
what is invisible. The Sun onto Ares lays one down with sickness or
removes him from his fatherland, destroys his money and causes losses
against one's will and makes him hostile to his friends, and “stirs up
trouble with his relatives,” unless Zeus should also be there by ingress.
The Sun onto itself or the Moon causes sickness and want of money,
and it causes movement ífom one's own places;2 often, too, it brings
wealth out of oppression. The Sun onto Aphrodite is a cause of
unsettlement, troubles the domestic felicity of women, but it provides
profits in regard to gifts. The Sun onto Hermes causes the mind to
wander and hurts the soul, is one to deceive and causes frivolous
spending. The Sun onto the pivots removes one to other places and
causes sickness and is grievous for the body, but in the Midheaven “it
bestows action and great renown.”
Aphrodite onto Kronos indicates further acquisition and reputation
in the district and help from secret sources, but it is maleficent for
marriage; for it unsettles or otherwise “exchanged3 the marriage bed for
the embrace of a lesser light.” Aphrodite onto Zeus causes ripening,
dangers, sickness, enmities, judgments on account of family and
contention within and with the family; and if the woman of this 1 The natives?
2 More malefic Sun delineations. [RH]
3 The change of tense is due to the quotation. RH] 10 [ingress] is pregnant, she will miscarry.1 Aphrodite onto Ares causes
stabilities and expenditures from women and removal from a place and
disturbances in regard to one's life. Aphrodite onto the Sun unsettles the
mind and leads it astray, and causes actions and recreations and
censures, and it makes for stability in the family. Aphrodite onto itself
is indifferent and toilsome, in one way good, in another base. Aphrodite
onto Hermes indicates inheritances and it increases possessions and
brings an end to actions; and it provides victory in lawsuits. Aphrodite
onto the Moon indicates “good cheer and it delights in action,” gives
effortless profit and joins in marriage, and causes child-bearing when it
is in a feminine zõidion. Aphrodite onto the HÕroskopos and Midheaven
is cheerful and joyous and effectual and màkes acquisition and profits
greater; and if it is stationing, still more. Aphrodite onto the Descendant
makes stability from a woman. Aphrodite onto the subterraneous pivot
causes hidden ailments and pains from spouses; and if it should also be
stationing, it causes ailments of the parts and fundament, and it brings
destruction of decorum and tears for the family.
Hermes onto Kronos increases actions and acquisition, and harms
enemies. Hermes onto Zeus is good for everything, giving profit from
commerce and making friends, causing display, and providing reputation
and strength at home. Hermes onto Ares indicates those who are
effective, and it sets [the natives] free from fears and puts an end to
toil. Hermes onto the Sun is inconstant in regard to crafts and action
until it should come to the degrees of the Sun,2 after which it is
efficacious,3 Hermes onto Aphrodite presents wealth and another's
money and an inheritance from those who have died, “and ffiendliness
in the household from the spouses of in-laws,” and makes friends of
children and slaves. Hermes onto the Moon disturbs the stability of
families and the district, and stirs up falsity in the market place and
contention and calumny, as long as a benefic should not be looking on; 1 It is difficult to explain the logic of why this should be such a difficult
transit. See Schmidfs introduetion for a discussion of this issue.[RH]
2 This might indicate that the ingress is defined with regard to the zõidion
occupied by the planet at the nativity instead of the degree occupied by the
planet. However, the passage may just as easily mean that the ingress has this
effect until Hermes becomes conjunct the true Sun.
3 Notice here the difference between the applying and separating effects
of the transit. [RH] 11 for often when a benefic regards it in this way, it turns the crafts of this
[ingress] to profit. Hermes onto the Hõroskopos and the Midheaven
makes for friendship and tnist from the great as a result of discourses
and honor in the district [in which he li ves]; onto the Descendant, it
causes pain and enmities, concerns, judgments, piteous plights from
loans; onto the subterraneous pivot it is worse, causing dangers and
harm from hidden and ancient [sources].
The Moon onto Kronos and Ares makes idle laziness and losses
and dangers from heights or blood, the one from Kronos, the other from
Ares; but with the other stars it is fine. The Moon onto the Sun or onto
itself “bestows a spirit at once sluggish and lying fallow,” and in the
pivots it sometimes makes a change of abode.
It is requisite to examine not only these ingresses, but also those by
triangle and square and diameter and hexagon. For, the sort of thing it
signifies in the nativity by fixation, such also it signifies in the ingress.1
For example, “Phainõn2 trining Zeus is truly very lucky,” and “Phainõn
trine with Puroeis3 is greatly best.” 3. Passage Attributed to Anubio
Introduction
Anubio probably lived in the 2nd Century C.E. The following
paraphrase is attributed to him solely on the basis of the metrical form
that may be seen to preserved in some of the lines of this prose
paraphrase, because Anubio is the only astrological writer known to
have used this form. There is another surviving text dealing with aspects
that is explicitly attributed to Anubio; we will translate this at a later
date.
This short excerpt begins with the expression “Kronos having
stepped onto Zeus” Kronos epembas eis ton Dia and then continues
with the verbless expression “Zeus onto Kronos” (Zeus onto Kronos)
just like the Orpheus passage. At one point the verb is used in a 1 Again we have the idea that the planet in transit operates according to the way it is situated in the natal chart. [RH]
2 Name for Kronos, the “shining one."
3 Name for Ares, the “fiery one.” 12 prepositionless expression, and the epitomist seems called upon to
prevent a misinterpretation. [CCAG 2; 202-203]
Translation
When Kronos has stepped onto Zeus, it causes disease or unforeseen
toil, or poverty, or disturbances and murders in reference to relatives.
Zeus onto Kronos is good. Kronos onto Ares makes enmities and
imprudence and inaction and non-beneficial blows.1 Ares onto Kronos
provides victories and action and sweetest life. Kronos onto Aphrodite
“oft times made an end of youths of an unyoked [age]”,2 or brings
rivalry with regard to spouses, or harm in relation to home, or treachery,
pain, sickness, death, poisons, or trouble with the gullet or joints, or it
harms the children first. Aphrodite onto Kronos makes peace between
women and their bed-mates without treachery and trouble, and causes
pain and censure and temperance in one's garments, and it yokes the
unmarried. Kronos onto Hermes signifies either sickness or death, but
gives the greatest of goods in full bodily strength at the time that it
steps on3 Kronos (that is, Hermes onto Kronos). Kronos having stepped
onto the Hõroskopos, and when it is diametrical to it, sometimes puts
youths to death; and it does this whenever Aphrodite is also the timelord of the hour, for the indications of the effects are steady at the time
when the ingressing planets are also the time-lords.
Zeus having stepped onto Ares is good, but Ares onto Zeus is base;
however. Ares stepping on Zeus does not always produce base things,
but whenever it is diametrical to the Sun. Zeus onto Aphrodite rejoices
much, for it gives benefit of toil and profit. Aphrodite onto Zeus does
not rejoice so much, for it causes ungraciousness and groundless 1 kopos. ‘Blows’ as in striking an object.
2 This could mean that this transit either destroys youths about to come of
age, or else it puts an end to their unmarried State.
3 henika tõi Kronõi epibêi. The epitomist seems to think that this
expression, which is the same prepositionless usage found at the beginning of
the Orpheus passage, needs a gloss, perhaps because without the preposition it
could suggest something like attacking or trampling Kronos. 13 expectations.1 Zeus onto Hermes and Hermes onto Zeus are quite
estimable and profitable, and especially for the ones pursuing hermetic
works;2 and should they be diametrical to each other, they are no less
beneficiai.
Ares onto Aphrodite causes wifely jealousies and disturbances, and
harms pregnancies by introducing premature childbirth, Similarly also,
Aphrodite onto Ares is harmful, except less so, for “when yielding,
strong-limbed Ares delights in Kupris.3 Ares onto Hermes harm and
sickness brings, in all is evil, and brings not victory to him who is
tried.”
Hermes onto Ares brings victory to him who is tried and there will
not be sickness or harm, but it is bad in commerce. Aphrodite onto
Hermes is fine for every action. Hermes onto Aphrodite is stronger in
regard to livelihood and art, marriage, and friendship.
“And for other doings, useful. Abo ve all others this pro vides for
commerce profitable for men, and is in judgments very timely; and to
him who is tried it gives the longed-for victory.” Júpiter . Material Attributed to Valens
Introduction
Although the manuscript attributes this writing to Valens, Pingree
considered it spurious and did not include it in his criticai edition of
Valens. Be that as it may, it is a thoughtfully written piece. Again the
problem is what kind of ingress is being discussed. This time there is
enough context to determine that the ingresses are to zõidion rather than
degrees. However, we have a new problem; the text seems to be written
in the context of solar retums. There are two issues discussed under
each planet, ingresses according to “chart” and according to “nativity.”
There seem to be two basic possibilities. Júpiter Either the first discussion
under each planet deals with transits ío the natal chart, and the second Compare this to the Zeus-Aphrodite transits in the previous article
attributed to Orpheus. [RH]
2 All works pertaining to Hermes, not hermetic in the alchemical sense.
3 Name of Aphrodite. Júpiter See my introduction to Appendix Gêmeos for a third possibiity. [RH]
1 14 discussion deals with transiting aspects made to the profected ascendant
(perhaps referred to simply as the “nativity”); or else the first part deals
with transits to the solar retum chart (which may be why the diminutive
themation is used), and the second part transiting aspects to the natal
Ascendant. There are arguments for and against either one of these
interpretations.
A note attached (adnectitur) to the manuscript makes the matter
even more mystifying. It purports to be a defmition of ‘ingress’ and
reads “They say that there is an ingress whenever by holding down the
disposition of the nativity for a retum nativity, we come down to a
eertain zõidion by drawing out the times ffom the Hõroskopos; for it is
called the ingress of the year at that zõidionThe same defmition
occurs in scholium #92 from Paulus. The Most Sagacious Valens On the ingresses of the Stars in Respect
of the Chart and the Nativity1
[CCAG 8, 1; 163-171]
Conceming Kronos
When Kronos has come onto the Hõroskopos, it has good beginnings,
for it causes unions and benefits and acquisitions; but when it has gone
by the last [parts], it holds distress and harm, and it brings dangers to
these places. If it has come onto the Midheaven, it causes similar
[effects] as the Hõroskopos, but it is more gentle in those matters and
in those harms, and slower for the actions of one's life; and in the one
case it is sluggish, in the other it forcefully busies about. In the
Descendant it is full of disturbance and danger, for it causes loss and
tears and listlessness of soul and penalties through the [actions] of
others and dangers ffom water and alienations of one's own family.
When it comes to be in the subterraneous zõidion, it produces the same
things, except that in this place it also produces dangerous illnesses and
fears.
If it should come to the [place]2 of Zeus, it causes chicaneries, 1 kata thematiou kai genethliou.
2 The word understood here and in analogous places in this paragraph may be ‘star\ instead of ‘place’.
15 penalties or the resolution of old business, and the death of kinfolk1 and
another's expenditures and shamefacedness and impostures towards
superiors. When it has come to the [place] of Ares, it causes dangers to
the body, alienations, loss of one's own, rapine and faint-heartedness,
enmities toward one's own and toward anothefs, lawsuits and imposts.
If Kronos should come to itself, it moves one to leave home
unprofitably, and often encloses one; and it is motivation for actions,
and by bringing in struggles, it at times also encloses one in prisons and
bondage, at other times it achieves the deaths of parents and friends
(though also expenditure), the unsettlement of one's own and another's,2
the betrayal of friends, listlessness, disturbances; and penalties, disturbances, and distresses through women, ingratitude from several,
demonstrations, and the persistent flux of rheum. When it arrives at [the
placei of Hermes, it brings about effects by means of letters and deeds
and speech and society and slaves and the loss and pain of children; it
also effects3 harm by a few, Júpiter perjury, listlessness, loss. If it should
arrive at the Sun, it causes untimely changes of place, and the
introduction of dangers, and penalties, and unemployment, and whatever
should be accomplished, it effects with force; and it causes deflux of
rheum and eruption of eczema and weakness of the eyes. When it has
come to the Moon, it taxes one with sickness, and it is also wont to cast
one down from a height and take one up5 to a height; for after doing
good at the nativity, this star takes everything away again.
And in reference to a nativity,6 if it should come to the square of
the nativity, it causes actions and the administration of old business to
be more easily resolvable, but it also causes profitless stays away from
home. If it should come onto the triangle, it administers to whatever
matters are related to action and loss without fastidious avoidance, while
it signifies that whatever is related to friends is without harm. If it
should come onto the diameter of the nativity, it will have in everything 1 anagkaios. That is, those related by the necessary tie of blood.
2 It seems that somewhere about here we have shifted to the delineation of the transit of Aphrodite without mentioning it.
3 teleõ. Júpiter persons?
5 eis hupsos anairein. In view of the next clause, this probably has the secondary meaning “destroys at a height.”
6 genethhon. 16 losses, intrigues of kinsmen, listlessness of mind, ingratitude,
separations from one's own, faithlessness of friends, enmities of
kinsmen, and dangerous sicknesses. If it should come onto the zõidion
where the year should be spent,1 it produces narrow straits and harm
and rapine, and the separation from women, and imposture.
Conceming Zeus When Zeus has come onto the Hõroskopos, it causes honors and
reputation, high visibility in the throng, acquisitions, rectification of
business, and children for those who are married; and a casting off of
blood-relatives.2 Having come to the Midheaven, it causes estimable
reversals, the rectification of business, changes for the better, and
accesses3 and unions. Having come to the setting zõidion, Júpiter it brings
pain, unsettlement of one's life and body, the casting off of children and
kin; and from the time that it passes by the zõidion of concealment, this
changes for the better, Having come to the subterraneous pivot, it is
significant at the initiation of secret affairs that are not achievable, or
it signifies the tardy attention to matters that are already finished; and
it signifies a soul sad and full of care.
When it has come to Kronos, it effects an abruptness in one's acts
that is not conducive and ruinous; for, no matter what is administered
at this time, the effects will be punitive and expensive. Having come
upon its own place, it will be not conducive for everything, except that
it causes calumnies and censures on account of worthless matters.
Having come to Ares, the time will be incomparable5 for beneficence
and reputation, but it will accomplish every action and administrative
function with a lack of fervor. Having come to Aphrodite, it causes the 1 That is, the Hõroskopos profected at one zõidion per year of life. Since
no reference was made at the beginning of the paragraph to an ingress onto the
“nativity” (as is the case in the upcoming delineations of the other planets), this
entry may serve that purpose. Therefore, it is possible that the “nativity’ that
is being transited by aspect here and throughout this paragraph is the profected
Ascendant. However, compare the final paragraph under Aphrodite.
2 apobolên de tõn apo tou haimatos.
3 prosodos. Júpiter Unequivocally an ingress onto a zõidion, not a degree!
5 asugkritos. This can also mean ‘antagonistic’.
17 fit meeting of the unmarried and marriage and intercourse, and children
for the married, but gossip and pain; and it makes the actions of life
more reasonable and beneficiai. Having come upon Hermes, it effects
work and beneficiai moves from a place, receipts and gifts, and
profitable partnerships; for it makes these activities more reasonable in
such places. Having come upon the Sun, it effects serious illnesses,
dangers from the water and shipwrecks, and deflux of rheum; and it
introduces expeditions that are not conducive and distresses in matters
pertaining to life.
And in reference to a nativity, having come to the nativity, it causes
stuggishness of the body and a like sluggishness in activities, except for
the marriage of the unmarried; and it is also accustomed to give
children and make additions to life. Having come to the trigon of the
nativity, it disturbs the beginnings, but achieves success and action at
the last. Having come onto the square, it has as effect the benefits of
multifaceted business;1 for it is adept at management and fine for unions
and reputation. Having come to the diameter, it gives benefits of
multifaceted business, and acquisition, and children to the married; and
a few it distresses; and it chilis and disturbs what one does, and
introduces fears.
Concerning Ares When the star of Ares has come to the Hõroskopos, it effects the
renewal of things by means of outside blood,2 for it throws life into a
tumult and especially through women; and it also causes fears and
diseases for women and is bad for everything. Having come .onto the
Midheaven, it is helpful for cuts of the extremities and dangers to the
eyes;3 and it brings sudden dangers from a fali or from conflagrations,
crowds, or quadrupeds; but it is not without use for management and
advantage. Having come to the Descendant, it is exceedingly odious, for
it also disturbs one's household and mode of living, and causes fights
and plots and fears of the soul, and especially through women; and it
causes crises for those who are married and for women. Having come
to the subterraneous pivot, it causes unseasonable expeditions and 1 telei õpheleias poluproeõpõn pragmatõn.
2 apo exhaimatos. 3 In the sense of helping to heal said cuts and dangers. [RH] profitless movements and gossip in account of secret affairs, and it is
bad for everything relating to life and acts and unions.
When it has come to the place of Kronos, it is exceedingly
propitious and cheerful and useful for all areas of life. Having come to
Zeus, it is exceedingly disturbing and punitive and makes for cowardice.
When it simply comes to itself, it is worse and unpleasant and
stimulating; and mark that the star is exceedingly bad for everything at
that time. Having come to Aphrodite, it connects one with female
persons and causes profitless unsettlements through acts of females, and
moral condemnations, and is turbulent in everything through the
pretenses of women. Having come to Hermes, it causes treacheries and
hidden acts and fears and thefts, unsettlement of friends, trickeries and
frauds and perjuries of those in the household. Having come to the Sun,
it causes dangerous illness, removais and moves from one's home,
unexpected journeys away ffom home, fears of a crowd and fire and
blood and of malefactors, and the danger of falis from quadrupeds.
In reference to a nativity, if it should come to the nativity, mark the
star in everything; for it is füll of sickness and penalties, and
ineffective, and highly dangerous; and there is a struggle in regard to
trifling suspicions, and agony of soul, and unsettlements of kinsmen. If
it should come onto the triangle of the nativity, it is turbulent on
account of worthless matters, and especially because of women; for it
causes upheavals and untimely cares. If it should come onto the square
of the nativity, it causes arguments with female persons and harm to
one's manner of life, and bodily cravings. If it should come upon the
diameter of the nativity, the affliction and burden is less.
Conceming the Sun When the Sun comes to be in the Hõroskopos, it causes weakness,
upheaval, dangers, movements; but it strengthens those who had already
been sick before it carne to this very place. . .l
. . . When it arrives at its own place, it causes cares and afflicíions
of the soul, disturbances, empty fears, and movements [originating in]
domestic matters.2 Having come to Kronos, it works dangers from water
and ailments or defluxes of rheum; and it is effective in relation to 1 Long lacuna in the text.
2 kinêseis ex oiksiõn. 19 actions. Arriving at Zeus, it is unpleasant in relation to the multitude
and those who are superior; and friends. . .' and censures and
calumnies; and for succeeding at the activities of one’s life. Having
come to Ares, it causes unpleasantness and robberies, the approach of
the multitude, dangers, conflagrations, bloodshed, manipulation,
asphyxiations from crises,1 2 and especially sudden dangers, falis ffom
heights or quadrupeds, and fears of the household, and changes away
from home, and unforeseen dangers from swearing an oath. When it
comes to be at Aphrodite, it causes dangers to those who have wives
from wives, and unpleasantness and censures due to women; and it is
effective for conducting one's life. Arriving at Hermes, it makes what
is hidden manifest, and causes a disturbance of those in the household
and fights with household managers; and it is not bad for actions, but
nevertheless they will be done sluggishly.
In reference to a nativity, if it should come to the nativity, it makes
upheaval and care, and it furthermore works for weaknesses; and it
administers the uncompleted actions of life early rather than at the
close.3 If it should come onto the square of the nativity, [it works]
trouble for the optical organs and dangers from water; but it is not bad
for actions, but makes them easier. If it should come onto a triangle, it
will be a propitious and easier time. Having come onto a diameter, it is
exceedingly odious; for it causes upheaval and fills one will mental
anguish, and causes censure and secrets and weakness and alienation of
the household.
Conceming Aphrodite When the star of Aphrodite has come onto the Hõroskopos, it produces
gaiety with good cheer, the gathering in of revenue, and knowledge.
And it is quite profitable in all the things being done if another star in
another figure should not object. When the star comes to be in the
Midheaven, it produces unempioyment, upheavals of soul, unsettlements
and profitless censures because of women. In the setting zõidion it
produces unsettlements of things, gossip, adulteries; and for the married,
the clamor and miscamages of women; and this star is exceedingly bad 1 Short lacuna.
2 That is, physical crises. [RH]
3 Of the period, that is. 20 in these places. If it should come to the subterraneous zõidion, it
produces the same things as it did in the setting zõidion.
When it has come to Kronos, it produces unemployment,
acquisitions, advancements, beneficiai moves, except with indifference;
for often it makes the benefits be with tears. When it has come to be on
Zeus, the star makes that time more harmful and unpleasant and full of
disturbance, and especially for the household; or it causes treachery and
plots and chicanery through women. When it has come to be on Ares,
the star is full of gossip, and the time disturbing; for it causes untimely
departures ffom home and ffivolous expenditures and deceptions of
women. When it has come to be on its own place, it is of good cheer
in everything, pleasant; and it is productive in relation to the activities
pertaining to one's life, and effective for everything to which one lays
his hand. Arriving upon Hermes, it will be good and beneficiai for
everything in life, for giving and receiving, and actions and partnerships
and manipulations; and it is good for whatever one should wish. When
it comes to be upon the Sun, it will provide upheavals of life and soul,
unsettlements or bodily weakness both in relation to kin and friends;
and it causes censures and fears; and in general the star is disturbing
and harmful until it should exit these places.
And in reference to a nativity, if it should come to the nativity, it
causes annoyances and disturbances and the distress of women and
untimely expenditures and unsettlements of women or bodily weakness,
censure ffom superiors, and narrow straits and unemployment. If it
should come onto the square of the nativity, it causes cheerfulness and
benefits at the beginning, but later it makes a man worse. If it should
come to the triangle of the nativity or onto the year that is being spent,1
it is entirely fine and beneficiai and gives marriage or intercourse with
women, and the conception of children for the married. 1 eis ton katagmenon eniauton. If this refers to the protected Hõroskopos, then this sentence would seem to be making a distinciion between it and the
“nativity” constantly referred to. This would lead us to the opinion that the
“nativity” is the natal Hõroskopos, whereas the ingresses referred to in the first
two paragraphs under each planet are perhaps ingresses to the solar retum.
However, compare the note to the final paragraph of eníry under Kronos.
21 Conceming Hermes When the star of Hermes has come to the Hõroskopos, it causes unions,
knowledge, great good fortune, economies, and the completion of old
business. If it should come up to the Midheaven, it similarly causes the
completion of old business, and a sudden awkwardness,' and
companionship with superiors. If the star should come to the setting
zõidion, it is exceedingly bad and punitive; for it causes censures and
calumnies pertaining to one's manner of living, upheavals1 2 3 and
whisperings; mark well that the time is poorfor everything. If it should
come to the subterraneous zõidion, it causes gossip of secret or piraíical
deeds, and hõpetas* with unpleasantness, and untimely departures in
stays away from home.
If it should come to onto Kronos, it causes benefits and unions
from old business, receipts and expenditures. Arriving at Zeus, it makes
the time more cheerful and glad; and it also provides unions. Having
come to Ares, it is exceedingly bad; for it causes weakness in one*s
mind and life, unless it produces a cutting through of matters with
concision, and reputation along with annoyance and loss and harm.
Having come to Aphrodite, it is exceedingly cheerful and beneficiai and
efficacious and propitious for women. Having come to its own place,
it makes the time poor; for it causes enmities and the alienation of one's
family and household, and treacheries and thefts and deceptions. Having
come to the Sun, it causes unpleasantness and cares and fears and
weaknesses and useless stays away from home.
And in reference to a nativity, when it has come onto the nativity,
it is distressing for everything mentally and in life; for it causes
rejections and censures and ingratitude and deprivations. If it should
come onto the square of the nativity, it is also exceedingly distressing
on the part of female persons; and it causes vain expeditions. If it
should come onto the triangle of the nativity, it is exceedingly
beneficiai; and especially as concems old business, it is not a bad time
to put a hand to it. Having come onto the diameter of the nativity, it
makes the time unfit and dangerous, and a liar and an imposter to all
men. 1 acheirismous aiphnidious.
2 meteõrismos.
3 Unknown word. 22 Concerning the Moon If the Moon should come to the Hõroskopos, it causes upheaval in the
soul;1 for it causes disgust and empty fears. If it should come to the
Midheaven, it will be propitious and efficacious for everything. If it
should come to the Descendant, it causes fears, indifference; and take
care with female persons and every action. Having come to the
subterraneous zõidion, it is unpleasant and full of disturbance.
Having come to Kronos, it becomes sluggish and full of indiffer¬
ence, and causes certain remembrances of ancient matters; look for an
opportunity to speak to one who is older, and [consider] every purchase;
and it is conducive to acquiring a home; and it gets one dreadfully
disturbed by dreams. Arriving at Zeus, it is propitious for every action,
but vexatious. When it has come to Ares, mark the days; for it causes
unforeseen accidents, indifference, or falis, or bloodshed, or excitations,
unless it is murderous and on the attack. Having come to Aphrodite, it
signifies cheerfulness and causes actions and intercourse, unless it
causes unpleasantness and the shaming of one publicly. Having come
to Hermes, it causes actions to be more effeminate, and it amplifies
whatever is effected through letters and partnerships, unless it causes
conflicts or odiousness of domestics or slaves; mark those days.
In reference to a nativity, [when it has come] upon the nativity, it
causes terrible upheaval, and brings with it disgust and empty fears.2 1 meteõrizõ, This word, which has already occurred several times in this excerpt, basically means ‘to raise up’. But this is hardly the elevation of soul
in the positive sense. The connection with disgust seems to be the key to
understanding its appiication here. Disgust is what causes the soul to rise up as
though trying to throw something up; it is almost a physical experience, the
mental “heaves.”
2 May be incomplete. [RH] 23 Appendix I — A Comparative Listing of the Ingress
Delineations
Compiled by Robert Hand
In this appendix I have taken all of the delineations of the ingresses
according to Schmidfs translations of the ancient texts and put them in
one place so that the reader can compare them. The footnotes that
accompany these texts in the main body of the book have not been
repeated here, for the same of economy. The reader is strongly urged
to read the delineations in their original contexts in the main body of
the text. Where delineations refer to more than one planet, I have
repeated them in full under each planet entry. Where the original has
said nothing about the combination, I have simply written, “No entry.” V>
Dorotheus — When Kronos and Ares are in ingresses in relation to the Sun, the Moon, and Zeus, both bodily and in those by square and
diameter, and similarly also the recun-ences and anti-recurrences
(that is, whenever they should come to their own fixed places, or
to the diameters), they become more harmful, if they were in fact
poorly situated from the beginning.
Every star is base when diametrical to itself by transit, and it is bad
when coming upon its fixed place. . .
Orpheus — Kronos onto itself signifies removais and wanderings in foreign lands, and disturbances and enclosure and bondage, the
death of parents, the disappearance of home and money.
Anubio — No entry.
Pseudo-Valens — If Kronos should come to itself, it moves one to leave home unprofitably, and often encloses one; and it is
motivation for actions, and by bringing in struggles, it at times also
encloses one in prisons and bondage, at other times it achieves the
deaths of parents and friends (though also expenditure), the
unsettlement of one's own and another's, the betrayal of friends,
listlessness, disturbances; and penalties, disturbances, and distresses
through women, ingratitude ffom severa], demonstrations, and the 24 persistent flux of rheum.
+>-\ Dorotheus — ... when Kronos is coming to Zeus, it hinders whatever Zeus provides and quells every activity and impulse; Kronos onto
Zeus also [causes] fines and damages what is being completed.
When Kronos and Ares are in ingresses in relation to the Sun, the
Moon, and Zeus, both bodily and in those by square and diameter,
and similarly also the recurrences and anti-recurrences (that is,
whenever they should come to their own fixed places, or to the
diameters), they become more harmful, if they were in fact poorly
situated from the beginning.
Orpheus — When Kronos has stepped on Zeus, it causes missteps in one's mode of living and is a destroyer of possessions; it causes the
marriage of a woman to disperse, and it is harmful for every deed.
“Phainõn [Kronos] trining Zeus is truly very lucky,”
Anubio — When Kronos has stepped onto Zeus, it causes disease or unforeseen toil, or poverty, or disturbances and murders in
reference to relatives.
Pseudo-Valens — If it should come to the [place] of Zeus, it causes chicaneries, penalties or the resolution of old business, and the
death of kinfolk and another's expenditures and shamefacedness and
impostures towards superiors.
- d"
Dorotheus — Kronos to the place of Ares makes those who are discouraged and not eager.
Orpheus — Kronos onto Ares is a cause of constraints, of bondage, of disease, and it causes pain on account of children, signifies the
ruination of possessions; it makes some [natives] fugitives from the
fatherland or hirelings and poor.
“Phainõn [Kronos] trine with Puroeis [Ares] is greatly best.” Anubio — Kronos onto Ares makes enmities and imprudence and inaction and non-beneficial blows.
Pseudo-Valens — When it has come to the [placej of Ares, it causes dangers to the body, alienations, loss of one's own, rapine and
faint-heartedness, enmities toward one's own and toward another’s,
lawsuits and imposts. VO
Dorotheus — Kronos onto the Sun brings dangers and judgments from the magistracy, and especially when it is stationing.
When Kronos and Ares are in ingresses in relation to the Sun, the
Moon, and Zeus, both bodily and in those by square and diameter,
and similarly also the recurrences and anti-recurrences (that is,
whenever they should come to their own fixed places, or to the
diameters), they become more harmful, if they were in fact poorly
situated from the beginning.
... the destructive stars [Kronos and Ares] are distressing when
they step onto the Júpiter pivots or onto the lights. However, if they
were in good and congenial places at the beginning, it makes the
affliction by transit blunter, just as the good stars which are
disposed in base places at the beginning become weaker by transit.
Orpheus — Kronos onto the Sun brings actions to completion with a blow; and one must also avoid sailing and joumeys because of fear
of robbers.
Anubio — If it should arrive at the Sun, it causes untimely changes of place, and the introduction of dangers, and penalties, and
unemployment, and whatever should be accomplished, it effects
with force; and it causes deflux of rheum and eruption of eczema
and weakness of the eyes.
Pseudo-Valens — No entry. But see Appendix Gêmeos . V9
Dorotheus — Kronos to Aphrodite harms the goods of Aphrodite. 26 Orpheus — Kronos onto Aphrodite makes relatives and fríends hostile,
brings deception, disturbance and penalties, and he who has a wife
will be dishonored by her lust.
Anubio — Kronos onto Aphrodite “oft times made an end of youths of
an unyoked [age]”, or brings rivalry with regard to spouses, or
harm in relation to home, or treachery, pain, sickness, death,
poisons, or trouble with the gullet or joints, or it harms the children
first.
Pseudo-Valens — No entry Dorotheus — Kronos to Hermes harms the things which are being
offered by Hermes.
Orpheus — Kronos onto Hermes signifies contention and judgments,
and penalties, disturbances, and unjust deaths of relatives; and one
must avoid the market and communicating one's actions to others;
for it causes the weaving of wiles and deceptions.
Anubio — Kronos onto Hermes signifies either sickness or death, but
gives the greatest of goods in full bodily strength at the time that
it steps on Kronos (that is, Hermes onto Kronos).
Pseudo-Valens — When it arrives at [the place] of Hermes, it brings
about effects by means of letters and deeds and speech and society
and slaves and the loss and pain of children; it also effects harm by
a few, perjury, listlessness, loss. Dorotheus — Kronos onto the Moon is likewise bad, for it brings
censures and reproaches, and it is worse when Kronos is stationing.
Kronos diametrical to the Moon is bad and especially when it is
under the beams, for it brings disease; and it is also so when Ares
sees the Moon.
When Kronos and Ares are in ingresses in relation to the Sun, the
Moon, and Zeus, both bodily and in those by square and diameter, 27 and similarly also the recurrences and anti-recurrences (that is,
whenever they should come to their own fixed places, or to the
diameters), they become more harmful, if they were in fact poorly
situated from the beginning.
... the destmctive stars [Kronos and Ares] are distressing when
they step onto the Júpiter pivots or onto the lights. However, if they
were in good and congenial places at the beginning, it makes the
affliction by transit blunter, just as the good stars which are
disposed in base places at the beginning become weaker by transit.
Orpheus — Kronos onto the Moon causes rebellions against the land or occasional sickness or the destruction and loss of possessions.
Anubio — No entry.
Pseudo-Valens — When it has come to the Moon, it taxes one with sickness, and it is also wont to cast one down from a height and
take one up to a height; for after doing good at the nativity, this
star takes everything away again.1 ■*> - Angles
Dorotheus — ... the destmctive stars [Kronos and Ares] are distressing when they step onto the Júpiter pivots or onto the lights.
However, if they were in good and congenial places at the
beginning, it makes the affliction by transit blunter, just as the good
stars which are disposed in base places at the beginning become
weaker by transit.
A malefic coming onto the pivots is quite harmful; for the
Hõroskopos obtains the whole of life as its lot; the Midheaven,
doings and children and reputation; the Descendant, marriage and
old age; the subterraneous pivot, the hidden mold of the body, and
foundations and creation and markets.
Orpheus — Kronos onto the Hõroskopos removes one to another land, 1 This is the only explicit delineation of an ingress upon the Moon by
Pseudo-Valens. But see Appendix Gêmeos .
28 and also causes deceptions, penalties, dangers. Kronos onto the
Midheaven leads one to a foreign country and gives reputation, but
it causes distress on account of debt. Kronos onto the Descendant
and the subterraneous pivot drives one away from his family and
home and possessions, or leads him away to another country, or
causes captivity, or kills slaves.
Anubio — Kronos having stepped onto the Hõroskopos, and when it is diametrical to it, sometimes puts youths to death; and it does this
whenever Aphrodite is also the time-lord of the hour, for the
indications of the effects are steady at the time when the ingressing
planets are also the time-lords.
Pseudo-Valens — When Kronos has come onto the Hõroskopos, it has good beginnings, for it causes unions and benefits and acquisitions;
but when it has gone by the last [parts], it holds distress and harm,
and it brings dangers to these places. If it has come onto the
Midheaven, it causes similar [effects] as the Hõroskopos, but it is
more gentle in those matters and in those harms, and slower for the
actions of one's life; and in the one case it is sluggish, in the other
it forcefully busies about. In the Descendant it is full of disturbance
and danger, for it causes loss and tears and listlessness of soul and
penalties through the [actions] of others and dangers from water
and alienations of one's own family. When it comes to be in the
subterraneous zõidion, it produces the same things, except that in
this place it also produces dangerous illnesses and fears. Dorotheus — Zeus to Kronos provides an alleviation of a preexistent distress; such [natives] manage the work of another and they will
spend freely. .. Zeus onto the square of Ares or of Kronos likewise
indicates good things; so also Aphrodite; for when the good planets
are coming onto the square of destructive planets, they provide
pleasure and health and honor.
Orpheus — Zeus onto Kronos makes what one does for a living irregular, at times giving the acquisition of lands and foundations
and dwellings, or managing anothers living, other times causing
them to be deprived of their former work and activities, bringing 29 expenditures and losses and major illness to others.
Anubio — Zeus onto Kronos is good.
Pseudo-Valens — When it has come to Kronos, it effects an abruptness
in one's acts that is not conducive and ruinous; for, no matter what
is administered at this time, the effects will be punitive and
expensive.
V\ ,r, _ / Dorotheus — Every star is base when diametrical to itself by transit,
and it is bad when coming upon its fixed place. . .
Qrpheus — Zeus onto itself redeems as many oppressions of these sorts
as it should find, and “provides profít, brings fame both empty and
noisy,” if it should not happen to be in its own house at the
fixation.
Anubio — No entry.
Pseudo-Valens — Having come upon its own place, it will be not
conducive for everything, except that it causes calumnies and
censures on account of worthless matters. Dorotheus — Zeus to Axes provides both activity and favor, and will
increase everything, and bring enemies into subjugation. Zeus onto
the square of Ares or of Kronos likewise indicates good things; so
also Aphrodite; for when the good planets are coming onto the
square of destructive planets, they provide pleasure and health and
honor.
Orpheus — Zeus onto Ares is good; for if it should find someone under
affliction and constraint and oppression, it releases him from all;
and if it should find one to be living in joy, it gives greater good
cheer, and makes him ffiends with greater persons, and provides
acquisitions, and distresses his enemies, and bestows profits and
reputation. 30 Anubio — Zeus having stepped onto Ares is good, but Ares onto Zeus
is base; however, Ares stepping on Zeus does not always produce
base things, but whenever it is diametrical to the Sun.
Pseudo-Valens — Having come to Ares, the time will be incomparable
for beneficence and reputation, but it will accomplisb every action
and administrative function with a lack of fervor. VO
Dorotheus — No Entry.
Orpheus — Zeus onto the Sun gives sluggishness to actíons and ruins
the home, or causes illness or the destruction of possessions, and
a vain and contrary end to one's labors.
Anubio — No entry.
Pseudo-Valens — Having come upon the Sun, it effects serious
illnesses, dangers from the water and shipwrecks, and deflux of
rheum; and it introduces expeditions that are not conducive and
distresses in matters pertaining to life.
V$
Dorotheus — Zeus onto the square of Ares or of Kronos likewise
indicates good things; so also Aphrodite; for when the good planets
are coming onto the square of destructive planets, they provide
pleasure and health and honor.
Orpheus — Zeus onto Aphrodite signifies unexpected wealth and shows
one to be stronger than his enemies, and marriage for the unwed;
and it provides children for those in wedlock and puts an end to
actions.
Anubio — Zeus onto Aphrodite rejoices much, for it gives benefit of
toil and profií.
Pseudo-Valens — Having come to Aphrodite, it causes the fit meeting
of the unmarried and marriage and intercourse, and children for the
married, but gossip and pain; and it makes the actions of life more 31 reasonable and beneficiai. V?
Dorotheus — No entry.
Orpheus — Zeus onto Hermes makes one friends of great men, whose
property he is also entrusted to manage, and they enlarge their own
home; and it provides gifts from friends; and these [natives] enjoy
themselves; but they cause pain to their enemies; and if they have
a just case, they conquer, though the beneficence of Hermes is
required.
Anubio — Zeus onto Hermes and Hermes onto Zeus are quite estimable
and profitable, and especially for the ones pursuing hermetic works;
and should they be diametrical to each other, they are no less
beneficiai.
Pseudo-Valens — Having come upon Hermes, it effects work and
beneficiai moves ffom a place, receipts and gifts, and profitable
partnerships; for it makes these activities more reasonable in such
places. V)
Dorotheus — No entry.
Orpheus — Zeus onto the Moon causes child-bearing for those in
wedlock, and provides good fortune and profit to him who is tried,
except that “after having harmed him a little earlier,” it provides
victory and success later; and occasionally it adoms some [natives]
with gold chains.
Anubio — No entry.
Pseudo-Valens — No entry. But see Appendix Gêmeos .
- Angles
Dorotheus — No entry.
Orpheus — Zeus onto the Hõroskopos and the Descendant is for both 32 good and bad, at times bringing on judgments and stmggles and
penalties and enmities, but at other times it redeems these and gi ves
profits and acquisition, still other times it signifies friendship, and
again intimacy and nuptials of shameful notoriety, and disturbance
due to these; and often, too, it makes for murder of kinfolk and
provides an inheritance from these, and leads the wanderer back to
his fatherland. And onto the Midheaven and the subterraneous
pivot, it causes the deaths of the parents and diseases and blows
and oppressions; and it provides marriage for others; it removes
others from the fatherland; and the end of their activities will be
toilsome.
Anubio — No entry.
Pseudo-Valens — When Zeus has come onto the Hõroskopos, it causes
honors and reputation, high visibility in the throng, acquisitions,
rectification of business, and children for those who are married;
and a casting off of blood-relatives. Having come to the
Midheaven, it causes estimable reversals, the rectification of
business, changes for the better, and accesses and unions. Having
come to the setting zõidion, it brings pain, unsettlement of one's life
and body, the casting off of children and kin; and from the time
that it passes by the zõidion of concealment, this changes for the
better, Having come to the subterraneous pivot, it is signifícant at
the initiation of secret affairs that are not achievable, or it signifies
the tardy attention to matters that are already fmished; and it
signifies a soul sad and full of care.
<?-*) Dorotheus — When Ares has come to Kronos, it makes those who are
resolute and ready and effective, and it separates with enmities.
Otpheus — Ares onto Kronos preserves whatever Kronos is accustoméd
to harm; for it makes sickness and pain cease, and gives wealth and
victory and good cheer.
Anubio — Ares onto Kronos provides victories and action and sweetest
life. 33 Pseudo-Valens — When it has come to the place of Kronos, it is
exceedingly propitious and cheerful and useful for all areas of life. Dorotheus — When Ares has come to the Sun or Zeus, it is base, more
so in the day, and even more when it is setting; and if it is also
stationing, it is dangerous as well; for as far as the ancients are
concemed, it signifies corporeal dangers and judgments. Ares also
does the same when it has come onto the diameter of the Sun and
Zeus; however, when the Sun or Zeus step on Ares by transit, or
they are diametrical, it also does the same thing.
Ares to Zeus and Aphrodite and Hermes turns what they provide
for the worse.
Orpheus — Ares onto Zeus is ruinous and harsh, and there will be
frivolous expenditures of money; also, it is harmful in lawsuits and
rouses up enemies; and the foetus is destroyed in pregnant women,
or it dies immediately upon birth; it signifies harm and insolence
and causes removais from one's place; and it renders actions futile
and causes pain on account of children or a woman, and it gives
enmities from rulers and bitter anger from the district.
Anubio — Zeus having stepped onto Ares is good, but Ares onto Zeus
is base; however. Ares stepping on Zeus does not always produce
base things, but whenever it is diametrical to the Sun.
Pseudo-Valens — Having come to Zeus, it is exceedingly disturbing
and punitive and makes for cowardice.
<?-(? Dorotheus — When Kronos and Ares are in ingresses in relation to the
Sun, the Moon, and Zeus, both bodily and in those by square and
diameter, and similarly also the recurrences and anti-recurrences
(that is, whenever they should come to their own fixed places, or
to the diameters), they become more harmful, if they were in fact
poorly situated from the beginning.
Every star is base when diametrical to itself by transit, and it is bad 34 when coming upon its fixed place. . .
Orpheus — Ares onto itself removes one from his place or causes
illness or makes bloody with iron or sets one on fire, “yet it
bestows action and good fame in one's life.”
Anubio — No entry.
Pseudo-Valens — When it simply comes to itself, it is worse and
unpleasant and stimulating; and mark that the star is exceedingly
bad for everything at that time.
d1 - ° Dorotheus — When Ares has come to the Sun or Zeus, it is base, more
so in the day, and even more when it is setting; and if it is also
stationing, it is dangerous as well; for as far as the ancients are
concerned, it signifies corporeal dangers and judgments. Ares also
does the same when it has come onto the diameter of the Sun and
Zeus; however, when the Sun or Zeus step on Ares by transit, or
they are diametrical, it also does the same thing.
Ares to the Sun, if in addition it should also be found under the
beams by transit, subjugates by fire, or gives a loss by fire. If
someone has a father, it destroys either him or the older man
having the role of father, and it is bad for great men and difficult
in every work, especially in public matters.
The Sun onto Ares or Ares onto the Sun, and the Sun or Ares onto
the Moon while the Sun is co-present, signify bloodshed or harrn
from fire.
Orpheus — Ares onto the Sun diminishes possessions if it should also
be bad for actions, causes pain and harms the mind, and pains
some [natives] on account of hidden deeds; and if it should also
make a station, it calls forth more difficult tumults and battles for
things, and gives paternal hatred over ancient matters, and it brings
betrayals and enmities from friends.
Anubio —No entry. 35 Pseudo-Valens — Having come to the Sun, it causes dangerous illness,
removais and moves from one's home, unexpected joumeys away
from home, fears of a crowd and fire and blood and of malefactors,
and the danger of falis from quadrupeds.
d" - Mercúrio Doroíheus — Ares to Zeus and Aphrodite and Hermes tums what they
provide for the worse.
Ares to Aphrodite causes irregularities for the sake of erotic
matters.
Orpheus — Ares onto Aphrodite is apprehensive of a fight and bitter
hatred from a woman; for they cause long separation and adulterous
suspicions; sometimes also it strips everything away from men.
Anubio — Ares onto Aphrodite causes wifely jealousies and disturbances, and harms pregnancies by introducing premature childbirth.
Similarly also, Aphrodite onto Ares is harmful, except less so, for
“when yielding, strong-limbed Ares delights in Kupris. [Aphrodite]
Pseudo-Valens — Having come to Aphrodite, it connects one with
female persons and causes profitless unsettlements through acts of
females, and moral condemnations, and is turbulent in everything
through the pretenses of women.
d*-? Doroíheus — Ares to Zeus and Aphrodite and Hermes tums what they
provide for the worse.
Ares to Hermes makes slaves, suspicions, want of form, and causes
enmities between friends, the flight of slaves or thefts; also, the
reduction of one’s livelihood or doings, for it pre-eminently
diminishes the livelihood and undoes one's doings.
Orpheus — Ares onto Hermes causes penalties and lawsuits and more
falsity, treachery, shame over hidden deeds, frauds, perjury,
betrayals, flights, and bondage. 36 Anubio — Ares onto Hermes harm and sickness brings, in all is evil, and brings not victory to him vvho is tried.”
Pseudo-Valens — Having come to Hermes, it causes treacheries and hidden acts and fears and thefts, unsettlement of friends, trickeries
and frauds and perjuries of those in the household.
c?-D
Dorotheus — Ares onto the Moon provides bodily illness or financial harm and charitable Service with toil; and they will only watch over
enemies, that is, they will have power over enemies.
The Sun onto Ares or Ares onto the Sun, and the Sun or Ares onto
the Moon while the Sun is co-present, signify bloodshed or harm
from fire.
Orpheus — Ares onto the Moon, if the zõidion is feminine, is about the fear of abiding illness, and especiaíly of the eyes; and if the zõidion
is mascuiine, it disturbs what one does for a living. And if it should
also make a station, still more; for it deprives of children and
causes death for the siblings, introduces dangers and tumult, and it
leads away to anothefs country or changes one's dwelling, and
gives some work for another work, if the zõidion should not happen
to be Kronos’ and should not prevent these things.
Anubio — No entry. But see Appendix Gêmeos .
Pseudo-Valens — No entry. d" - Angles
Dorotheus — the destructive stars [Kronos and Aresl are distressing
when they step onto the Júpiter pivots or onto the lights. However, if
they were in good and congenial places at the beginning, it makes
the affliction by transit blunter, just as the good stars which are
disposed in base places at the beginning become weaker by transit.
A malefic coming onto the pivots is quite harmful; for the
Hõroskopos obtains the whole of life as its lot; the Midheaven,
doings and children and reputation; the Descendant, marriage and 37 old age; the subterraneous pivot, the hidden mold of the body, and
foundations and creation and markets.
Orpheus — In the pivots it is difficult for everything, bringing instabilities and disturbances in the family and pain in life, and in
the Descendant especially through a woman; for it also causes
premature childbirth. And onto the Midheaven, they dishonor the
marriage bed of those in wedlock, or it also provides sickness in
this pivot.
Anubio — No entry.
Pseudo-Valens — When the star of Ares has come to the Hõroskopos, it effects the renewal of things by means of outside blood, for it
throws life into a tumult and especially through women; and it also
causes fears and diseases for women and is bad for everything.
Having come onto the Midheaven, it is helpful for cuts of the
extremities and dangers to the eyes; and it brings sudden dangers
from a fali or from conflagrations, crowds, or quadrupeds; but it
is not without use for management and advantage. Having come to
the Descendant, it is exceedingly odious, for it also disturbs one's
household and mode of living, and causes fights and plots and fears
of the soul, and especially through women; and it causes crises for
those who are married and for women. Having come to the
subterraneous pivot, it causes unseasonable expeditions and
profítless movements and gossip in account of secret affairs, and it
is bad for everything relating to life and acts and unions. O
Dorotheus — The luminaries in the places of benefics are beneficiai, but in the places of malefics, harmful.
Orpheus — “The Sun onto Kronos brings memories of ancient matters” and brings wealth and joy to one's life.
Anubio — No entry.
Pseudo-Valens — Having come to Kronos, it works dangers from water and ailments or defluxes of rheum; and it is effective in relation to 38 actions. o-\
Dorotheus — The luminaries in the places of benefics are beneficiai, but in the places of malefics, harmful.
Orpheus — The Sun onto Zeus “bestows great renown” and good fame and good cheer, and causes manifestation of what is invisible.
Anubio — No entry.
Pseudo-Valens — Arriving at Zeus, it is unpleasant in relation to the multitude and those who are superior; and friends. . . [lacuna] and
censures and calumnies; and for succeeding at the activities of one's
life.
O-cf Dorotheus — The luminaries in the places of benefics are beneficiai, but in the places of malefics, harmful.
The Sun onto Ares or Ares onto the Sun, and the Sun or Ares onto
the Moon while the Sun is co-present, signify bloodshed or harm
from fire.
Orpheus — The Sun onto Ares lays one down with sickness or removes him from his fatherland, destroys his money and causes losses
against one's will and makes him hostile to his friends, and “stirs
up trouble with his relatives,” unless Zeus should also be there by
ingress.
Anubio — No entry.
Pseudo-Valens — Having come to Ares, it causes unpleasantness and robberies, the approach of the multitude, dangers, conflagrations,
bloodshed, manipulation, asphyxiations from crises, and especially
sudden dangers, falis from heights or quadrupeds, and fears of the
household, and changes away from home, and unforeseen dangers
from swearing an oath. 39 0-0
Dorotheus — Every star is base when diametrical to itself by transit, and it is bad when coming upon its fixed place. . .
Orpheus — The Sun onto itself or the Moon causes sickness and want of money, and it causes movement from one's own places; often,
too, it brings wealth out of oppression.
Anubio — No entry.
Pseudo-Valens — ... When it arrives at its own place, it causes cares and afflictions of the soul, disturbances, empty fears, and
movements [originating in] domestic matters.
0- Mercúrio Dorotheus — The luminaries in the places of benefics are beneficiai, but in the places of malefics, harmful.
Orpheus — The Sun onto Aphrodite is a cause of unsettlement, troubles the domestic felicity of women, but it provides profits in regard to
gifts.
Anubio — No entry.
Pseudo-Valens — When it comes to be at Aphrodite, it causes dangers to those who have wives from wives, and unpleasantness and
censures due to women; and it is effective for conducting one’s life.
0- Mercúrio Dorotheus — No entry.
Orpheus — The Sun onto Hermes causes the mind to wander and hurts the soul, is one to deceive and causes frivolous spending.
Anubio — No entry.
Pseudo-Valens — Arriving at Hermes, it makes what is hidden manifest, and causes a disturbance of those in the household and
fights with household managers; and it is not bad for actions, but 40 nevertheless they will be done sluggishly. 0-5
Dorotheus — The Sun onto Ares or Ares onto the Sun, and the Sun or Ares onto the Moon while the Sun is co-present, signify bloodshed
or harm from fire.
Orpheus — The Sun onto itself or the Moon causes sickness and want of money, and it causes movement from one's own places; often,
too, it brings wealth out of oppression.
Anubio — No entry.
Pseudo-Valens — No entry. But see Appendix Gêmeos . O - Angles
Dorotheus — No entry.
Orpheus — The Sun onto the pivots removes one to other places and causes sickness and is grievous for the body, but in the Midheaven
“it bestows action and great renown.”
Anubio — No entry.
Pseudo-Valens — When the Sun comes to be in the Hõroskopos, it causes weakness, upheaval, dangers, movements; but it strengthens
those who had already been sick before it carne to this very place. Dorotheus — Aphrodite onto Kronos is fine for doing and for everything. . .
Orpheus — Aphrodite onto Kronos indicates further acquisition and reputation in the district and help from secret sources, but it is
maleficent for marriage; for it unsettles or otherwise “exchanged
the marriage bed for the embrace of a lesser light.”
Anubio — Aphrodite onto Kronos makes peace between women and 41 their bed-mates without treachery and trouble, and causes pain and
censure and temperance in one's garments, and it yokes the
unmarried.
Pseudo-Valens — When it has come to Kronos; it produces unemployment, acquisitions, advancements, beneficiai moves, except with
indifference; for often it makes the benefits be with tears. Mercúrio -\
Dorotheus — Aphrodite onto Zeus disturbs and troubles through
women, and plays one's hopes false, and nothing of what one
intends comes to pass.
Orpheus — Aphrodite onto Zeus causes ripening, dangers, sickness,
enmities, judgments on account of family and contention within and
with the family; and if the woman of this [ingressj is pregnant, she
will miscarry.
Anubio — Aphrodite onto Zeus does not rejoice so much, for it causes
ungraciousness and groundless expectations.
Pseudo-Valens — When it has come to be on Zeus, the star makes that
time more harmful and unpleasant and full of disturbance, and
especially for the household; or it causes treachery and plots and
chicanery through women. Mercúrio -cf Dorotheus — No entry.
Orpheus — Aphrodite onto Ares causes stabilities and expenditures
from women and removal ffom a place and disturbances in regard
to one's life.
Anubio — Ares onto Aphrodite causes wifely jealousies and distur¬
bances, and harms pregnancies by introducing premature childbirth.
Similarly also, Aphrodite onto Ares is harmful, except less so, for
“when yielding, strong-limbed Ares delights in Kupris.
Pseudo-Valens — When it has come to be on Ares, the star is full of 42 gossip, and the time disturbing; for it causes untimely departures
from home and frivolous expenditures and deceptions of women. Mercúrio -0
Dorotheus — Aphrodite to the Sun provides continuous association with women and censure on account of women; and it also disturbs the
soul and causes unsettlement in domestic matters.
Orpheus — Aphrodite onto the Sun unsettles the mind and leads it astray, and causes actions and recreations and censures, and it
makes for stability in the family.
Anubio — No entry.
Pseudo-Valens — When it comes to be upon the Sun, it will provide upheavals of life and soul, unsettlements or bodily weakness both
in relation to kin and friends; and it causes censures and fears; and
in general the star is disturbing and harmful until it should exit
these places. Mercúrio - Mercúrio Dorotheus — Every star is base when diametrical to itself by transit, and it is bad when coming upon its fixed place. . .
Orpheus — Aphrodite onto itself is indifferent and toilsome, in one way good, in another base.
Anubio — No entry.
Pseudo-Valens — When it has come to be on its own place, it is of good cheer in everything, pleasant; and it is productive in relation
to the activities pertaining to one’s life, and effective for everything
to which one lays his hand. Mercúrio - Mercúrio Dorotheus — Aphrodite to Hermes augments what Hermes makes or provides.
Orpheus — Aphrodite onto Hermes indicates inheritances and it 43 increases possessions and brings an end to actions; and it provides
victory in lawsuits.
Anubio — Aphrodite onto Hermes is fine for every action.
Pseudo-Valens — Arriving upon Hermes, it will be good and beneficiai for everything in life, for giving and receiving, and actions and
partnerships and manipulations; and it is good for whatever one
should wish. Mercúrio -5
Dorotheus — Aphrodite onto the Moon is cheerful and effectual, yet it brings suffering or censure on account of a woman.
Orpheus — Aphrodite onto the Moon indicates “good cheer and it delights in action,” gives effortless profit and joins in marriage, and
causes child-bearing when it is in a feminine zõidion.
Anubio — No entry.
Pseudo-Valens — No entry. But see Appendix Gêmeos . Mercúrio - Angles
Dorotheus — No entry. Orpheus — Aphrodite onto the Hõroskopos and Midheaven is cheerful and joyous and effectual and makes acquisition and profits greater;
and if it is stationing, still more. Aphrodite onto the Descendant
makes stability ffom a woman. Aphrodite onto the subterraneous
pivot causes hidden ailments and pains from spouses; and if it
should also be stationing, it causes ailments of the parts and
fundament, and it brings destruction of decorum and tears for the
family.
Anubio — No entry.
Pseudo-Valens — When the star of Aphrodite has come onto the
Hõroskopos, it produces gaiety with good cheer, the gathering in of 44 revenue, and knowledge. And it is quite profitable in all the things
being done if another star in another figure should not object.
When the star comes to be in the Midheaven, it produces
unemployment, upheavals of soul, unsettlements and profitless
censures because of women. In the setting zõidion it produces
unsettlements of things, gossip, adulteries; and for the married, the
clamor and miscarriages of women; and this star is excéedingly bad
in these píaces. If it should come to the subterraneous zõidion, it
produces the same things as it did in the setting zõidion. Dorotheus — No entry.
Orpheus — Hermes onto Kronos increases actions and acquisition, and harms enemies.
Anubio — Kronos onto Hermes signifies either sickness or death, but gives the greatest of goods in full bodily strength at the time that
it steps on Kronos (that is, Hermes onto Kronos).
Pseudo-Valens — If it should come to onto Kronos, it causes benefits and unions from old business, receipts and expenditures. Dorotheus — Hermes to Zeus is best for everything, and especially for those who wish to come into power.
Orpheus — Hermes onto Zeus is good for everything, giving profit from commerce and making friends, causing display, and providing
reputation and strength at home.
Anubio — Zeus onto Hermes and Hermes onto Zeus are quite estimable and profitable, and especially for the ones pursuing hermetic works;
and should they be diametrical to each other, they are no less
beneficiai.
Pseudo-Valens — Arriving at Zeus, it makes the time more cheerful and glad; and it also provides unions. 45 5-d"
Dorotheus — Hermes onto Ares makes those who are daring, inventive, and excited about things.
Orpheus — Hermes onto Ares indicates those who are effective, and it sets [the natives] free from fears and puts an end to toil.
Anubio — Hermes onto Ares brings victory to him who is tried and there will not be sickness or harm, but it is bad in commerce.
Pseudo-Valens — Having come to Ares, it is exceedingly bad; for it causes weakness in one's mind and life, unless it produces a cutting
through of matters with concision, and reputation along with
annoyance and loss and harm.
5-0
Dorotheus — No entry.
Orpheus — Hermes onto the Sun is inconstant in regard to crafts and action until it should come to the degrees of the Sun, after which
it is efficacious.
Anubio — No entry.
Pseudo-Valens — Having come to the Sun, it causes unpleasantness and cares and fears and weaknesses and useless stays away from home.
5- $
Dorotheus — Hermes onto Aphrodite is stimulating in regard to erotic matters, and it is also beneficiai for one's actions and for the rest
of his works.
Orpheus — Hermes onto Aphrodite presents wealth and anothefs money and an inheritance from those who have died, “and
friendliness in the household from the spouses of in-laws,” and
makes friends of children and slaves.
Anubio — Hermes onto Aphrodite is stronger in regard to livelihood and art, marriage, and friendship. 46 “And for other doings, useful. Abo ve all others this pro vides for
commerce profitable for men, and is in judgments very timely; and
to him who is tried it gives the longed-for victory.”
Pseudo-Valens — Having come to Aphrodite, it is exceedingly cheerful and beneficiai and efficacious and propitious for women. Dorotheus — Every star is base when diametrical to itself by transit, and it is bad when coming upon its fixed place. . .
Orpheus — No entry.
Anubio — No entry.
Pseudo-Valens — Having come to its own place, it makes the time poor; for it causes enmities and the alienation of one's family and
household, and treacheries and thefts and deceptions. Dorotheus — Hermes to the Moon provides health and strengthening, and gives power to the body parts. i Orpheus — Hermes onto the Moon disturbs the stability of families and the district, and stirs up falsity in the market place and contention
and calumny, as long as a benefic should not be looking on; for
often when a benefic regards it in this way, it tums the crafts of
this [ingress] to profit.
Anubio — No entry.
Pseudo-Valens — No entry. But see Appendix Gêmeos . 5 - Angles
Dorotheus — No entry.
Orpheus — Hermes onto the Hõroskopos and the Midheaven makes for friendship and trust from the great as a result of discourses and
honor in the district [in which he lives]; onto the Descendant, it 47 causes pain and enmities, conceras, judgments, piteous plights from
loans; onto the subterraneous pivot it is worse, causing dangers and
harm from hidden and ancient [sources].
Anubio — No entry.
Pseudo-Valens — When the star of Hermes has come to the
Hõroskopos, it causes unions, knowledge, great good fortune, economies, and the compietion of old business. If it should come
up to the Midheaven, it similarly causes the compietion of old
business, and a sudden awkwardness, and companionship with
superiors. If the star should come to the setting zõidion, it is
exceedingly bad and punitive; for it causes censures and calumnies
pertaining to one's manner of living, upheavals and whisperings;
mark well that the time is poor for everything. If it should come to
the subterraneous zõidion, it causes gossip of secret or piratical
deeds, and hõpetas [unknown word] with unpleasantness, and
untimely departures in stays away from home. Dorotheus — The luminaries in the places of benefics are beneficiai, but in the places of malefics, harmfiil.
The Moon to Kronos is cold, and when it is in its own trigon, [the
native] is benefited by those who are ruling: . . .
Orpheus — The Moon onto Kronos and Ares makes idle laziness and losses and dangers from heights or blood, the one from Kronos, the
other from Ares; but with the other stars it is fine.
Anubio — No entry.
Pseudo-Valens — Having come to Kronos, it becomes sluggish and full of indifference, and causes certain remembrances of ancient
matters; look for an opportunity to speak to one who is older, and
[consider] every purchase; and it is conducive to acquiring a home;
and it gets one dreadfully disturbed by dreams. 48 5->
Dorotheus — The luminaries in the places of benefics are beneficiai, but in the places of malefics, harmful.
Orpheus — No entry.
Anubio — No entry.
Pseudo-Valens — Arriving at Zeus, it is propitious for every action, but vexatious.
)-(? Dorotheus — The luminaries in the places of benefics are beneficiai, but in the places of malefics, harmful.
When the Moon has come to Ares, it signifies unforeseen dangers
if no benefic should look at it. Similarly also, when the Moon has
come onto the Sun while Ares looks on.
Orpheus — The Moon onto Kronos and Ares makes idle laziness and losses and dangers from heights or blood, the one from Kronos, the
other from Ares; but with the other stars it is fine.
Anubio — No entry.
Pseudo-Valens — When it has come to Ares, mark the days; for it causes unforeseen accidents, indifference, or falis, or bloodshed, or
excitations, unless it is murderous and on the attack.
5-0
Dorotheus — When the Moon has come onto the Sun in Leo, it is fine for unions.
When the Moon has come to Ares, it signifies unforeseen dangers
if no benefic should look at it. Similarly also, when the Moon has
come onto the Sun while Ares looks on.
Orpheus — The Moon onto the Sun or onto itself “bestows a spirit at once sluggish and lying fallow,” and in the pivots it sometimes 49 makes a change of abode.
Anubio — No entry.
Pseudo-Valens — No entry. >- Mercúrio Dorotheus — The luminaries in the places of benefics are beneficiai, but in the places of malefics, harmful.
The Moon onto Aphrodite while no malefics look on is a good
time; and if Ares is co-present with the Moon or with Aphrodite,
it signifies intercourse with women.
Orpheus — No entry.
Anubio — Having come to Aphrodite, it signifies cheerfulness and causes actions and intercourse, unless it causes unpleasantness and
the shaming of one publicly.
Pseudo-Valens — No entry. Dorotheus — The Moon to Hermes when he is beneficent indicates good things, but difficult things when he is maleficent.
Orpheus — No entry.
Anubio — No entry.
Pseudo-Valens — Having come to Hermes, it causes actions to be more effeminate, and it amplifies whatever is effected through letters and
partnerships, unless it causes conflicts or odiousness of domestics
or slaves; mark those days. Dorotheus — Every star is base when diametrical to itself by transit, and it is bad when coming upon its fixed place. 50 When the Moon has come onto its own place, it rnakes thoughts
rise to the surface. And if it should chance to be in a tropical
zõidion, [the native] changes from one occupation to another. And
if it should happen to be with Aphrodite and Zeus by fixation, it
provides much good cheer.
Orpheus — The Moon onto the Sun or onto itself “bestows a spirit at once sluggish and lying fallow,” and in the pivots it sometimes
makes a change of abode.
Anubio — No entry. But see Appendix Gêmeos .
Pseudo-Valens — No entry. 3 - Angles
Dorotheus — The Moon to the Hõroskopos elevates the soul. Having come to the Midheaven, it makes for promotions and reputation;
and you may know the kind of reputation from the star testifying
to the Moon. The Moon to the Descendant is fine for plots against
enemies. Similarly also, having come to the subterraneous pivot, it
is fine for slaves and the plots of enemies and matters clandestine
and hidden, and for the association of such.
Orpheus — The Moon onto the Sun or onto itself “bestows a spirit at once sluggish and lying fallow,” and in the pivots it sometimes
makes a change of abode.
Anubio — No entry.
Pseudo-Valens — If the Moon should come to the Hõroskopos, it causes upheaval in the soul; for it causes disgust and empty fears.
If it should come to the Midheaven, it will be propitious and
efficacious for everything. If it should come to the Descendant, it
causes fears, indifference; and take care with female persons and
every action. Having come to the subterraneous zõidion, it is
unpleasant and full of disturbance. 51 Appendix Gêmeos — Pseudo-Valens' Ingresses upon the Nativity
Compiled by Robert Hand
In each section the text from Pseudo-Valens contains ingresses of each
planet upon the “nativity.” As Schmidt has mentioned in his note, it is
not at all clear what this means, and he has presented two possible
explanations. After going over his translation I discovered something
very curious. Although Pseudo-Valens describes ingresses by the Moon,
he does not describe ingresses upon the Moon by other planets, with the
exception of Kronos onto the Moon. In addition all of the descriptions
of the ingresses upon thé nativity occur in about the part of each
paragraph where one would logieally expect there to be interpretations
of ingresses upon the Moon. This leads to a strange possibility. Are the
so-called ingresses upon the nativity actuaíly ingresses upon the natal
Moon? And if so, why are they called ingresses upon the nativity as
opposed to ingresses upon the Moon?
It would be lovely to say that we have an answer to these
questions, but we do not. However, there is an intriguing possibility.
There are several ancient systems in which the Moon is a much more
significant point in the chart than it is in modem Western astrology. For
example, in Hindu astrology planetary periods, or dasas, are reckoned
from the lunar mansion occupied by the natal Moon. The ruler of the
first period of life is the ruler of the Moon's lunar mansion. Similarly
in both Hindu and ancient Greek systems the Moon is reckoned as
another point from which one can count houses. [While is it is true that
one can count houses from any point in a chart, some points such as the
Ascendant, Lot of Fortune and the Moon were used more than others.]
Also in Hindu astrology the major system of transits, gochara, counts
its houses from the sign or rasi of the Moon, not the Ascendant. The
Moon sign is called janma rasi, and janma is a word in Sanskrit which
has the same basic root and meaning as genes is or nativity! Is it
possible that Pseudo-Valens' references to ingresses upon the nativity
refer to a system like gochara where the transi t is measured from the
Moon-sign?
Interestingly, Pseudo-Valens explicitly gives only the ingress of
Kronos upon the Moon. But when he comes to the ingress of Kronos
upon the nativity, he starts with the ingress upon the square. In the
other ingress delineations he starts with the planet ingressing upon the
place of the nativity. It is as if he had already delineated the ingress of 52 Kronos upon the nativity elsewhere, which, if ‘nativity’ means the
Moon, he has.
As a final test I compared the delineations of the ingresses upon the
nativity given in Pseudo-Valens to those given of gochara in B.V.
Raman's Hindu Predictive Astrology.1 While there are differences, the
similarities were astonishing, especiaily when it came to ingresses being
treated as difficult or easy. The main difference between the two works
is that gochara as employed in modem Hindu astrology has evolved
into a somewhat complex technique and treats planets transiting through
all twelve houses from the sign of the Moon. The Pseudo-Valens
material describes aspect relationships to the “nativity.” This is a
difference one would expect given the evolution of the two systems.
To help the reader make up his or her own mind, I have gathered
here together all of Pseudo-Valens’ delineations of ingresses upon the
nativity as translated in the main body of the text.
- Nativity
And in reference to a nativity, if it should come to the square2 of the
nativity, it causes actions and the administration of old business to be
more easily resolvable, but it also causes profitless stays away from
home. If it should come onto the triangle, it administers to whatever
matters are related to action and loss without fastidious avoidance, while
it signifies that whatever is related to friends is without harm. If it
should come onto the diameter of the nativity, it will have in everything
losses, intrigues of kinsmen, listlessness of mind, ingratitude,
separations from one's own, faithlessness of friends, enmities of
kinsmen, and dangerous sicknesses. If it should come onto the zõidion
where the year should be spent, [profection] it produces narrow straits
and harm and rapine, and the separation from women, and imposture.
V - Nativity
And in reference to a nativity, having come to the nativity, it causes
sluggishness of the body and a like sluggishness in activities, except for
the marriage of the unmarried; and it is also accustomed to give
children and make additions to iife. Having come to the trigon of the 1 Bangalore: Raman Publications, 1970.
2 See my introduction to this section for a comment on the fact that he
starts here with the square. 53 nativity, it disturbs the beginnings, but achieves success and action at
the last. Having come onto the square, it has as effect the benefits of
multifaceted business; for it is adept at management and fine for unions
and reputation. Having come to the diameter, it gives benefits of
multifaceted business, and acquisition, and children to the married; and
a few it distresses; and it chilis and disturbs what one does, and
introduces fears.
cf - Nativity
In reference to a nativity, if it should come to the nativity, mark the star
in everything; for it is full of sickness and penalties, and ineffective,
and highly dangerous; and there is a struggle in regard to trifling
suspicions, and agony of soul, and unsettlements of kinsmen. If it
should come onto the triangle of the nativity, it is turbulent on account
of worthless matters, and especially because of women; for it causes
upheavals and untimely cares. If it should come onto the square of the
nativity, it causes arguments with female persons and harm to one's
manner of life, and bodily cravings. If it should come upon the diameter
of the nativity, the affliction and burden is less.
O - Nativity
In reference to a nativity, if it should come to the nativity, it makes
upheaval and care, and it furthermore works for weaknesses; and it
administers the uncompleted actions of life early rather than at the
close. If it should come onto the square of the nativity, [it works]
trouble for the optical organs and dangers ffom water; but it is not bad
for actions, but makes them easier. If it should come onto a triangle, it
will be a propitious and easier time. Having come onto a diameter, it is
exceedingly odious; for it causes upheaval and fills one will mental
anguish, and causes censure and secrets and weakness and alienation of
the household. Mercúrio - Nativity
And in reference to a nativity, if it should come to the nativity, it causes
annoyances and disturbances and the distress of women and untimely
expenditures and unsettlements of women or bodily weakness, censure
from superiors, and narrow straits and unemployment. If it should come
onto the square of the nativity, it causes cheerfulness and benefits at the
beginning, but later it makes a man worse. If it should come to the 54 triangle of the nativity or onto the year that is being spent, [profection]
it is entirely fine and beneficiai and gives marriage or intercourse with
women, and the conception of children for the married,
5 - Nativity
And in reference to a nativity, when it has come onto the nativity, it is
distressing for everything mentally and in life; for it causes rejections
and censures and ingratitude and deprivations. If it should come onto
the square of the nativity, it is also exceedingly distressing on the part
of female persons; and it causes vain expeditions. If it should come onto
the triangle of the nativity, it is exceedingly beneficiai; and especially
as concems old business, it is not a bad time to put a hand to it. Having
come onto the diameter of the nativity, it makes the time unfit and
dangerous, and a liar and an imposter to all men.
3> - Nativity
In reference to a nativity, [when it has come] upon the nativity, it
causes terrible upheaval, and brings with it disgust and empty fears. 55 Glossary
The following word list is intended to give only the barest of guides to
the specifieally astrological vocabulary occurring in this book. It is
keyed to the words actually used in the translation itself. Each word is
followed by the transi iterated Greek word it çonsistently translates. The
third entry for each word is its counterpart (if any) in modem
astrological idiom. If there is no modem counterpart, but the translation
seems sufficiently clear, we have put “none”.
Occasionally, we have simply transliterated a Greek word in our
translation. This is either because we have not yet come up with a
felicitous equivalent, or else we do not yet think that we have
sufficiently understood the word on its own terms.
Bear in mind that the modern counterpart is not always coextensive with the Greek word; it may refer to a wider or narrower field
of objects or relationships. And even if the two words are co-extensive,
the modern word often comes from an entirely different semantic field,
and consequently does not regard the same object in the same manner
or from the same prospective.
For more information about these words and their interconnections,
and a more extensive list of Greek astrological terms, see the
Companion to the Greek Track. application: sunaphê: application
(to) ascend (of nodes): anabibazõ: ascend
(to) bear witness to: epimaturõ: cast an aspect (probably forward)
bound: horion; term
bound sovereign: horiokratõr. term ruler
circumambulation: peripatos: a direction
configuration: suschêmatismos: general word for aspect
(to) configure: suschêmatizõ: verb form of above entry
contact: kollêsis: encounter (usuaily as a result of direction)
contemplate: theõreõ: general aspect word
crisis: klimaktêr. climacterical times
(to) culminate: mesouraneõ: to culminate
decline; apoklima; cadent house
degree; moira: degree depression; tapeinõma\ fali
(to) descend (of nodes): katabibazõ: descend
dwelling: oikotêr: sign ruled 56 exaltation: hupsõma: exaltation
face; prosõpon: traditional
figure: schema: any kind of planetary relationship
(to) figure: schêmatizõ: verb form of above entry
(to) have dealings with: chrêmatizõ: none
Hõroskopos: Hõroskopos: Ascendant
house: oikos: sign ruled
house steward: oikodektõr: ruler of a sign
lord: kuríos: lord
(to) mark the birth hour; hõroskopeõ: to be the Ascendant
master: des potes: occasional synonym for rulership
mastership: despoteia: see above entry
Midheaven: mesouranêma: Midheaven
monomoiria: monomoiria: assignment of degrees to planets pivot: kentron: angle
place: topos: house
post-ascension: epanophora: succedent house
pre-ascension: proanophora: cadent house
(to) regard: epitheoreõ: cast an aspect forward
(to) rejoice: chairõ: to be in one’s joy
(to) rise: anatellõ: rise
ruler: oikodespotês: ruler of chart or issue, (not a sign rulership)
rulership: oikodespoteia: rulership in the above sense
(to) scrutinize: katopteuõ; aspect word
sect: hairesis; sect or condition
separation: apporoia: separation
(to) set: duneõ: set
(to) take delight in: chairõ: to be dignified
(to) testify to; epimarturõ: cast an aspect (probably forward)
trigon; trigõnon: triplicity
trigonal master: trigõnou despotês: triplicity ruler
zõidion: zõidion: sign 57 The Golden HindPress