Mapping the Psyche
An Introduction to Psychological Astrology
Volume 2: Planetary Aspects and the Houses of the Horoscope Clare Martin The Wessex Astrologer Published in 2016 by
The Wessex Astrologer Ltd,
4A Woodside Road
Bournemouth
BH5 2AZ
www.wessexastrologer.com
© Clare Martin 2016
Clare Martin asserts the moral right to be recognised as the author of
this work.
Cover Design by Jonathan Taylor
Cover picture: Basilica Philosophica. The alchemist balances the
spiritual with the material, the light with the dark, the solar with the
lunar. Engraving made by Matthäus Merian (1593-1650, Basel) for
the third volume of Johann Daniel Mylius’ Opus Medico-Chymicum
(1618) Later used in the appendix to the Musaem Hermeticum
(1625)
A catalogue record for this book is available at The British Library
ISBN 9781910531150
Previous edition by the CPA Press (2007) 9781900869348 No part of this book may be reproduced or used in any form or by
any means without the written permission of the publisher.
A reviewer may quote brief passages. Contents
Lesson One: Introduction to the Houses
Incarnation and the Angles
The Horizon: East-West Axis
The Meridian: North-South Axis
About House Systems
The Twelve Houses
Nature and Nurture
Time and Space
Chart Shapes
Hemispheres
Three phases of relationship
Quadrants
Lesson Two: The Twelve Houses – Part One
Houses One to Six
The First House
The Second House
The Third House
The Fourth House
The Fifth House
The Sixth House
Lesson Three: The Twelve Houses – Part Two
Houses Seven to Twelve
The Seventh House
The Eighth House
The Ninth House
The Tenth House
The Eleventh House
The Twelfth House Lesson Four: Polarity and the Angles
Polarity
Aries-Libra Axis
Taurus-Scorpio Axis
Gemini-Sagittarius Axis
Cancer-Capricorn Axis
Leo-Aquarius Axis
Virgo-Pisces Axis
The Angles in the Birth Chart
The Cross of Matter
The Ascendant-Descendant Axis
The MC-IC Axis
Lesson Five: The Nodes of the Moon
Aspects to the Nodal Axis
The Nodal Axis and the Houses
Lesson Six: Introduction to the Aspects – Part One
The Conjunction
Moon-Venus-Neptune conjunction
Sun-Mercury conjunction
Sun conjunct Moon
The Opposition
Mercury opposite Pluto
Sun opposite Pluto
Sun-Neptune opposition
Lesson Seven: Introduction to the Aspects – Part Two
The Square
The T-square
The Grand Cross
Semi-squares and Sesqui-quadrates
The Finger of the World
The Hard Rectangle Lesson Eight: Introduction to the Aspects – Part Three
The Trine
The Grand Trine
The Sextile
The Grand Sextile
The Kite
The Minor Grand Trine
The Grand Rectangle
The Yod
Lesson Nine: Chart Imbalances
Element Imbalances
Lack of Fire
Lack of Earth
Lack of Air
Lack of Water
Lesson Ten: Whole Chart Interpretation
Chart Data
Bibliography and Recommended Reading LESSON 1
Introduction to the Houses
Clare: It is good to see everyone again for the next stage of our
astrological adventure. This term things get really interesting because
we are going to add two major new levels to our astrology, both of
which explain how the birth chart actually manifests in real life.
Just to recap – last term we explored the meaning of the planets –
the characters in the play of our lives, and by putting them in the
astrological signs we explored how each planet seeks to express
itself, its motivation, values, desires and goals. We looked at the way
the zodiac signs are constructed, by polarity (positive or negative),
modality (cardinal, fixed or mutable), and by element (earth, air, fire or
water).
This term we are going to bring our astrology down to earth –
literally. We are going to see how the planets and signs function in the
world. It is not until the moment of our birth that the astrological
houses and angles are created, and it is at that moment that the
universal pattern becomes personalised, setting the scene for the
unfolding drama of our lives. In addition to the two axes created by
the angles, we will add a third major axis to our charts, that of the
Moon’s nodes. With the angles functioning as our personal doorways
into the world, we will see how the nodal axis functions as a doorway
into other dimensions, which appear to hold our pattern and
remember our soul’s purpose.
When we have identified the houses and the three axes in the
chart, we will go on to explore the aspects, the relationship between
the planets, and consider whether they support or do battle with each
other. The aspects describe the dynamic tension, struggle, talent and
potential in every chart. They tell stories which are both intensely
personal and yet reflect universal, recognisable themes which, to a
greater or lesser extent, we all share. Finally, with all the components in place, planets, signs, house,
angles and aspects, we will spend the last evening of this term on the
general interpretation of a birth chart, integrating everything we have
learned so far.
Audience: There just seem to be so many layers to all this – I think I
am beginning to lose my confidence. I used to think I knew a great
deal of astrology and now I increasingly feel as if I know nothing.
Clare: Well, you can now join the club because you are not alone.
When we first come across astrology we tend to approach it just as
we would with any other kind of learning – we seek to master it, we
feel that once we have learned the grammar we should be able to
speak the language fluently. But ultimately, astrology is a living and
constantly evolving tradition which cannot be mastered in this way;
we can only hope to participate in its wonders and mysteries.
Astrology teaches us to question, to open our minds to multiple and
subtle layers of meaning. It is one of the ancient mystery traditions
which leads us into a dialogue with living forces which are sometimes
opaque or hidden from us, sometimes capricious, often humorous
and occasionally overwhelmingly astonishing and meaningful. Our
best approach is one of enquiry and humility – we can ask astrology
questions and wait patiently for the answers. If we attempt to impose
our own preconceived notions upon it, then we will not hear it speak
to us. So don’t despair – I think this is an excellent sign.
INCARNATION AND THE ANGLES
We are going to add a new dimension to our astrology tonight. Up
until the moment of our birth, the planets and signs are disembodied
– they are of universal, collective significance only. They exist as
principles, unable to take any particular, specific shape or form.
However, at the exact time and place of our birth, the forever
changing pattern of the heavens becomes fixed, in what is the most
powerful, seismic moment of our lives. At the moment of birth our
undifferentiated wholeness comes to an end and we find ourselves
quartered, nailed, as it were, to the cross of matter, to the two major
axes which are the angles of the chart. From that moment on we are concretised, caught in the drama of opposites, which is also the
drama of life itself. Every birth chart is a reflection of the symbol for the Earth, the
cross within the circle, describing the precise nature of the specific
material, solid, concrete world into which we have been born and
through which each of us must manifest ourselves. It is the angles
which make time and space comprehensible, which give us our
orientation, our east, west, north and south.
The horizon, or East-West axis at that moment forms the
Ascendant-Descendant of the chart, and the meridian, or South-North
axis forms the MC (Medium Coeli) and IC (Immum Coeli).
Simultaneously, the twelve astrological houses come into being,
taking their starting point from the Ascendant. The houses describe
every area of life and all the relationships that we will encounter –
they describe ‘where’ or ‘in what area of life’ we will meet, experience
and manifest the planetary principles. It is the angles and the houses
which turn the cosmic picture into a highly particular and specific map
of the individual psyche and into an entirely personal life story.
Whether or not we believe, as the ancients did, that our souls
choose the specific time and place of our birth, nevertheless from the
moment of birth our lives are circumscribed and defined within the
limits of our birth chart. We cannot trade in or exchange any of the
positions of the planets, or decide to have another birth sign or a
different house placement of Pluto, for example. We are literally stuck
with our birth charts, which means that nothing can come to pass
which is not already present as potential in our birth charts. In this sense our birth charts are indeed our fate. But they are also
a tiny and unique piece of the great project, the magnum opus of
collective human evolution. What is of interest from this point of view
is not the birth chart itself, but how each of us engages and actively
participates with the unique part of the whole which has been allotted
to us, knowing that the way we live our own lives will add to the sum
total of all human experience and existence.
The astrological birth chart remains exactly the same for our entire
lives. There is no guarantee that we will be any more integrated,
evolved or conscious at the end of our lives than we were at the
beginning. The question is whether our lives are going to make a
difference, “for nature’s continued existence depends ultimately on
the kind of consciousness we bring to bear on it”.1 Ultimately, it is up
to each one of us to decide what to do with our birth chart and how to
live it.
Once a vision of life as an organic whole is accepted in
principle, humanity becomes in one sense a co-creator with
nature, in so far as it can foster, ignore or destroy its identity
with nature.2
If we are working alchemically, then there is work to be done. Our
job is to work against the blindness of our natural state in the service
of increased consciousness.
Things are created and given into our hands, but not in the
ultimate form that is proper to them … For alchemy means: to
carry to its end something that has not yet been completed; to
obtain the lead from the ore and to transform it into what it is
made for.3
Let’s see how a horoscope is created at a particular time and in a
particular place. I thought it would be interesting to use today’s
astrology as an example of how this works. Have a look at the
positions of the planets in this chart. On this day, no matter where in
the world we happen to be, the Moon, Sun, Neptune, Uranus and
Mercury are all in Aquarius. Mars is in Scorpio, Pluto and Chiron are in Sagittarius, Venus is in Pisces, Saturn is in Taurus and Jupiter is in
Gemini. 24th January 2001 London, 6.00 am GMT
From what we learned last term, we can already get a good sense
of the astrological themes described by the planets in these signs,
and the many millions of people born today will carry these themes
with them throughout their lives and live them out in a variety of
specific, individual ways. However, the areas of life in which these themes will be expressed depends upon the exact time and place of
each person’s birth. I have fixed this horoscope in time and space by
setting it for 6.00 am this morning in London.
East-West Horizon – Ascendant-Descendant Axis
Imagine that you are standing right in the centre of this horoscope.
The Ascendant is on your left, which tells us that at 6.00 this morning
0°23' of the sign of Capricorn was rising over the eastern horizon.
The Descendant is on your right, and you can see that 0°23' of the
sign of Cancer was setting over the western horizon. The Sun
ascends over the eastern horizon every day at dawn and descends
over the western horizon every day at sunset. You can see from this
horoscope that it is still dark because the Sun is under the horizon,
which is something we know anyway, because the Sun does not rise
in London in January until just before 8.00 am.
From our position at the centre of the chart, the entire zodiac and
all the planets and stars appear to rotate around us in a clockwise
direction every 24 hours at an average rate of approximately 1° every
four minutes.
The Ascendant is also the starting point of the twelve houses, with
the first house beginning at the Ascendant and all the houses follow
anti-clockwise around the chart, until you can see that the twelfth
house ends at the same point that the first house begins – at the
Ascendant. Houses 1-6 are below the horizon, hidden from view
under the earth, and houses 7-12 are visible above the horizon.
The South-North Meridian – MC-IC Axis
The other major axis of orientation is the point where the Sun’s path
crosses the North- South meridian, the points due north and due
south at the moment of birth, known as the Midheaven/IC axis. Once
again, if you are standing in the centre of the chart, with the east on
your left and the west on your right, then you will be facing south and
the Midheaven, or MC (an abbreviation of Medium Coeli, the Latin for
the ‘middle of the heavens’) will be directly ahead and above you, and
the IC (an abbreviation of Imum Coeli, the Latin for ‘lowest part of the
heavens’) will be directly behind you and under the earth. At 6.00 am this morning in London the MC was 5°45' Scorpio, which means that
the IC was exactly opposite, at 5°45' Taurus.
Audience: I am having difficulty with this, because in normal maps
the west is on the left and the east is on the right, with the north
above and the south below. How does a natal chart fit in with the
normal way we look at a map?
Clare: That is a good point. Imagine that you are looking at an atlas –
where are you actually looking from?
Audience: Well, I suppose you are looking down at the earth from
some place in space?
Clare: Exactly. You are disembodied – looking down at the earth from
somewhere outside the earth, and indeed from somewhere outside
your body. Astrology is geocentric, so we are looking out at the
heavens from our place on the earth and in our bodies. Now imagine
that you are standing in a wide open place, somewhere like Salisbury
Plain. Facing due south, the MC will be directly ahead of you and the
IC, or north point, will be directly behind you, invisible, under the
earth. All the constellations and planets will appear to rise over the
eastern horizon to your left, they will gradually rise higher in the sky
until they cross the MC, and then their height will gradually diminish
until they set somewhere over the western horizon. Imagine that the
entire zodiac is moving around you in a clockwise direction. At 6.00
am this morning the five planets in Aquarius were all in the second
house, and Chiron had just risen over the Ascendant and entered the
twelfth house. You can also see very graphically that there is about to
be a new moon, because the Moon is just over 3° behind the Sun
and, since it moves very rapidly through the signs, at approximately
1° every two hours, we can immediately see that there was a new
Moon today, at about 12.00 noon. 2.00 pm
We are now going to look at the situation eight hours later, at 2.00
pm this afternoon. All the planets in Aquarius have moved from the
second house through the first, twelfth, eleventh, tenth and ninth
houses, and across the MC. The Sun and Moon are now in the
seventh house, with Neptune, Uranus and Mercury still in the eighth
house. The new Moon has already occurred and the Moon is now
ahead of the Sun and quickly approaching Neptune. Incidentally, it is most auspicious to begin a new term in a new year at the new Moon.
So this is a perfect time for a new beginning.
By 7.00 pm, which is the moment when our class and the second
term of this course began, the picture has changed again. You can
see that all the planets in Aquarius have crossed the Descendant and
entered the sixth house, which means that it is now dark, as you can
see by looking out of the window. Saturn is just about to cross the
MC, to be followed by Jupiter. The Moon has already crossed over
Neptune and is now more than a degree away, moving rapidly
towards Uranus and then Mercury. 7.00 pm
In actual fact, of course, the signs and planets are not revolving in
a clockwise direction around us every twenty four hours – they just
appear to do so from our position in the centre of the chart. Rather, it
is the earth itself which is turning on its axis every twenty-four hours.
So another way of seeing the same thing is to focus on the fact that
the East-West and North-South points are moving anti-clockwise at a
rate of approximately 1° every four minutes against the backdrop of
the planets and signs. This means that the Ascendant gradually moves anticlockwise from Capricorn to Aquarius to Pisces and so on
right around the zodiac until it returns to the same point in Capricorn
once again, roughly 24 hours later.
Understanding how all this works in practice is very helpful,
because then we can visualise for ourselves exactly what a birth
chart is from an astronomical point of view. It is worth visiting the
Greenwich Observatory or the London Planetarium, just to
experience for yourself how this mechanism actually works. It can be
confusing until you understand that the East-West and North-South
axes are moving in an anticlockwise direction around the chart,
whereas all the planets and signs appear to be moving in a clockwise
direction from your place of observation.
Audience: Looking at a chart in this way helps to see the whole thing
visually. Does this mean that people born at night, with the Sun under
the horizon, are more comfortable in the dark?
Clare: Well, it is certainly true that people with the majority of their
planets under the horizon tend to be more private and to draw their
strength and their meaning from within themselves. This is a good
example of the way that our astrological interpretations are put into
context if we understand the astronomical structure of a birth chart.
Audience: Can you say something about the different house
systems? I find this particularly confusing and don’t really know where
to start.
ABOUT HOUSE SYSTEMS
Clare: This is turning into a rather technical lesson but, as you can
see from our own chart this evening, that is not really surprising.
Saturn is the most elevated planet in the chart at the moment, and it
is strongly emphasised because it is on the MC. And since Saturn is
in the fixed earth sign of Taurus we are working to understand the
structure. Jupiter in Gemini indicates that we all want to learn, and
with all the Aquarian planets in the sixth house of work, this also tells
us that we are interested in bringing the heavens down to earth and
making them work for us. There are many different house systems in astrology and no doubt
you have already come across this and wondered which is the
‘correct’ house system to use? However, house systems, like
everything else in astrology, are subject to fashion and to personal
preference. The only contribution I can make here is to suggest that a
horoscope is like a hologram – no matter how it is divided, the overall
pattern and structure remains identical, since the meaning of the
whole is reflected in each of its parts. Perhaps the major house
systems used today are the Placidus, Koch and Equal house
systems. Placidus and Koch are quadrant systems, which means that
the meridian, or MC-IC axis, is always found on the tenth and fourth
house cusps, with three complete houses in each quadrant of the
chart.
For the purposes of this course, I am using the Equal house
system, in which the zodiac is divided into twelve equal sections of 30
degrees, beginning at the Ascendant. This means, as you can see
from the three charts we have already looked at tonight, that the
meridian is not anchored to the cusps of the tenth and fourth houses,
but ‘floats’, being found anywhere from the eleventh-fifth houses, to
the tenth-fourth houses to the ninth-third houses, to the eighthsecond houses. The reason for this is that the angle between the
horizon (Ascendant-Descendant axis) and the meridian (MC-IC axis)
is constantly changing, depending on the time of day, time of year
and the latitude for which the horoscope is set.
Have another look at the series of charts above. At 6.00 am this
morning, the meridian was in the eleventh and fifth houses, because
the angle between the meridian and the east point of the horizon was
less than 60°. By 2.00 pm this afternoon, the meridian was in the
eighth and second houses, because the angle between the meridian
and the east point of the horizon was just over 120°. By the beginning
of our class at 7.00 pm the angle had altered again to just over 90°
and it will continue to decrease until 6.00 am tomorrow morning when
it will be around 60°once again.
We will look at the interpretation of the MC-IC axis over the next
few weeks, but for the time being it is just worth noting that, no matter
which house system we use, the meaning of this axis is not identical
to the meaning of the tenth-fourth house cusps. This is clear when we use the Equal House system, but not necessarily so clear when we
use a quadrant system of house division.
Let’s have a look at some of the similarities and differences
between the Placidus and Equal House systems of house division.
Here is the chart for 6.00 am this morning in both house systems. You
will see that the positions of planets, the angles of the chart and the
relationship between the planets remains identical.
However, some of the planets have changed houses. You can see,
for example, that in the Equal House system, the five Aquarian
planets are in the second house, with Venus in the third, Saturn in the
fifth, Jupiter in the sixth and Mars in the eleventh. In the Placidus
house system, however, the Moon, Sun and Neptune are in the first
house, with Uranus, Mercury and Venus in the second, Saturn in the
fourth, Jupiter in the fifth and Mars in the tenth. Equal House System Placidus House System
Audience: Now I am really confused. Surely these two charts are
now completely different and their interpretation will be totally
different?
Clare: I am afraid that the answer to this is both yes and no, because
as astrologers we are going to find ourselves confronted with the
whole issue of the nature of objective truth and of the meaning we
impose upon the objective world. Astrology does not respond well to any ideas we might have about there being only one truth. At the end
of the day, the art of interpretation will always depend upon each
astrologer’s individual perceptions and preconceptions, and on the
particular nature of each astrologer’s relationship to factual, symbolic
and mythic thinking. Perhaps the best thing you can do is to
experiment with several house systems and no doubt you will
gradually find the one you prefer – the one which works for you. It is
not uncommon for astrologers to use different house systems for
different astrological techniques. So try and hang on in there and see
what emerges for you over time.
Let’s look at some of the other differences between these two
house systems. With the Placidus chart the houses can be very
different sizes, and this difference in size tends gets more and more
extreme as the latitude of the place of birth increases. In fact, the
Placidus system breaks down altogether at high latitudes, which was
never a problem traditionally, since astrological lore was developed
around the temperate zones of the Mediterranean.
Large houses can contain whole signs, which are referred to as
‘intercepted signs’. These signs are considered to be ‘buried’ in the
particular houses they fall into, and the planetary ruler/s of that sign
are generally considered to have more difficulty functioning ‘in the
world’ because they are not anchored to a house cusp and do not
rule any of the houses. You will see from the Placidus chart that the
signs of Pisces and Virgo are intercepted, being ‘buried’ in the
second and eighth houses respectively. When signs are fully
contained within a house, the planetary rulers of those signs may not
be anchored in time or space – may not have a home, which means
that they may not be able to function particularly strongly in the world.
Audience: Can you just confirm what you mean by planets ruling
houses?
Clare: Each house has a ‘cusp’ which marks the place where the
house begins. In this chart, the first house cusp is 0°23' Capricorn, so
Saturn, which rules Capricorn, will rule the first house. The second
house cusp is 17°15' Aquarius, so Saturn is the personal ruler of the
second house and Uranus is the collective, transpersonal ruler. This
is important because we will all have ‘empty’ or ‘untenanted’ houses with no planets in them, but this does not mean that nothing is
happening there. It simply means that we will look to the ruler of the
house for information about the way that house is functioning.
Audience: Can you say how this might actually work out in this
chart?
Clare: Let’s go back to the first chart I showed you tonight and
imagine that we are studying the chart of somebody born in London
at 6.00 am this morning. The signs of Pisces and Virgo are
intercepted, and the rulers of these two signs are Jupiter (traditional
ruler of Pisces), Neptune (transpersonal ruler of Pisces) and Mercury
(ruler of Virgo). Jupiter and Mercury are grounded in the chart
because they also rule Sagittarius and Gemini, the signs on the
twelfth and sixth house cusps. But Neptune has no home. And it may
be difficult for Venus to find tangible expression, since it is in the
intercepted sign of Pisces.
On the other hand, whenever there are intercepted signs in the
large houses in the Placidus system, then the same pair of planets
will rule two of the smaller houses, and those planets will function
strongly in the world because they are anchored to more than one
house cusp. For example, you will see that Mars and Pluto rule both
the tenth and the eleventh houses, because the cusp of both houses
is Scorpio, and Venus rules both the fourth and fifth houses, because
the cusp of both houses is Taurus.
This information tells us about the relative strength of the planets
and where to put the emphasis in our interpretation. For example,
Mars, Pluto and Venus will be strongly emphasised in the chart. But
as we have already seen, Venus is in the intercepted sign of Pisces,
so we can assume that the person born at 6.00 am this morning will
be particularly imaginative and sensitive but may have difficulty
finding a concrete expression for this.
Finally, because Placidus is a quadrant house system, three
complete houses are found in each of the four quadrants. Starting
from the angles, these are known as angular, succedent and cadent
houses, and the meaning of these terms is not dissimilar from the
meaning of the cardinal, fixed and mutable modes. In an Equal House chart, on the other hand, each planet has equal
weight ‘in the world’ because each sign (and therefore the planetary
ruler of each sign) is ‘anchored’ to a house cusp.
THE TWELVE HOUSES
Now that we have looked at how the twelve houses are constructed
in the first place, we can consider how each house describes different
ways in which we engage with the world.
Every area of experience and every relationship we will ever have
are right there in our own birth charts, with each house describing a
particular kind of relationship, as you can see from this table.
1st house Relationship to our immediate environment 2nd house Relationship to our body, our money and our
possessions 3rd house Relationship to siblings, neighbours, cars and
teachers 4th house Relationship to father, family and early environment 5th house Relationship to our children, pleasures and risk taking 6th house Relationship to work, co-workers, daily ritual and
routine, health, pets. 7th house Relationship to partners and spouses 8th house Relationship to sex, death and shared resources 9th house Relationship to travel, foreigners, higher education,
meaning and to our god. 10th house Relationship to mother, public world, profession, boss
11th house Relationship to friends, colleagues, politics and
society 12th house Relationship to dreams, images and hidden worlds The planets in each house and the condition of the planets ruling
each of these houses will describe the quality of these kinds of relationships in our lives.
Now have a look at this overview of the types of activities we will
be engaged in, and the people we are likely to meet in each of the
twelve houses.
Nature and Nurture
Before we look at each of the houses individually, it is worth saying a
bit more about the relationship between individual perception and
external reality. It is clear from our birth charts that we are not blank
slates when we are born. Rather, we are born with our pattern
already complete, which means that we are inherently attuned to
perceive and process our experiences and our relationships
according to the inbuilt frequency and resonance of our birth charts.
Imagine, for example, that you are discussing your mother with
your brother. Logically, we would expect you to have similar or even
identical impressions of her since, objectively speaking, she is the
same person. But it is our own perceptions and experiences, rather
than her ‘objective reality’, which are found in our birth charts, so it is
likely that each of you sees her rather differently. As you can see from the tables, it is the tenth house which
describes our relationship to our mother and our contribution to the
world. Say, for example, that you have Jupiter in the tenth house and
your brother has Saturn in the tenth house. This would indicate that
your perception of your mother is that she is philosophical, gregarious
and popular, that she encourages you to believe in your potential for
success, that she opens up the world for you and broadens your
horizons. Your brother, on the other hand, is more likely to perceive
her as a figure of authority, a woman who carries responsibility at work, someone who is strict and demands that he work hard in order
to achieve success and respect in the world, leaving nothing to
chance.
The interesting question here is which of you is right? From an
astrological viewpoint, the people in our lives are a reflection of who
we are. “They are our mirrors, reflecting back to us not only what we
consider positive about ourselves, but also what we are unconscious
of, or reject in ourselves.” Júpiter This means that no relationship is possible
which is not already indicated somewhere in our birth chart.
According to the law of resonance, we can only perceive something if
we have a corresponding vibration. “Anything which lies outside our
capacity to resonate cannot be perceived by us and therefore does
not exist for us.”5 Resonance can either be sympathetic, an affinity
with another person or thing, or it can be antipathetic, an aversion to
another person or thing. This is why the external world and other
people are the most reliable source of information about ourselves.
Going back to this particular example, you are more likely to elicit a
warm, positive and enthusiastic response from your mother, whereas
your brother is more likely to elicit from your mother a strict and rather
more demanding response. And it is highly likely that your mother will
have both these themes in her own chart, although your experience
of her will be determined by your own charts.
Time and Space
No doubt you can see straight away that there is a natural affinity
between the twelve signs of the zodiac starting with Aries and the
twelve houses of the zodiac starting with the first house. They are not
the same thing but, since the signs describe a temporal cycle and the
houses describe a spacial cycle, the two systems can be
superimposed upon each other because, in astrology, every cycle
has the same intrinsic meaning.
Audience: So we have two systems which are similar but not the
same. Can you say a bit more about that?
Clare: Yes, that was a fairly broad statement. The cycle of the zodiac
is temporal, because the signs are an expression of the annual, seasonal cycle of the Sun’s changing relationship with the earth – so
it is a cycle defined by time. Just as the Sun always moves in one
direction – through time, from Aries all the way through to Pisces
before beginning again a year later, so we also develop spacially,
from our totally subjective awareness in the first house, through our
developing awareness of our family, of others and of the world, right
through to the point where we become totally merged with all of
human experience, in the twelfth house. So there is a natural
progression in both signs and houses which reflects our development
through time and space.
In practice, we are working with both these dimensions
simultaneously. This means, for example, that no matter which
planets are in our fifth house or which planet rules our fifth house of
creative self expression, this house will always be naturally
associated with the sign of Leo and its ‘natural ruler’ will always be
the Sun. Hopefully you are still with me at this stage?
Audience: Yes, that does make sense. It is like doing a three
dimensional sudoko puzzle.
Clare: Exactly right. With the introduction of houses we are in fact
adding a third dimension to our astrology. We are moving beyond the
simple ‘what’ and ‘how’ of the planets and signs, and adding the
‘where’ of the houses, so we have to hold three different factors in our
minds all the time.
CHART SHAPES
Before we consider the meanings of the individual houses, it is useful
to stand back and look at the general shape of each birth chart,
according to the distribution of the planets in the houses. At this stage
we are looking for any kind of special emphasis – crowded areas of
the chart will immediately tell us where the emphasis will lie. I would
recommend Howard Sasportas’ book, The Twelve Houses, in which
he divides the houses into two, three and four general realms of
experience.6
Hemispheres Every chart is divided by the angles into two sets of hemispheres.
The first six houses describe our personal development, and the
following six houses describe our relationship to others, to society
and to the world in general.
North-South Hemispheres
The horizon (Ascendant-Descendant axis) divides the chart into a
northern hemisphere below the horizon and a southern hemisphere
above the horizon. Houses one to six lie under the horizon, under the
earth, and are therefore hidden from view. They are houses of self
development, describing our subjective, internal worlds. Houses
seven to twelve lie above the horizon, in full view, and describe how
we relate to others and to the world around us. As with all opposites, these two hemispheres oppose, challenge,
depend upon and complement each other. If we have an emphasis of
planets below the horizon, no matter how active and successful we
are in the outer world and however involved we are with other people,
we will ultimately draw meaning and fulfilment from within ourselves,
from our personal, private lives. Every house has a planetary ruler,
which means that the houses above the horizon will be ruled by
planets below the horizon. Experiences gained in the outside world
need to be internalised; taken back into the inner world for processing. This means that the outer, public world always remains,
to some extent, unfamiliar and rather uncomfortable territory.
Conversely, if we have a marked emphasis of planets above the
horizon, then no matter how stable and secure we are on a personal
level, we will ultimately draw meaning, purpose and find fulfilment
through our relationships with others and with the outer world – it is
these areas of life which will energise us. The personal, subjective,
introverted approach is not for us, since the houses below the horizon
will be ruled by planets which are above the horizon, so that our inner
resources and values will be externalised; taken into the world and
shared. This means that the inner, private world will remain, to some
extent, unfamiliar and uncomfortable territory.
Does anyone have a marked emphasis of planets in one of these
hemispheres?
Audience: Yes, I have. Almost all my planets are below the horizon,
in the first six houses.
Clare: So we can presume that you are, fundamentally, a private
person with a rich inner life. However demanding and active and
successful your outer life is, nevertheless it appears that you will draw
your strength and your energy from within yourself and that it is there
that you are most at home and most fulfilled, at the end of the day.
We can also say that your outer life, your involvement with others and
with the world, does not really fulfil you on a fundamental level. Does
this ring true at all?
Audience: Yes, that is very interesting. Given the choice I would
much rather do my own thing than get involved with group activities,
but I have always thought of this as a weakness and criticised myself
for being anti-social.
Clare: Once again, this is a good example of how astrology can give
us the confidence to accept ourselves just as we are, rather than
feeling obliged to become what we think we ought to be.
East/West Hemispheres The other major division of the houses is defined by the MC/IC axis
which divides the chart into eastern and western hemispheres, with
the eastern hemisphere being on the left, or ‘oriental’ side of the
chart, and the western hemisphere being on the right, or ‘occidental’
side of the chart.
Broadly speaking, if we have a marked emphasis of planets in the
eastern hemisphere houses we are likely to be self defining – our
orientation and perspective will be fundamentally subjective. With
such a chart we tend to create our own reality, and to rely primarily on
ourselves and on our own resources. Ultimately, relationships,
however significant, will tend to be measured against our own
subjective needs and wishes, since the houses in the western
hemisphere will be ruled by planets in the eastern hemisphere. This
means that relationships are always going to be rather uncomfortable
territory, although it is also easier, with an eastern hemisphere emphasis, to break off from negative or destructive relationships
which do not serve our personal needs.
Conversely, a marked emphasis of planets in the western
hemisphere tends to indicate that we will define ourselves primarily in
terms of our relationships, whether to family, children, work
colleagues, partners or to the philosophical or religious beliefs to
which we adhere. Ultimately, it is through these kinds of relationships
and connections that we define ourselves, and our subjective or
individual identity outside these kinds of relationships is likely to
remain unexplored, unfamiliar and rather awkward, since the houses
in the eastern hemisphere will be ruled by planets in the western
hemisphere.
Audience: The chart for our class has a marked western hemisphere
emphasis.
Clare: Yes, and that is an excellent sign, because it means that we
are likely to want to learn from each other and to listen to each other.
Naturally, none of these orientations is any better than any other,
since astrology is a descriptive language and has no moral agendas.
But a marked hemisphere emphasis provides us with a valuable clue
about the general orientation of our clients. I have almost always
found that people with a strong eastern hemisphere emphasis take
their autonomy for granted, and are much more likely to consult an
astrologer about relationship issues, which are far more puzzling to
them. Likewise, the big question for those with a strong western
hemisphere emphasis tends to be how to define and identify
themselves as individuals, outside the area of relationship. Perhaps
that’s our real motivation in this class.
Audience: Well that is certainly true from my point of view.
THREE PHASES OF RELATIONSHIP
The houses can also usefully be divided into three areas of
relationship – personal, social and universal.
The first four houses describe our personal orientation and our
relationship to our immediate environment. Howard Sasportas called this the experience of “Me-in-Here”. For people with a strong
emphasis in the personal houses, a major focus of their lives will be
on personal development and security.
Houses five to eight are socially oriented, describing how “Me-inHere-meets-You-out-There”.7 For people with a strong emphasis in
the social houses, relationships will be particularly important.
Houses nine to twelve are universal houses, describing our
involvement with the world at large. The emphasis is on “Us-in-Here”,
and on our contribution to the greater picture which involves us all.8
In each of these phases, we begin with the enthusiasm and
optimism of the natural fire houses (first, fifth and ninth), consolidate
and establish ourselves in the earth houses which follow (second,
sixth and tenth), develop new understanding as a result of these
experiences in the air houses (third, seventh and eleventh), and
withdraw to absorb and emotionally process what has been learned
in the water houses (fourth, eighth and twelfth) before moving on to
the next phase, which will begin with the fire houses once again. Quadrants We can go one step further and divide the houses into four
quadrants, which have been described by Howard Sasportas as the
quadrants of self development, self expansion, self expression and
self transcendence. I would also recommend Alexander von
Schlieffen’s book in the CPA series, which is devoted to this subject
and provides an excellent exploration of the meaning and
interpretation of the quadrants in the horoscope. Mercúrio Notes
1. Baring, A. & Cashford, J., The Myth of the Goddess, p.681.
2. Ibid.
3. Paracelsus, Selected Writings. Júpiter . Richard Idemon, Part One: The Basics of Relating in Through the Looking Glass.
5. Thorwald Dethlefsen, The Challenge of Fate.
6. Howard Sasportas, The Twelve Houses, Chapter 15: Grouping the Houses.
7. Ibid.
8. Ibid. Mercúrio . Alexander Graf von Schlieffen, When Chimpanzees Dream Astrology. LESSON 2 The Twelve Houses Part One: Houses One to Six
The houses can be interpreted environmentally and psychologically,
operating simultaneously on both levels. They usually reflect aspects
of the objective truth as well as our subjective perception. As we go
through each of the houses in turn, I hope to illustrate how this works
in practice.
FIRST HOUSE: EMERGING
[Aries House – Natural Ruler: Mars]
There are two major factors to consider with the first house, since
the cusp of the first house is also the Ascendant. The East-West
horizon, or Ascendant-Descendant axis is so significant that it
deserves separate exploration, and we will spend some time looking
at the angles in more depth next week. For the time being, I want to focus on the Ascendant as the cusp
of the first house, which is possibly the most important house cusp in
the birth chart since it describes the threshold between our existence
in the womb and our physical birth into the world. It describes, often
with extraordinary accuracy and detail, the process of birth itself.
Amongst other things, the twelfth house describes our pre-natal
experiences. In the twelfth house we are in a totally symbiotic
relationship with our mother, dependent and vulnerable,
experiencing everything that she experiences without any way of protecting ourselves or screening anything out. In the twelfth house
we also seem to be at one with all of human experience and with the
whole universe, picking up mysterious influences and emotions
which cannot be reduced to personal content only. There is so much
going on that it is difficult not to be overwhelmed by the pervasive
atmosphere of the twelfth house, which continues to affect us
throughout our lives. The first house describes our subjective
experience of the world into which we are born, and the Ascendant
or first house cusp describes the actual birth moment itself, our
struggle to be born and to achieve our independent existence. This
is such a powerful event that it continues to operate strongly
throughout our lives, being re-constellated every time we approach a
new beginning, however great or small, whether this is a new
meeting, a new opportunity, a new job, a new relationship or even
the beginning of a new day.
Let’s look at some examples of Ascendants in different signs, and
planets conjunct the Ascendant, so we can begin to see how this
actually works in practice. The first house is entirely subjective,
describing our personal approach, response and reaction to the
world around us. The entire Ascendant complex describes our
instinctive outlook on life and the way we navigate through and
engage with the world around us. I want to approach this on two
different levels, one profound and one trivial, but both of which tend
to be relevant in my experience.
Audience: Can you explain what you mean by the Ascendant
complex, Clare?
Clare: Yes, the Ascendant complex is a combination of different
factors which includes the sign on the Ascendant, the condition of
the planet or planets which rule that sign, any planets within 8° of the
Ascendant, and any planets which make aspects to the Ascendant.
When all these factors are combined, it is possible to make a
particularly accurate and specific interpretation about the way an
individual engages with the world and with all new beginnings. For
this reason, the general descriptions I am about to give you are really just caricatures, because every Ascendant is much more
complex and personal and accurate, when analysed properly.
Aries Ascendant
Keeping it simple for the time being, how would you imagine that
someone with Aries rising or Mars in the first house, will perceive,
and therefore relate to, the world?
Audience: Will they approach the world competitively and forcefully,
and see everything as a personal challenge to be conquered?
Clare: That’s right. They are likely to be instinctively independent
and approach life with considerable energy, determination and
courage. Aries rising people are often initiators, looking for the next
new project, goal or challenge to launch themselves into. And this
approach will be reflected in the circumstances of their physical birth.
Perhaps they were born very quickly, charging into life, a pattern
which will continue to repeat itself every time they embark on new
beginnings. Perhaps they were the first-born in the family, or are
destined to lead the way, leaving their siblings to follow in their path.
And since Mars rules knives and other sharp instruments, the birth
process may have involved surgical instruments, some kind of
cutting or tearing, or injections. In this case, there will be a deep
memory, often on an unconscious level, that the world is a violent
place, and that our personal survival demands the use of ‘weapons’
and courage in the face of obstacles and pain. This can be
expressed positively by embarking on heroic missions to rescue and
defend, or negatively with a particularly aggressive, combative
approach to life.
Audience: So the planet that rules the Ascendant and the first house
in this case is Mars. Does that give extra emphasis to Mars in the
chart?
Clare: Yes, it certainly does, and the sign and house in which Mars
is placed will significantly modify the interpretation of the Ascendant
and the way we relate to the world around us. If, for example, you have Aries on the Ascendant, then that sounds very spontaneous,
courageous and instinctive, but if your Mars is in the fourth house in
Cancer, then that will modify the Ascendant and you will be more
cautious and sensitive and self protective about the way you
approach the world. Alternatively, if your Mars is in the second house
in Taurus, then that will lend more patience and perseverance. In
fact, the planet which rules the first house and the Ascendant is so
important that it is the ruler of the entire chart.
Audience: But I always thought that the ruling planet was the planet
which rules your Sun? So that if you are a Gemini, for example, then
your ruling planet would be Mercury?
Clare: This is a logical assumption, but in fact the ruling planet is the
ruler of the sign on the Ascendant. This reflects the importance of
the moment of birth is and the significance of the angles in the birth
chart. It also explains why it is so important to have an accurate time
of birth.
Audience: You were going to mention the ‘ridiculous’ level?
Clare: Oh yes, that’s right. The point about the Ascendant and first
house is that it represents not only our personal approach to the
world but it can also describe the personal vehicle in which we
navigate through life. And our vehicle is our body but it can also be
our car – which is a way of making a personal statement about
ourselves and our approach to life. So, for example, what kind of car
would someone with Aries rising drive?
Audience: A red sports car?
Clare: Exactly. This makes a strong statement about personal
potency, speed and drive as well as independence, aggression and
freedom. A red sports car is a message that everyone else should
get out of the way and let us through. With Mars ruling or in the first
house we are unlikely to make good passengers, insisting that we
are at the wheel ourselves – in the ‘driving seat’. I have also noticed
that many Aries rising or Mars ruled or Aries Sun people actually ride motorbikes – which represent freedom, speed, potency and a refusal
to be held back by the traffic. Although this may seem rather absurd
at first glance, it can actually be psychologically revealing, since the
car we choose often does say something about the way we
approach life.
Taurus
With Taurus on the first house cusp or Venus in the first house, our
approach to life will be more passive, practical, gentle and graceful.
With Venus ruling the chart, our personal security and comfort will be
of primary concern, and we will want to take our time before
embarking on any new ventures. It is also likely that we will resist
change, since Taurus is perhaps the most fixed of all the fixed signs.
The placement of Venus in our birth charts and of any planets in the
first house will provide additional information, although it is likely that
our personal appearance and, for that matter, our choice of car will
be strongly influenced by practical concerns and by our personal
values. Taurus is an earth sign, so we may, for example, be very
conscious of ecological issues, dress ourselves in natural fabrics in
soft earthy colours and drive a car which uses very little fuel.
Alternatively, we might want to show our substance and wealth to the
world by wearing expensive jewellery and driving an expensive car.
Speed will be less important than comfort and our main priorities
may be the music system, heated seats and make-up mirror. If we
are engaging with the world in a particularly practical earthy way, we
may well drive a work vehicle, such as a catering van, flower delivery
van, transporting musical instruments for our band or orchestra, or
even drive a mud splattered farm tractor. All of these options are
ways of approaching the world in a Taurean or Venusian manner.
The birth process itself is likely to have been a well planned and
gentle experience, and with Venus ruling the chart, the child may
well have felt welcomed into the world.
Gemini
With Gemini on the first house cusp and Mercury ruling the chart, or
Mercury in the first house, it is likely that we have entered the world with great curiosity, looking around us at our new environment and
taking everything in. Our approach to life will be inquisitive and
curious, and we will engage with our immediate environment as an
opportunity to gather information, to play, to have fun and to learn.
There always seems to be a particularly light and youthful quality to
Gemini rising or Mercury in the first house. Life is an opportunity to
learn and to make connections, and should not be taken too
seriously.
People with Gemini rising or Mercury in the first house are often
great walkers, since this gets them out into the open air, stimulates
the lungs and exercises the legs. Gemini rising or Mercurial people
may not like the feeling of being inside a vehicle, which can make
them feel trapped or restricted. So if they are not walking, then it is
likely that they will travel around by bicycle, an archetypally
Geminian mode of transport. Alternatively, a pair of roller skates or a
skateboard might serve just as well.
Cancer
With Cancer rising, and the Moon ruling the chart, or with the Moon
in the first house, we are likely to have experienced an intense
emotional symbiosis with our mother during the process of birth, an
overwhelming experience of the power of nature, and feelings of
being expelled from the womb, which is translated during our lives
into a strong need for personal protection and care. With Cancer
rising there will be a marked emotional sensitivity to our
surroundings and a cautious, self-protective approach to life. As you
can imagine, people with this placement tend to carry their shells
around with them both for their own protection and for the protection
of their children and family members. It is therefore not unusual for
those with Cancer rising or Moon in the first house to drive ‘people
carriers’, or vehicles which are particularly safe, rounded and crab
like. Towing a caravan or driving a mobile home would also be
appropriate for Cancer rising. Equally likely is the possibility that they
don’t drive at all, which might be one way of asking to be cared for.
Leo With Leo on the first house cusp or the Sun in the first house, there
will be an innate feeling of being special, a sense that we have been
born to be noticed and recognised, to be in the limelight and to be
the subject of praise and adoration. It may well be, for example, that
our into the family was of particular significance, for example in the
case of a pregnancy after many years of difficulty conceiving. An
individual with Leo rising may have a deep memory of being a much
wanted child, whose birth was a cause for joyful celebration. Leo
rising or Sun in the first house people will naturally expect the world
to reflect back to them how special and unique they are and they will
often demand special treatment, attention and recognition. They
approach the world with warmth and generosity. The particular way
they go about seeking recognition will depend on the position of the
Sun in the chart.
In an ideal world, we could imagine that someone with Leo rising
or the Sun in the first house would prefer to be chauffeured or, better
still, carried around in a sedan chair. Their car of choice would be
grand and eye-catching. Certainly, they would prefer not to have to
travel with the masses, although other people also represent a
potential audience, providing the Leo rising or Sun in the first house
individual an opportunity to take centre stage, drawing everyone’s
attention towards them. There is often something particularly
dramatic about the way that Leo rising people approach the world
and make their entrances.
Virgo
With Virgo on the first house cusp, Mercury rules the chart once
again, although this Mercury ruled sign is concerned with practical
efficiency rather than curiosity, as in the case of Gemini. Virgo is an
earth sign and is particularly associated with health and the body.
Virgo rising people are specialists and perfectionists and cannot take
too much on board at once since they are easily overwhelmed and,
because of a strong psychosomatic, or body-mind connection, they
tend to be prone to intestinal or digestive problems. Virgo rising
people are naturally modest and self effacing, and they need to
analyse, assimilate, restrict and carefully digest their experiences of
the world. They want to get it right and they need to feel in control. Audience: What kind of car do you think someone with Virgo rising
would drive?
Clare: Well, first of all they are unlikely to want to take up too much
space, so a small white car would be ideal, since white is the colour
of purity. However, because Pisces is always present where Virgo is
concerned, there could be plenty of chaos in the boot or in the glove
box. And because of the strong psychosomatic link, there may well
be a sense of personal physical violation if the car gets scratched or
damaged in any way. Virgo rising tends to drive slowly and carefully,
paying great attention to detail. There may also be an element of
anxiety about driving, because they are likely to be particularly
concerned about following the rules of the road, obeying the speed
limits, parking restrictions and so on.
Libra
The person with Libra on the first house cusp and Venus once again
ruling the chart, is likely to present a pleasant and attractive face to
the world, and to wish to make everything in their environment
beautiful, peaceful and harmonious. There is often a noticeable style,
grace and balance about the way Libra rising relates to the world. It
is almost as if both mother and child wanted to behave well and look
their best during the birth process. And I have noticed that those with
Libra rising generally prefer to be driven, rather than drive
themselves, which is not surprising, since Libra is opposite Aries.
Scorpio
With Scorpio on the Ascendant or Pluto rising, the world is
experienced as a dangerous place, full of hidden threats which may
strike at any time. There is nothing superficial about this placement,
and it is not unusual for the birth process itself to have involved a
struggle for survival for either the child or the mother or both. People
with Scorpio rising are extremely private but seem destined to
experience many personal crises during their lives. As always with
this sign, which is either black or white and very rarely anything in
between, they tend to engage with the world either as ice or fire. For
example, an individual with Scorpio rising can be impossible to read – inscrutable and silent, with a powerful magnetic presence which
can be felt as soon as they walk into a room. If the element of fear is
particularly strong this can result in a kind of paranoia and a desire to
manipulate the world in order to remain in control. The intense,
burning side of Scorpio comes to life during crises, with the result
that those with a Scorpio Ascendant or with Pluto rising often seem
to live many lives during their one life, being impelled, like the
phoenix, to walk into the fire again and again in order to renew and
regenerate themselves. Every new beginning, for Scorpio rising, will
evoke the original struggle for survival, a theme which will remain
throughout life. As you can imagine, transport is a difficult issue for
Scorpio rising because it is never safe to travel in the world. They
may well choose a car which is as invisible as possible – just like
every other car – in order to avoid attention. Alternatively they may
drive a black or maroon car with darkened windows so that nobody
can see inside.
Sagittarius
The individual with Sagittarius rising or Jupiter on the first house
cusp is likely to approach life with enthusiasm, optimism and faith,
seeing all new beginnings as opportunities for exciting new
adventures. Life is a continuous journey into new territory and,
because Sagittarius is a mutable sign, the adventures along the way
are likely to be even more important than the eventual destination.
Sagittarius rising people tend to make a big entrance into the
world, and their birth is often dramatic or theatrical or larger-than-life
in some way. They may, for example, be born in the middle of a
thunderstorm or other kind of dramatic weather (since Jupiter, the
god of storms, rules the chart), or on the move – for example in the
car on the way to the hospital, or on an aeroplane or ship. Whether
or not these events are literally true, from a psychological point of
view all Sagittarius rising people seem to be born on a wagon
heading west, through new and unexplored territory and towards
new adventures. Physically, those with Sagittarius or Jupiter rising
are in some sense ‘larger than life’ – they often have the kind of
presence which seems to extend beyond their physical bodies. Audience: That’s interesting because I have Sagittarius rising and I
am always covered in bruises, because I am clumsy and find myself
crashing into things and other people. I think that is because I don’t
really know my limits.
Clare: I think that is often the case, and this is something you can try
out for yourself next time you meet someone with Sagittarius rising.
Ask them to show you their most recent bruises and no doubt they
will oblige, responding with the typical generosity of this sign. As for
the mode of transport, Sagittarius and Jupiter rising people tend to
catch planes as often as other people catch colds. Alternatively they
might drive long distance coaches taking groups of people on
pilgrimages or other kinds of adventures. A gipsy caravan would be
equally acceptable.
Capricorn
With Capricorn on the Ascendant or Saturn in the first house, life will
be approached carefully, cautiously, responsibly and even fearfully.
There is often a strong feeling of isolation, a sense of being alone in
the world, as if one had been put straight into an incubator at birth, or
that the birth process has been an experience of abandonment, of
being expelled from the womb, cold and alone and isolated.
Capricorn or Saturn rising people may feel that there is something
particularly unsafe about the world and that they are unlikely to get
their needs met. The actual birth process may well have been slow
and painful, with a long labour involving extremely hard work for both
the mother and baby, and all new beginnings will be coloured by this
experience. They might drive an old black car, which can only go
very slowly.
Aquarius
There is usually something cool, detached, charismatic and
magnetic about Aquarius rising or Uranus in the first house. Aquarius
rising people often engage with the world from something of a
distance, and there is likely to be something unusual about their
appearance or the way they dress. Audience: I have Mars in Aquarius in the first house. Does that
mean that I will engage with the world by competing? I can see the
Mars in the first house part of this, but how do I make sense of the
fact that Mars is in Aquarius?
Clare: The sign tells us how the planets will function, so Mars in
Aquarius tells us how you will compete. I would imagine that you
assert yourself in a detached, rational, idealistic, perhaps unusual or
eccentric, manner. You are likely to have high expectations of
yourself, and of other people, and will seek to make your mark on
the world (Mars in the first house) by imposing (Mars) your personal
ideals and particular vision (Aquarius) on your environment (first
house), making sure first of all that you have all the intellectual
ammunition (Mars in Aquarius) you need. There is a great deal of
forceful intellectual precision in this placement, and it could even
describe the circumstances of your birth, which in this case may
have been assisted by the latest scientific advances (Aquarius) or
the use of a sharp instrument (Mars) of some kind?
Audience: This is amazingly accurate, although not in the way you
have suggested. My mother is a Christian scientist and she was
determined to give birth to me naturally, using the power of the mind
to get through it, but in the end she had acupuncture for the pain, so
there are the sharp instruments!
Clare: This is an excellent example of the multi-levelled meanings
we find everywhere in astrology. The houses can be interpreted on
many levels, from symbolic to intellectual to psychological to
physical, and often we can find meaning on all these levels
simultaneously.
I don’t think people with Uranus or Aquarius rising are particularly
interested in transport since they tend to find it difficult to accept their
physicality, and often don’t seem to live in their bodies at all, but
rather in their minds. The Saturn co-ruler of Aquarius adds caution
and reserve and hesitation to the way in which they meet the world.
Audience: Yes, I think that’s true, because I have always felt rather
disembodied. Pisces
With Pisces rising or Neptune in the first house, there are unlikely to
be clear boundaries between life in the womb and life in the world.
The birth process may well have involved the use of drugs or
anaesthetics, so that the child was born, as it were, without
consciously crossing the threshold. This might be the case with an
induced or Caesarean birth. This is an immensely sensitive
Ascendant, and the individual is likely to absorb their environment
like a sponge, taking on the colour of their surroundings like a
chameleon, without any clear sense of personal definition. People
with Pisces rising or Neptune in the first house can be particularly
hard to get hold of, since they tend to change shape all the time.
Audience: I have Pisces rising and journeys are never simple for
me. I never seem to be able to get anywhere on time, and I have no
sense of direction at all. And I can certainly relate to the sensitivity
you mention – I can be completely overwhelmed by what is going on
around me, to the extent that I seem to lose myself altogether. I have
had to learn to keep life as simple as possible.
Clare: I have spent quite a bit of time looking at the different
Ascendants because people often consult an astrologer when they
find themselves at a crossroads in their lives, perhaps contemplating
a change of direction or a new beginning of some sort. At these
times, it is worth remembering that the birth chart is exactly that – a
chart of the birth moment itself – and an astrologer’s role can often
be that of a midwife, helping their client through and across this
threshold of new beginnings. So it is important that we examine the
Ascendant complex very carefully whenever we are consulted about
new ventures or new directions, since our client’s approach to new
beginnings is very likely to be different from our own.
Let’s assume, for example, that we have Sagittarius rising, but
that our client has Capricorn rising. Unless we are sufficiently selfaware, we could find ourselves reassuring our client, trying to
convince them that all they need to do is to trust and have faith and
that everything will turn out just fine. This may not be true at all in our
client’s experience and they may well feel even more fearful or inadequate and alone by the time they leave your consulting room
than they did when they arrived. But if we pay particular attention to
the Ascendant complex of our clients, then we can more accurately
reflect their experience of the world and provide the support and
mirroring which will help them to navigate any changes in their lives.
SECOND HOUSE: ESTABLISHING
[Taurus House – Natural Ruler: Venus] We have spent a great deal of time looking at the first house and at
the ascendant, and we need to move on now to the second house.
The second house is the house of physical and material substance,
of incorporation, our first experience of which is our relationship to
our body, what we feel about our body, whether we can trust it,
whether we value it or not, and how safe and secure it feels. This will
often be a reflection of the way our bodies were – or were not –
valued, respected, nourished, affirmed and protected by our primary
carers. This extends to our relationship to our possessions, our
personal resources and to what we feel we are worth. This also
relates to money which, in our culture, is such a powerful symbol of
personal substance and worth. So in a very material sense, the
second house describes how we earn our money and from a
psychological point of view it describes how we value ourselves and
our attitude to the money we earn. Audience: I have Neptune in the second house, and I have read that
this is a terrible placement, since money just slips through your
fingers, like water?
Clare: Certainly, you may not have a particularly strong sense of
your own physical boundaries or limitations, but this can also be an
immensely creative placement. It could indicate that you earn your
money in a Neptunian profession, such as advertising, charity work,
film, fashion, dance or as an artist. Ultimately Neptune in the second
house tells us about your values, which may well be more idealistic
and altruistic than materialistic. Unless we actually value money it is
unlikely that we will bother to accumulate it.
The second house tells us so much about our values and attitude
to substance of all kinds. Saturn in the second house, for example,
can describe a psychology of poverty, which remains with us all our
lives, no matter how much money we have in the bank.
Audience: What does Pluto in the second house mean?
Clare: Pluto is about intense control, so it can describe someone
who needs to have total control over their body, such as in the case
of athletes or ballet dancers, for example. Pluto is the planet of crisis,
repeated purging, purification and ultimate survival, and I have seen
it in the charts of people who amass huge wealth and then lose it all,
as if there was a repeating compulsion to radically purge any
substance or matter which has accumulated in order to be stripped
down before once again emerging and building again from scratch.
Sometimes people with Pluto in the second house have been strictly
controlled or manipulated, perhaps exploited, in their early years,
and the personal battle which ensues can be an obsessive need for
personal control, in order to avoid being controlled by others.
Audience: I have to be in total control of my body. Every day I do
hours of exercise and I am always putting myself on strict diets and
purges. I wish I could find a way not to be so extreme or obsessive,
but I suppose there is no hope for me? Clare: Well, it may be that on some level you experience your body
as dark or corrupt or unacceptable in some way. In Freudian terms,
the second house relates to the anal stage of development, when
the child seeks for the first time to have control over its body and
over the products of its body and a battle of the wills develops
between the child and the parent. A psychological interpretation
might be that you have ‘introjected’ this battle, which means that you
may well be treating your own body in the way it was treated when
you were much younger. If this is the case, then you have choices as
an adult which were not available to you when you were a child,
when the balance of power was inevitably unequal. It may be
possible for you to listen to your body more, and to question whether
it is really necessary to keep on punishing and purging it.
THIRD HOUSE: LEARNING
[Gemini House – Natural Ruler: Mercury] The third house describes our early environment, our exploration of,
and interaction with our immediate surroundings, the development of
thinking, learning, language and communication. This house
indicates how we absorb and process information, which in turn
defines what and how we perceive, and for each of us this will be
different. It also describes our relationships with our brothers and
sisters, our experience of early schooling and of school teachers and
neighbours. True to its natural Gemini association, the third house
also describes short journeys and local travel. Audience: I have Saturn in the third house and I don’t like to travel –
I always try and find reasons why I don’t need to go somewhere.
Clare: I wonder if there is any connection here with your journey to
school when you were much younger. With Saturn in the third it may
well be that this was a fearful event for you?
Audience: That’s right – now I think about it, I used to be picked up
every day by the mother of two children at my school, a brother and
sister, and I always felt awkward and alone because they would
ignore me, or talk about things which I didn’t know anything about.
And the reason I was taken to school in the first place was because
my mother was a single parent and had to leave for work even
before I left for school, so I always felt alone and abandoned – I
remember pleading with my mother to take me with her and to drop
me off at school on her way to work, but she wouldn’t do that
because it would mean I would arrive before the school gates were
opened and it would be unsafe.
Clare: That story describes very graphically what it feels like to have
Saturn in the third house. It can also mean that you are an only child,
that you feel you have been denied brothers and sisters, or
alternatively it could mean that you are the oldest child, with early
responsibility for your younger brothers and sisters. This can be
tough, because it means that you have not had an opportunity to
learn how to play or spat or fight with your siblings.
Audience: In my case, it describes the fact that I was an only child,
but I have always wanted brothers and sisters.
Clare: Saturn normally describes what we crave and what we feel
we have been denied, so this is a good example.
Audience: I have Neptune in the third house and I never had a clue
what was going on at school.
Clare: Neptune in the third would indicate that you have a poetic and
imaginative mind, and you may have spent your school years staring out of the classroom window and dreaming. With Neptune in the
third house you are likely to absorb information like blotting paper
and you probably need to feel things before they make sense to you.
I suspect that you have a visual and holistic way of processing
information. Logical analysis or rote learning would no doubt have
been meaningless to you and you are more likely to respond to the
way something is said rather than to the actual meaning of the words
themselves.
FOURTH HOUSE: BELONGING
[Cancer House – Natural Ruler: Moon] The fourth and tenth houses are the parental houses, describing the
home environment we grew up in (fourth house) and the family’s
relationship to, or status in, the world (tenth house). Generally
speaking, the fourth and tenth houses tend to describe our
perception of our father and mother respectively, although to some
extent that is interchangeable, since our parents play different roles
at different times in our lives, and our perception of them can
change. Nevertheless, we usually learn about the world from our
mother, who is generally the more visible parent (tenth house), and
we take our name, our basic identity and our connection to the family
line from our father, who is generally the more hidden parent (fourth
house).
The fourth house describes our early home environment, the
atmosphere we absorbed there and the nature of our early physical and emotional container, our biological and social roots and origins.
This is the watery Cancerian house, with the Moon as the natural
ruler, describing the quality of the nurturing we experienced in our
early lives and how safe we feel about belonging to our family, clan
or tribe.
The level of acceptance, love and encouragement we receive
from our family stays with us throughout our lives and describes how
safe we feel on an emotional level. Our family can provide a firm and
nurturing foundation upon which we can build, or alternatively, at the
other end of the spectrum, an unsafe, neglectful, critical or leaky
container in which case we may never feel safe on a fundamental
level. The primal matrix of the fourth house is eventually internalised,
describing how we create our own home and family and where we
come home to ourselves, which will include the sign on the cusp of
the fourth house, the condition of ruling planet or planets, as well as
any planets in the fourth house.
In the equal house system, the IC – which is a much more
personal point describing our own deepest inner foundation and root
system – is not necessarily found in the fourth house. In other words,
it is not necessarily tied up so closely with our parents. We will look
at this in more depth next week when we explore the angles of the
chart.
Audience: I have Jupiter in the fourth house and was born into a
very large extended family with lots of uncles and aunts and cousins
coming and going all the time.
Clare: That is a great example of Jupiter in the fourth. With this
placement there is an inherent sense of the meaning and value of
belonging to a family, which is often both very sociable and
gregarious. It can sometimes mean a strongly religious background
which supports family structures and values, so that the family itself
is supported by a larger matrix in which it is embedded.
Audience: Well, I come from a large Italian family, so there is a
strong Catholic background. Audience: I have Saturn in the fourth house and absolutely none of
this Jupiter stuff applies to me. I remember reading that Saturn in the
fourth is like ‘Bleak House’, which feels much more appropriate.
Clare: Yes, this is a very graphic image of Saturn in the fourth. I
always think of the fourth house as being like a flower bed. Some of
us are planted in fertile soil and tenderly nurtured and watered so
that we can grow tall and strong without too much difficulty. Some of
us are planted too close together or too far apart, some of us are
uprooted before we have had time to establish ourselves properly,
and some of us are water plants or plants which grow in the air, like
orchids. With Saturn in the fourth the experience is often one of
being sown in hard, dry ground from which it is difficult to draw
nourishment and in which it is hard to put down any kind of root
system – we are like desert plants having to survive on the very
barest minimum of nutrients. And this eventually makes us very
strong and self sufficient.
FIFTH HOUSE: CREATING
[Leo House – Natural Ruler: Sun] The fifth house is the house of recreation – self-expression,
enjoyment and pleasure. It describes what we do for fun, how we
play, what makes us feel alive and glad to be alive. The fifth house
describes our experience of being a child and our attitude towards
our own children. It also describes our attitude to romance, speculation and risk-taking, all those activities which make us feel as
if we are at the centre of the universe, uniquely blessed, special and
favoured by the gods.
The fifth house describes what we enjoy and do for fun rather
than for any particular goal or result. We all have different ideas
about what is fun. With Venus in the fifth house, for example, this
might be love affairs, whereas with Saturn in the fifth house our
pleasures are likely to be solitary and serious. With Mercury in Virgo
in the fifth house we might be a stamp collector or train spotter, with
Mars in Aries we might be a sportsman or woman, and with Jupiter
in Pisces we might love to dance. Fifth house pursuits are any
activities which give us joy and make us feel really alive.
Audience: But I have Pluto in the fifth house.
Clare: That is a good example, because we have to make sense of
what this powerful god of the underworld is doing in the fifth house of
creative self-expression. The first thing we can say is that your
pleasures are likely to be intense and you may be rather obsessive
about your hobbies. I suspect that you won’t really be enjoying
yourself unless you are doing something with total focus and
intensity. I also suspect that you should keep away from superficial
party or board games, since Pluto is about survival and the fifth
house is about competition, so the experience of being beaten is not
trivial – it can feel like a personal threat and you may find yourself
wanting to annihilate your opponent.
Audience: Yes, I don’t seem to be able to play on a light-hearted
level like most other people. If I compete then I must win, so I have
ended up not competing at all because it is too painful and difficult.
Audience: I have nothing in the fifth house. Does that mean I am not
creative or that I won’t have any children?
Clare: Absolutely not. In this case you will need to look for the planet
which rules the fifth house, and the story will be found there. Audience: I have Chiron in the fifth house in Cancer, with Cancer
ruling the fifth house. The Moon is in the fourth house in Gemini.
Clare: Well, there is something of the wounded child in this
placement and it may well be that you have always felt as if you
were an outsider, perhaps that you didn’t belong to your family, in
some way. And with the ruler of the fifth in Gemini in the fourth
house, I wonder if you had two homes when you were a child?
Audience: Well that is amazing because I was fostered at a very
young age, but I did spend periods of time with my birth family. So I
never really felt that I belonged anywhere and you are right that I
have always felt like an outsider.
Clare: And this could mean that your gift is your sensitivity to
children’s feelings. Do you work with children at all?
Audience: Yes, I work in an adoption agency, but the part I like best
about that is going into the families of people who want to adopt and
checking that the children will be safe and properly cared for there. I
also run an animal refuge where I look after animals which have
been abandoned.
Clare: That is a wonderful expression of your Chiron placement in
the fifth house. No doubt it gives you great pleasure to be able to find
homes for the children and to look after the animals.
Audience: Yes it does.
SIXTH HOUSE: PERFECTING
[Virgo House – Natural Ruler: Mercury] Let’s move on to the sixth house, which completes the personal
hemisphere and is the final house of self-development, in which we
perfect ourselves and develop particular skills which can be put into
useful service.
The sixth house is the workhouse – describing how and where we
earn our daily bread. It also describes how we approach, cope and
deal with the demands and details of everyday life at home and at
work. The sixth house says a great deal about our contribution and
attitude to work and the kind of work situations we find ourselves in.
It also describes our relationship to work colleagues and to those
that serve us.
The sixth house describes how we serve and service our bodies,
whether we feed them properly and give them enough rest and
exercise. In this context, we can see our body as our servant. How
do we treat it? Is it overworked, driven to exhaustion, starved,
overfed or overindulged? The sixth house can also indicate the kinds
of health issues which might arise if we neglect or abuse our body.
With Jupiter in the sixth house, for example, we might have a
tendency to over-work or to over-indulge generally, which could
eventually lead to liver problems, since Jupiter rules the liver. With
Mars in the sixth house, which rules the head, we might be prone to
headaches.
The sixth house also describes how we treat and care for our
pets. These two things are not so far apart, because we can easily
appreciate that small animals which are in our care need to be
looked after, loved and fed at regular intervals, but it is sometimes much harder to appreciate that we need to care for our own bodies
in the same way, to ensure that they are properly cared for and get
the right diet and exercise and enough rest, for example.
The sixth house, therefore, describes how we navigate unequal
relationships, those who work for us – it is traditionally the house of
servants – and those for whom we work. Let’s look at some
examples. What do you think would happen, for example, if you had
Uranus in the sixth house and went to work for the Civil Service?
Audience: You wouldn’t last long?
Audience: You wouldn't go there in the first place.
Clare: Not if you knew your chart. Uranus in the sixth will fight
against being hemmed in by red tape or bureaucracy. It can’t bear
these kinds of restrictions and will no doubt rebel against the system.
Uranus describes where in the chart we refuse to engage, so we
may well refuse to submit to the demands of duty, work and service
Audience: I have Uranus in the sixth house and it is also the ruler of
my chart.
Clare: So presumably this applies to you? It could also mean, of
course, that you work in the area of invention, or science or that you
are involved with new technology of some sort. Or that it is important
for you to be in a work environment where everyone is equal and
works side by side. The ideal solution for Uranus in the sixth house
would be to go freelance, so that you can work on your own terms, in
which case you might sometimes be free and sometimes very busy.
Or to work in a cooperative serving a shared ideological vision. What
sort of sixth house work do you do?
Audience: Well I am not working now. I also have Pluto in the sixth
house.
Clare: Do you find that you are drawn into any kind of power
struggles at work? It could well be that you have a well developed
nose for hidden issues or any kind of corruption which might be going on under the surface in your working environment?
Alternatively, you might even work as a private detective, or in some
kind of healing area where people go through intense
transformation?
Audience: Well I used to work in a small company doing office stuff,
managing the library and the accounts and taking my turn at the
reception desk. But I found it very hard, actually, and I did get into
power struggles with a woman there, so I left. I am now unemployed,
but I am thinking of training in some kind of healing work, and maybe
working as an astrologer.
Clare: With Uranus and Pluto in the sixth house I suspect you will
want some kind of work which brings about powerful change and
transformation, because this combination is very high voltage, so
working with healing on an energetic level might suit you well. It
would also give you the opportunity to work for yourself and I
suspect that you would prefer work which is non routine. Eventually,
since you belong to the Uranus-Pluto in Virgo generation, you are
likely to want to radically rethink and change the way things are
done, and this will no doubt apply to any area of work you find
yourself doing. I doubt that office work or sitting behind a desk is
right for you. LESSON 3 The Twelve Houses Part Two: Houses Seven to
Twelve
Last week we explored the meaning of the first six houses, and it is
worth pausing for a moment to consider the relationship between the
first six houses and the remaining six houses. Every chart is divided
by the angles into two sets of hemispheres. The first six houses lie
under the horizon, which means that they are under the earth when
we are born, hidden from view. They are the houses of selfexploration, describing our subjective, internal worlds. The natural
rulers of the first six houses are personal planets, with Mars ruling
the first, to Venus ruling the second, and so on to Mercury (third),
Moon (fourth), Sun (fifth) and finally back to Mercury again, which is
the natural ruler of the sixth house.
The point about this is that, in order to engage successfully and
creatively with houses seven to twelve, the collective houses which
describe how we relate to others and to the world around us, we
need to be able to build on and draw from the personal resources,
self-development and self-knowledge we have achieved in the
personal houses.
For example, successful adult-to-adult relationships (seventh
house) depend upon our having a good sense of our own identity, on
our ability to decide what is right for us (first house). Nor can we
safely surrender to the emotional depths of intense encounter with
another (eighth house) until we have a sense of our own personal
stability, self worth, security and enough personal ‘ballast’ to support
us (second house). Nor can we make any sense of or gain any
benefit from higher education, philosophy travel, teachers or
experiences outside our ken (ninth house), until we have learned to
process information and to order our thoughts (third house). Or take
our place effectively in the world (tenth house) until we have a stable
enough base from which to operate (fourth house). Nor can we make
a meaningful or creative contribution to the society in which we live
(eleventh house) until we have something of personal value to offer
(fifth house). Nor is it appropriate to retire from the world (twelfth
house) until we have mastered its demands (sixth house). Otherwise we would be turning our back on the world and trying to get straight
back into the womb.
In this sense, the houses tell the story of our gradual sequential
development and maturation, and it is worth taking this into
consideration when we are interpreting charts. There is always a
temptation to live our lives backwards, and on some level I think we
all try to do this, to some extent, until the world teaches us otherwise.
For example, we tend to start out from a narcissistic position in which
we assume that the world owes us a living and expect it to
accommodate our every wish (twelfth house), paying no attention to
the actual practical realities or to the way in which we might serve or
contribute to the world (sixth house). Or we might expect the
community or society to which we belong (eleventh house) to
recognise and accept and include us immediately, without us having
to go to the trouble of developing our own particular talents, or
discovering the unique and special contributions we can make to the
group (fifth house). Or we might expect the world to provide us with a
job, or a public platform, or respect and influence in world (tenth
house) before we have established an inner sense of security and
stability (fourth house). Or we might expect exciting opportunities
and adventures to open up for us (ninth house) without first learning
anything about them (third house), or we might give our power to
others (eighth house) and end up feeling used and abused because
we haven’t established a sense of personal security and self worth
(second house). Finally, we might seek to find ourselves solely
through our partner (seventh house) without getting to know
ourselves first. These descriptions may sound rather harsh, but
hopefully you can see what I am getting at? Can you see how these
opposite areas of activity are intimately connected and, in fact,
dependent upon each other?
Audience: Actually this sounds fairly realistic to me. I suspect we all
instinctively take the second route around the chart but, as you say,
life teaches us otherwise. It seems that life is meant to be difficult.
SEVENTH HOUSE: RELATING
[Libra House – Natural Ruler: Venus] The cusp of the seventh house is also the Descendant, and we will
be looking in more detail at the Ascendant-Descendant axis next
week. The seventh house describes all one-to-one relationships of a
contractual nature, such as business partnerships and marriage. It is
the house of equal, negotiated relationships, and describes what we
meet through others and how we find ourselves through such
relationships. Traditionally, this is also the house of open enemies,
so it is the battlefield on which we meet our equal opposites.
Although we usually recognise that the first six houses belong to
us, the seventh and eighth houses almost invariably seem to
describe the qualities belonging to those with whom we are in
relationship. It is very difficult indeed to recognise ourselves in these
two houses. In the seventh and eighth houses it is no longer us, it is
‘them’. The seventh and eighth houses describe the qualities we
draw towards us and we find these particularly hard to identify with.
Ultimately, however, they do tell us more about ourselves than about
others, although it seems that we can only learn these things about
ourselves through our relationships. Ultimately, our task is to
recognise that these two houses tell us more about ourselves than
about those with whom we are in relationship. With Saturn in the
seventh house, for example, we may find that our partner is boring,
withholding, critical and heavy. However, if we move on to another
relationship, then before long our new partner will start to become
boring, withholding, critical and heavy. Eventually we may realise
that there is a pattern and that this may have something to do with
us. This is often a very difficult realisation, because with Saturn in the seventh it is possible that we are afraid of relationships, that we
have made our choice based on our need for safety and security,
that we can only enter into relationships cautiously or formally,
wearing our protective armour, which eventually becomes rigid and
prevents our continued growth and development, something for
which we then blame our partner.
Audience: I have Venus and Uranus conjunct in Gemini in the
seventh house and I would say that I recognise that as belonging to
me, and always have. For example, it has always been me who is
the disruptive one in relationships.
Clare: So what would you say that you value about relationships,
with Venus conjunct Uranus?
Audience: Freedom and space.
Clare: I wonder if this is something of a two-edged sword, because it
may hark back to early experiences of being abandoned by loved
ones? It is possible that you may expect your partners to leave you
in the end, so you break off the relationships before they can do so,
and take the blame yourself? Where the seventh house is
concerned, there is always the question of ‘who is doing what to
who’. But with this placement relationships don’t necessarily need to
end in separation. It may be possible to negotiate enough space and
freedom within a relationship, or a real friendship in which each of
you respects the other as individuals and adults, so that neither of
you feel trapped.
Audience: Well I have certainly always taken the blame for breaking
off from relationships in the past. And I do see that it would be nice
to have this kind of space within a relationship.
Audience: I have Jupiter in the seventh.
Clare: With Jupiter in the seventh house, we are often attracted to
people from different cultures or religions or to people we feel we
can learn from, because they expand our horizons. Audience: I have Mars and Neptune and Saturn there. Saturn and
Neptune are in Libra and Mars is in Scorpio.
Clare: Well what we could say first of all is that relationships are a
big area for you.
Audience: Yes.
Clare: Saturn in the seventh indicates that relationships are a
serious issue for you and you are unlikely to enter into them lightly.
Many of your most important lessons will be learned through
relationships. With Neptune in the seventh you are likely to idealise
your partner. There can be a fantasy about finding a perfect partner,
someone who will redeem and rescue you, or someone you can
rescue. The same thing happens when Pisces is on the Descendant.
On the one hand we can accept our partner uncritically exactly as
they are, but on the other hand we can be deluded, and end up
feeling disappointed or betrayed or let down. And Neptune is where
we are always thirsty, where we always want more, so we will long
for the perfect, ideal other who exists in our dreams, and feel
dissatisfied with the ordinary mortal we end up with. On some level it
is we ourselves who are unavailable for relationship. The dilemma
with Saturn and Neptune in the seventh house is that they are
opposites in the sense that Saturn has strong boundaries and
Neptune has no boundaries, so do you stick with the reality or hold
out for your dream?
Audience: Does this also mean that we sacrifice ourselves for our
partner?
Clare: Yes, that can be one interpretation, although we are unlikely
to realise that this is what we are doing, for so long as we are tied up
in the fantasy of perfect love. With Mars in Scorpio in the seventh
house, we are likely to attract intense relationships and power
struggles. So there is a combination of the romance and idealisation
of the Neptune in Libra generation, the hard work indicated by
Saturn and the sexual intensity and passion of Mars in Scorpio. Audience: Well I did say it was complicated. I certainly find it very
hard.
EIGHTH HOUSE: SHARING
[Scorpio House – Personal Ruler: Mars – Collective Ruler:
Pluto] The eighth house is where we meet with intense emotional
experiences and encounters which change us forever. The natural
Scorpio house, the eighth house is where we are confronted by
inherited issues and secrets which lie deep beneath the surface and
which are often taboo, or which most of us would prefer not to look at
at all. Our eighth house inheritance is not just about hidden personal
or family issues, but extends to our inheritance of unresolved issues
and old poisons which exist in our society and in the collective
generally. If we have planets in the eighth house then at some point
in our lives we will be impelled – forced – to engage with and to
purge whatever has become corrupt or poisonous about them. Our
task appears to be to bring the issues associated with these planets
to the light, so that they can be cleansed and healed. I often advise
students to knock carefully before entering the eighth house. The
reason for this is that eighth house issues can be so deeply buried in
the unconscious that our clients may have no idea they are there, so
I think the astrologer therefore needs to tread very carefully.
The eighth house describes the most primitive, archaic emotions
which lie quietly under the surface until they are activated. When planets in the eighth house are active, they are volcanic,
unstoppable forces which take us over and possess us. This is the
house of sex, death, taxes and joint finances, where hidden
emotions come to the surface, often shocking us with their intensity.
Audience: I have Mercury, Uranus and Sun in Leo, and Venus and
Pluto in Virgo, and they are all in the eighth house. And Leo is the
sign on the eighth house cusp.
Clare: Right. So the ruler of the eighth house is in the eighth house.
Now I am assuming that because you have offered your own eighth
house as an example, that you have opened the door for us and we
are allowed to enter?
Audience: Yes, you can enter. Uranus and the Sun are together,
and Pluto and Venus are together, but Mercury is by itself.
Clare: With five planets in the eighth house, no doubt the underworld
is familiar territory to you. It is your home. Let’s start by looking just
at Mercury in the eighth house. It is like having a Pluto-Mercury
contact, which means very deep, penetrating, intense and secretive
or private ideas and thoughts. This is the investigative mind – you
need to get to the root of things, to understand what is not being said
or communicated, to read the signs. The eighth house is very deep
but non-verbal so it works on the level of intuition and emotion. It
could even say something about your siblings, because Mercury is
also the natural significator for brothers and sisters so it might be a
particularly intense relationship with a brother or sister.
With the Sun and Uranus in Leo in the eighth house, you will feel
compelled to plumb the depths of understanding and use your
insight to bring new knowledge to the surface. This configuration is
about bringing things from the dark, where they are hidden, into the
light, into the open air. This is the seat of your creativity and your
unique gift.
Audience: In fact I am bringing things from the dark into the light all
the time, because I am a midwife. Clare: Well, it seems that you are in exactly the right profession
because you are dealing with life and death issues, and Leo is the
sign of the child, of new life and potential. You have the ability to be
both detached and scientific, with the Sun-Uranus connection, but I
suspect that you are also strongly guided by your intuition and by
your instinctive understanding of medicine and healing, which is also
an eighth house matter. The Venus-Pluto connection describes your
love of intensity and your function as a powerful woman working with
women who are going through profound and often terrifying and
painful experiences. With so many planets in the eighth house you
will be wonderful in a crisis. That is when you come into your own
and into your power.
Your work is a wonderful expression of these eighth house
planets, and no doubt there are more personal issues here as well,
which will concern your relationship with your father. Sun-Uranus can
describe a distant father and you may have feelings of abandonment
around him, although there will be a strong psychic connection
between you because it is in the eighth house. And the Venus-Pluto
connection in the eighth house can describe your sexual power as a
woman, and issues about power and powerlessness in relationships
so there are many other personal levels of meaning here which are
probably best explored in a private setting.
NINTH HOUSE: SEEKING
[Sagittarius House – Natural Ruler: Jupiter] The ninth house is the house of god, and describes what we believe
in, what is meaningful to us, and how and where we draw meaning
from life. It is the Sagittarius house, ruled by Jupiter, so the ninth
house describes how we broaden our horizons, either physically
through travelling and having contact with different cultures, or
mentally and intellectually through higher education and our
philosophy of life – seeking the bigger picture. Or spiritually, by
finding a god we can serve and who serves us. On a mundane level,
it can describe our experiences of higher learning or of groups
devoted to spiritual or philosophical exploration. Whatever specific
shape this takes, what we are really doing in the ninth house is
searching for wisdom and meaning in order to find out what we
believe in. It is about what makes life worth living, not just in the
personal sense, from a fifth house point of view, but in the context of
the bigger picture.
Saturn in the ninth house can, like every planet, be interpreted on
a variety of different levels. It might mean, for example, that we were
denied the opportunity to go to university, or that we studied
structural engineering at university. It may mean that we have never
been abroad because we are afraid of travelling outside our
immediate environment. Or that our work is in a ninth house matter,
so we might be a travel agent or a tour rep. And it is likely that, if we
have one at all, our god is rather strict and demanding. It will be hard
work to build our ninth house and it may take a long time, but we will
build on rock. So we might end up going to university in our fifties, or
eventually finding our own faith based on real experience of the
world.
Audience: I have Saturn in the ninth house and I find it very difficult
to have faith.
Clare: In my experience, with Saturn in the ninth we often feel as if
our god lays down the law and demands strict obedience if we are to
avoid being punished. This can lead to a kind of cynicism and to
periods in the wilderness, where we may feel utterly unsupported
and alone on a spiritual level. With Uranus in the ninth house, on the other hand, we might have
studied science or politics at university and we could have
unexpected experiences and encounters or sudden insights when
we are travelling abroad. We may be seeking enlightenment, or our
god may be rational, highly intellectual or egalitarian, so we may be
a Quaker or belong to a non-denominational church.
Audience: I have Neptune in my ninth house.
Clare: With Neptune here, you are likely to have a longing to merge
with god, seeking a mystical union in which you are in god and god
is in you. And you may have studied music or dance at university, or
spent periods of time abroad in ashrams or on retreats. But, unless
you are travelling by boat or ship, there may be problems when you
are travelling.
Audience: Why do you say that?
Clare: Because it is possible that you will encounter confusion and
chaos. Or your luggage might get lost, or your reservations turn out
not to have been made, or your passport and money might get
stolen, that sort of thing.
Audience: I have travelled round the world without any problems.
The only thing is that other people always let you down – they can’t
be trusted.
Clare: Perhaps you have projected your Neptune, in which case it
will be evoked in the shape of other people when you are travelling.
TENTH HOUSE: CONTRIBUTING
[Capricorn House – Natural Ruler: Saturn] The tenth house describes our ‘public face’ – our public or
professional image and position in the world – our career or job –
and our relationship to authority figures such as our boss. It is the
house of status, responsibility, authority and mother, to the extent
that she was the authority in our lives, the rule maker, when we were
children.
The tenth house is the house of worldly ambition, describing the
kinds of achievements we seek recognition for. Because it is also the
house of the mother, it can also describe very accurately the
ambitions our mother or our family have for us, their vision of what
we can be in the world. More often than not, we find ourselves trying
to fulfil our mother’s ambitions and try to become what she wants us
to become, at least to start with. For example, if your mother was a
frustrated ballet dancer and you happened to have Venus in Leo in
the tenth, you might find yourself becoming a ballet dancer because
since, from the moment you could walk, you may have been taken to
ballet classes. With Venus in Leo in the tenth house, this would be a
way of gaining praise and recognition, not just in your mother’s eyes,
but in the eyes of the world as well.
With Mars in the tenth house we may be ambitious and forceful
and seek to lead. With Saturn in the tenth we are likely to work hard
to achieve the authority and respect we crave.
Audience: Is the sign important? Clare: Yes, and it is always important to check on the positions of
the planet or planets which rule the tenth house. This will give us
more accurate and detailed information about the specifically
individual expression of tenth house matters.
The tenth house describes our attitude to authority and to worldly
success and failure. It is also what we project onto the outside world.
So, for example, we might see the world as demanding and critical, if
we have Saturn in the tenth house or Capricorn on the cusp of the
tenth. Or we might find the world scary and oppressive if we have
Pluto in the tenth or Scorpio on the cusp of the tenth. Or full of
exciting possibilities and opportunities, if we have Jupiter in the tenth
or Sagittarius on the cusp.
ELEVENTH HOUSE: UNITING
[Aquarius house – Personal Ruler: Saturn – Collective Ruler:
Uranus] The eleventh house is traditionally the house of hopes and wishes,
describing the ideals and aims we have for the group, community or
society to which we belong. It is the house of political and social
beliefs and of the causes with which we are likely to become
involved. The eleventh house describes how we function as part of a
group or community, amongst our friends and colleagues. The
natural house of Aquarius, the most mature of the air signs, the
eleventh house is where we engage with the world and others
according to our ideals and principles and hopes for humanity as a whole, respecting the rights of others, treating them as equals and
allowing them the space and freedom to be who they are. So, the
eleventh house is a good place to look if you want to understand
more about how you respond to group situations.
With Jupiter in the eleventh house, for example, will are likely to
find it easy to make friends because we expect everyone to be
basically benevolent and gregarious. With Saturn in the eleventh
house, we are likely to be more cautious and take longer to make
friends. Planets in the eleventh house describe the sort of friends
and colleagues we tend to attract.
Audience: I have Uranus and Pluto in the eleventh house and I try
and avoid group situations whenever possible.
Clare: As a member of the Uranus-Pluto generation born in the mid1960s, this indicates that you will have new ideas about society and
that you will want to break down the old structures and build again
from scratch. You are likely to be very political, and even subversive,
finding yourself impelled to challenge the way communities or
collectives or groups are run, seeing them as corrupt and in need of
revisioning.
Audience: That sounds much better, and it also explains why my
best friends always seem to be involved in some sort of political
activism.
TWELFTH HOUSE: MERGING
[Pisces House – Personal Ruler: Jupiter – Collective Ruler:
Neptune] Now we have reached the twelfth house, we are almost back where
we began. We have already considered the twelfth house as our
experience of being in the womb and, as with all water houses, this
house describes our psychic inheritance and any unfinished
business we have inherited from our parents and ancestors.
The twelfth house does not belong to time-space ‘reality’ because
it has no boundaries. It is the house where everything happens all
the time and where everything is connected. There is no place here
for the ego, which can only function in time, and so it describes that
part of ourselves which never fully incarnates or engages with the
world – the place where our dreams and fantasies hold sway, where
visions, hopes and fears inspire, support or paralyse our lives. It is
our bolt hole, the place we escape to, whether psychically,
emotionally or physically, just to be alone and to heal ourselves. In
the twelfth house we can experience a feeling of universal support,
guidance and inspiration, which can in turn help us to inspire and
support others. Alternatively this can be where we are our own worst
enemies, refusing to engage with the world, overwhelmed by the
‘going home project’, seeking oblivion, dissolving ourselves in
addictive or other kinds of self destructive behaviour.
People with a twelfth house emphasis need time by themselves
because they are like psychic sponges, absorbing everything which
is going on in the environment around them, which can be
overwhelming. The twelfth house is where we merge, escape from
our separateness and identify with that which is greater than ourselves – it describes our memories of life before birth and our
feelings about life after death. It is the desire to retreat or to escape
from the hard edges of the world, it is the pull of the monastic life, a
life of contemplation and communion with the divine. It is the house
where we replenish and heal ourselves in order to gain enough
strength for our next venture into the real world.
The twelfth house is also the house of institutions, hospitals,
prisons, monasteries, nunneries and retreats, all of which are
containers which protect us from the world. It describes our
relationship to such institutions.
Audience: I have my Sun in the twelfth house, and this all sounds
rather daunting.
Clare: Well, you are no doubt immensely sensitive to the
environment around you and I would imagine that you need plenty of
privacy and solitude, to retreat from the world and be alone on a
regular basis, because when you do this you will no doubt feel as if
you are deeply supported in some way which is quite hard to define.
It is worth remembering that the natural rulers of this house are both
Neptune and Jupiter, so the twelfth, like the ninth, is also the house
of god, in the sense of being deeply connected on a mystical level.
Your life will be embedded in the big picture, and you may well find
yourself through working in any of the twelfth house institutions I
mentioned earlier. You are at home when you can flow and merge
and dream, living in an imaginal world where everything changes all
the time. I would also imagine that your father was somehow rather
hard to get hold of – nebulous or absent either physically or
psychologically.
Audience: I have Uranus in Cancer in the twelfth house, and I
always want to be at home.
Clare: With Uranus in the twelfth house I think there is always a part
of us which refuses to believe that the ‘real’ world is all that there is,
and in Cancer it is likely that the home you are speaking of actually
has more to do with a memory of your spiritual home than any kind
of home which can be found here on earth. I also think that Uranus in the twelfth house represents access to spiritual guidance which
provides us with a welcome sense of perspective and detachment. LESSON Júpiter Polarity and the Angles
This evening I want to spend some time looking at the six pairs of
polarities present in every chart. We will then go on to look at the
meaning of the angles.
The birth chart tells us that, from the moment of our birth, we are
confronted with a series of polarities. It is these polarities which cause
us to become strangers to ourselves, divided, split, separated and
fragmented, with the result that we keep meeting the split off parts of
ourselves in other people or in the world ‘out there’, not realising that
they belong to us.
For the individual, the struggle to deal with irreconcilable
opposites generates the development of psyche. Individuation,
in other words, is made possible through the tensions caused
by the neurotic aspects of the personality.1
So I want to spend some time considering the signs and the
houses as six pairs of complementary opposites because, as Dane
Rudhyar wrote, “it simply does not make any sense to try and define
the meaning of one end of an axis without including in the definition
the meaning of the other end.”2
This approach helps us to work with the mechanism of projection,
which is one of the most important ideas in psychology and in
psychological astrology. It is also much easier to understand what
something actually is, if we study at the same time what it is not. So
we are going to spend this evening caught up in the drama of
opposites, which is, of course, what makes life so interesting.
Like a pendulum, the more extreme one pole becomes, the more
extreme the opposite pole becomes. Whenever we identify
consciously with one end of a polarity, the opposite end is
constellated in the unconscious, compensating for and balancing the
consciously held position. Have a look at this table of opposites. In the last column are words
describing the extreme opposites of the same spectrum. We already
know from last term that opposites are inseparable, they repel and
attract each other in equal measure. The interesting question, which
is not necessarily clear from the birth chart itself, is where do we
stand on each of these axes – where are we consciously identified?
In fact, it is not uncommon for people to consult an astrologer
precisely because a situation in their lives or a relationship has
become polarised. In such cases, they may find themselves veering
dramatically from one extreme end of a polarity to the other, not
realising that the two poles are fundamentally connected. One of our
major tasks as astrologers is to ‘hold the opposites’ for both ourselves
and for our clients. This is always an uncomfortable and difficult thing
to do, but it can protect us from colluding with our clients, on the one
hand, or from taking an unhelpful ‘problem solving’ approach on the
other hand. Natural Zodiac and House Axes ARIES-LIBRA AXIS
Planetary Rulers: Mars-Venus
Natural Houses: First-Seventh
The Aries-Libra axis concerns the struggle to find the balance
between autonomy and compromise, self assertion and co-operation,
respect for the self and respect for the other.
Naturally associated with the first-seventh houses, this is a
cardinal, fire-air axis ruled by Mars and Venus, mythic lovers and
antagonists in equal measure. It describes the inherent tension which
exists in all relationships, the struggle to find a balance between
personal freedom and autonomy on the one hand, and the support,
approval and appreciation we all need from others on the other hand.
The question is, how can we be independent and focused on the
achievement of our own goals, and at the same time find completion
and fulfilment in our relationships? Like all apparent contradictions,
this conflict can be so uncomfortable that we usually identify with one
side or with the other. If this axis becomes particularly polarised, the
split off side can become so powerful that it can start to dominate our lives. For example, if we choose total independence and autonomy
we can end up feeling lonely and isolated, having nobody special in
our lives to fight or strive for, and nobody with whom to share our
triumphs and disappointments. Ultimately, there is no inherent
meaning in being strong and independent and focussed in isolation.
Our personal fulfilment and sense of achievement are ultimately the
result of fighting in the service of a principle, such as justice and
harmony, or on behalf of the other.
On the other end of the spectrum, if we choose to live solely for
and through our relationships, we can end up feeling angry and
resentful that we have sacrificed our self development and
independence. Say, for example, we are identified with the civilised,
cultured Libran end of this axis, with its strong sense of fairness, its
love of peace and harmony and its diplomatic talents. Then no doubt
we will constantly find ourselves surrounded by extremely selfish
people who show no consideration for others. This could well make
us extremely angry and anger, of course, belongs to Aries, not to
Libra.
Audience: So we end up acting out the negative aspects of the other
side of the spectrum?
Clare: Exactly. And of course, neither extreme works at the end of the
day. Both sides need each other, so ideally we will find some kind of
relationship between them. For example, we know that heroes in
mythology are always dependent on the help of others. Theseus
could never have killed the minotaur in the labyrinth without the help
of Ariadne and her golden thread. Jason could never have stolen the
golden fleece without Medea’s magic, and Perseus could never have
rescued Andromeda without the sword and mirrored shield given to
him by Athena. It is therefore the support of others who take an
interest in us which not only enables us to achieve our goals, but
which also gives our achievements real meaning, because they are
the result of shared efforts. Jason swearing Eternal Affection to Medea (1742-3) Jean-François
Detroy
Audience: Are you referring to the Aries-Libra axis in general?
Clare: Yes. We all have this axis somewhere in our charts, so these
themes are archetypal, although they will find personal expression in
the houses across which these signs fall. But the Aries-Libra axis is
also naturally associated with the first and seventh houses of
relationship, so these themes will also be present to some extent
across the first and seventh houses in every horoscope.
TAURUS-SCORPIO AXIS
Rulers: Mars [Pluto]/Venus
Natural Houses: Second-Eighth On the Taurus-Scorpio axis we meet Mars and Venus again, although
this time in their fixed, earth-water, manifestations. As a fixed axis,
the confrontation between Taurus and Scorpio can be particularly
entrenched and unyielding. Naturally associated with the secondeighth house axis, the inherent conflict on this axis revolves around
issues of resources and ownership, values and possessions, both
personal and shared.
Taurus is a gentle, peace loving and practical sign, which prefers to
stay within its own sphere of comfort. However, if this axis becomes
particularly polarised on the Taurus end of the spectrum, then the
simple, biological drive towards stability can become stagnation. This
inevitably evokes and stimulates the kind of intense crises which are
associated with the sign of Scorpio, which break down fixed
structures in the interests of growth and new life.
Audience: I have often wondered why Taureans seem to have such
battles in relationships. I suppose this is what happens when they are
identified with the Scorpio end of the spectrum?
Clare: That’s right. When we start to think in terms of axes, then we
will start thinking of a Taurus person as being somewhere on the
Taurus-Scorpio axis, although we don’t know exactly where until we
have explored this with them first. But this means that we will no
longer be surprised if we have a Taurus client who is consumed by
intense and complex emotional or relationship problems, sexual
issues, power struggles, battles over money and shared resources,
and the like. None of these things belong to the sign of Taurus, which
is very straightforward and grounded, but they are not uncommon
themes with Taurean clients. I am using the term ‘Taurean’ to
describe a person who may not have the Sun in Taurus but could
have several planets in Taurus or in the second house, or Taurus on
the Ascendant. In such cases, the Taurean can gradually restore their
equilibrium by developing a sound sense of self worth, providing
materially for themselves, cultivating a fixity of purpose, a pride in
their own accomplishments and the courage to defend themselves,
rather than engaging in power struggles which appear to be caused
by the emotional demands of others. A useful Taurus-Scorpio myth is that of King Midas, who was
extremely wealthy.3 He was, we could say, identified entirely with the
Taurus end of this axis. When he was granted a wish by the god
Dionysus he wished that everything he touched would turn to gold,
and so it did. However, when he touched the flowers in his garden
they turned to gold, and everything he tried to eat turned to gold so
he became increasingly hungry. Worst of all, his beloved daughter
turned into gold when he accidentally touched her. Fortunately, and
because King Midas was so full of remorse when he realised the
consequences of his greed, Dionysus agreed to reverse the spell,
and everything came to life again.
We could say that he realised that, without the destructive aspect
of the life force which belongs to Scorpio, everything would become
static, incapable of change or growth. The point is that Taurus begs Scorpio, retention leads to release, incorporation to elimination, to
ensure that nature remains in balance.
Audience: What happens if this axis is reversed and the identification
is on the Scorpio end? Can you give us an example of a Scorpio that
needs to find its Taurus?
Clare: In this case the individual may seek to find their security and
self worth through other people or through other people’s resources,
rather than their own. If we depend completely on others for our
security and sense of self worth then we have given our power to
them, and we naturally feel that they owe us something in return. If
we have no sense of our own inner intrinsic value or worth, we have
nothing to contribute to the relationship. The Scorpio client can
therefore be extremely possessive, feeling that other people are their
possessions and that they belong to them, body and soul. With such
a great investment in the other, it is not surprising that, before long,
intense feelings of jealousy, suspicion and insecurity emerge. The
interesting thing about this is that possessiveness belongs to Taurus
and is not a Scorpio trait at all. In essence Scorpio is where we are
forced to surrender and let go. Scorpio does not hold onto things – it
purges and eliminates, because everything which no longer serves
life has to die to make way for new life. The myth of Pluto and Persephone is relevant here because it
harks back to the ancient seasonal rituals celebrating the relationship
between life and death in nature. Júpiter Taurus is spring time, celebrated in
the fertility festival of Beltane at the beginning of May, when
Persephone is said to make her annual return to the earth from the
underworld and all of nature begins to thrive and grow. But at the
opposite end of the year, in Scorpio time, marked by Samhain, the
festival of death, Persephone returns to the underworld, her earth
mother Demeter goes into mourning and everything in nature dies.
Scorpio and Pluto signify the great organic processes of death and
renewal. The life force ebbs and flows on a seasonal basis, growth
cannot continue indefinitely – nature has to be stripped bare in order
to ensure renewed life. So the Taurus-Scorpio axis is one entire
process and we cannot really understand one without understanding
the other. GEMINI-SAGITTARIUS AXIS
Rulers: Mercury-Jupiter
Natural Houses: Third-Ninth
On the mutable air-fire, Gemini-Sagittarius axis we meet the
planetary rulers Mercury and Jupiter, which describe learning and the
gathering of information on the one hand and its dissemination on the
other hand. This axis of exploration concerns the relationship
between information and meaning, facts and knowledge, the student
and the teacher, the primary school and the university. The poles of
this axis complete and complement each other. If the Gemini end
loses touch with the bigger picture, with the value or purpose of the
information it is gathering, then everything can become trivial,
superficial and meaningless, even to the point of nihilism. If, on the
other hand, Sagittarius loses touch with Gemini, the sense of having
privileged access to the one truth can lead to arrogance and
fundamentalism, cut off from the detachment and relative truths of
Gemini.
Charts in which this theme will come to life are those with several
planets in Gemini or Sagittarius, in the third or ninth houses, or with
this axis on one of the angles.
If we are identified only with the Gemini end of this axis, then we
may become caught in a kind of perpetual childhood or as a perennial
student, living a provisional existence which allows us to remain
uncommitted and unaccountable, refusing to be pinned down in any
way. In the end, this can become the very kind of trap we have
always been so determined to avoid, since it is a refusal to mature or
to contribute anything meaningful to the society to which we belong.
If, on the other hand, we identify only with the Sagittarius end of this
axis, then our quest for wisdom, meaning and for the philosophical
fire will expand unchecked until it begins to overwhelm us. If we lose
our objectivity, and ignore the actual facts, then we will find ourselves
increasingly out of touch with, and alienated from, the very sense of
vision and meaning which was so important to us, because we will
not have any perspective or have learned to put our vision into words,
or developed the ability to discuss it objectively with others, to
compare it to other schools of thought or to teach it. We may well
start to demand acolytes and disciples who will follow us unquestioningly and, paradoxically, become increasingly dependent
upon them for our sense of authority, status and meaning. When this
axis becomes particularly polarised either end can become a trap,
which is inappropriate to the mutable nature of these two signs.
Audience: So if you are on the Gemini end of this axis, then you are
going to be identified as a student and start attracting teachers?
Clare: Yes, but in fact this would mean that you have projected your
own inner teacher, your own wisdom and knowledge, onto others.
Audience: So you need to develop your own wisdom and meaning?
But if you did this, then you wouldn’t need to learn anything from
anyone else in your life again?
Clare: With a mutable axis such as this, there is no point at which we
will stop learning or exploring. But hopefully, we will be able to absorb
what we are learning, so that it increasingly becomes a part of who
we are, before we move on to the next chapter. If these axes are
strongly polarised and projected, however, then we may well be
unable to incorporate what we know or what we believe, choosing
instead to teach or preach what we know and believe, without making
any use of it in our own lives. In other words, we will not ‘walk our
talk’.
CANCER-CAPRICORN AXIS
Rulers: Moon/Saturn
Natural houses: Fourth-Tenth
Ruled by the Moon and Saturn, the Cancer-Capricorn axis, naturally
associated with the fourth-tenth house axis, describes the child and
the parent, the one who needs nurturing and the nurturer, our need to
belong and our need to stand on our own feet in the world. This is the
parent-child axis and of course there is no child without a parent and
there is no parent without a child. Taken to extremes, the signs of
Cancer and Capricorn can describe the twin core fears of engulfment
and abandonment which seem to be universal themes, deeply lodged
in all of our psyches. The sphere of Cancer and the Moon is nourishment and nurturing,
early experiences of safety and care, our need for protection. The
Moon is the child in all of us, and the child doesn’t grow up. The
sphere of Saturn, on the other end of the spectrum, is the sphere of
the parent, the carer and provider, the one who is responsible for
establishing safe boundaries. The entire axis is concerned with
issues of security, safety and protection.
This axis polarises very easily in relationships, with one partner
becoming needy and dependent, demanding to be cared for and
looked after, and the other partner becoming the provider and
competent parent. In fact, relationships are often the arena in which
we seek to resolve uncompleted primal nurturing issues and this will
be particularly so if we have Cancer and Capricorn on the AscendantDescendant axis, several planets in Cancer and Capricorn or in the
fourth and tenth houses.
When this axis polarises, the Cancer end becomes increasingly
needy and the Capricorn end becomes increasingly withholding and
withdrawn. I once had a client for whom this was a particularly painful
theme in her life, and I learned a great deal from her. She had Cancer
on the Ascendant, which of course indicates that issues of self
protection were very important. However, as is generally the case
with this axis, she had projected the Saturn ruled Capricorn parent
figure onto her husband, who she experienced as judgmental, cold
and distant. As the axis became further and further polarised, she
became more and more needy as she felt increasingly rejected and
judged by her husband, and very alone. What made this theme even
stronger was the fact that Saturn, the ruler of the Descendant, was
right on her Ascendant in Cancer.
The first thing I noticed when I met this client is that she was
extremely overweight, which is not something you would expect with
Saturn on the Ascendant. But I realised that this was a physical
manifestation of her feeling of emotional starvation. The whole
Cancer-Capricorn axis concerns our ability to give and to receive
nourishment – what is enough and what is not enough. My client felt
so emotionally starved in her marriage and by her husband that food
had become her only comfort. Audience: And I suppose her size was also a suit of armour – a way
of protecting herself, if she had Saturn rising. Were you able to help
her?
Clare: No, I don’t think so, because this axis had become so
polarised that I was unable to reach her. I did spend quite a bit of time
suggesting that she could learn to parent herself and to take care of
her own needs. I was trying to encourage her to start taking
responsibility for herself, as an adult. After all, we all start off being
spoon fed, but there comes a time when we take the spoon and learn
to feed ourselves. In other words, I was trying to help her to find a
more conscious relationship between the Cancer and Capricorn poles
of this spectrum.
Audience: But she didn’t get it?
Clare: No, because she was just so needy. And the last thing you
want to hear, when you are craving some kind of support, some kind
of emotional food, is that you will not get the emotional support you
are looking for from your partner and so you will eventually need to
learn to protect, nurture and nourish yourself. Hopefully she was able
to hear this later, when she listened to the recording of the session.
But in this case, I heard that she did eventually leave her husband
and went into a relationship with another man who – guess what –
turned out to be cold, judgemental and withholding. She repeated the
pattern because nothing had changed within, and this axis remained
polarised.
Audience: What happens if you are identified with the Capricorn end
of this spectrum?
Clare: Then it is likely that you will be more self contained and may
well end up playing the role of parent in relationships.
Audience: This has always bothered me, but I can see how it works
now. I have Capricorn rising but I always have men in my life who are
like my wife. Clare: Or mother? (Laughter)
Audience: Exactly. They cook for me and look after me. I don’t know
why this always happens because I am not really needy, I work really
hard, much harder than they do, so they end up doing things for me. I
always wonder why I end up going out with these passive, ‘house
husband’ types, who look after me. It’s very easy to live with, but my
problem is I am bored to death. On one hand it is really good, but I
feel stifled. I also have a lot of fire and air in my chart, so I suppose I
want to break away and rebel against it.
Clare: But perhaps this is saying that, instead of feeling stifled by the
men who are there in your home, who look after you and run about
and cook for you, that you have projected – by delegating onto your
partner – your need to be cared for and protected and fed, rather than
doing this for yourself?
Audience: I know I have that side, but it is due to a lack of time that I
give that to them.
Clare: So they do it for you. With Capricorn rising you are adult,
responsible and self sufficient, so naturally you attract all those
Cancerian qualities in partners, and so the relationship axis polarises
with one of you doing the caring and looking after the domestic side
of things, and the other doing the career and the work and bringing
home the bacon.
Audience: The problem is that because I don’t like this situation I find
myself living a double life. That is my great dilemma – that I end up
having a secret life on the side.
Clare: So we can see clearly how the Cancer-Capricorn story is
working out, but of course every chart has more than one story, and
there is obviously something else here as well.
Audience: I don’t look for that.
Clare: You may not be consciously looking, but no doubt you are
unconsciously looking? Audience: I keep on searching for partners who are Capricorns or
Aquarians, but when they are with me they seem to transform almost
immediately into Cancerians.
Clare: In your case it seems that you have embodied the qualities of
Saturn and the Capricorn Ascendant so successfully that it is difficult
to recognise your neediness and dependency, which is why you meet
it ‘out there’ in your partners. This is really the opposite situation to
the client I was talking about who was just feeling desperately lonely
and needy.
LEO-AQUARIUS
Rulers: Sun-Saturn [Uranus]
Natural Houses: Fifth-Eleventh
Ruled by the Sun and Saturn, the Leo-Aquarius axis is another
aspect of the parent-child relationship, although this time it is a
positive, fire-air axis. The Sun-ruled Leo pole describes our unique
creativity and individual potential and the Saturn ruled Aquarius pole
describes the collective rules and laws to which we are all subject.
Uranus, the transpersonal ruler of Aquarius, also has its part to play
on this axis, and often operates as a refusal to obey any rules other
than its own or to function as part of a group. The Uranian urge is to
challenge and disrupt the status quo. It is led from the head rather
than the heart although, ultimately, there is nothing more powerful or
effective than the harnessing of ‘hearts and minds’.
The Leo-Aquarius axis describes the relationship between the
individual and the group, between what is right for me, as an
individual, and what is right for everyone else. These two things are
not so easy to integrate because we find ourselves once again
entrenched on a fixed axis, in which neither pole is prepared to adapt,
adjust or negotiate. It is all too human to behave as if the rules which
govern society do not apply to us personally. On the other hand, if we
are particularly law abiding citizens, then we will no doubt find
ourselves repeatedly outraged by the selfish, thoughtless behaviour
of those who refuse to become responsible members of society or
conform to its rules. Nevertheless, the heart and the head do co-exist,
since most of us have the conviction, or the proof, that amongst all the millions of people in the world, there will be one unique and
special person who is absolutely perfect for me.
The famous grail legend of the Fisher King can also help us
understand the Leo-Aquarius polarity. The story begins at the point
where the Aquarius pole has become cut off from the Leo pole. The
King is wounded, the land is barren and the entire kingdom has
become frozen and paralysed. And along comes Percival, who plays
the Leo role, an innocent soul with a pure heart who has never
learned the rules. Eventually, after many adventures and mishaps,
Percival manages to free the king of his suffering and the land of its
desolation. He learns that the Fisher King is his grandfather, which
makes him the rightful heir to the throne of the Grail King. So
ultimately, the collective is dependent on the individual, and the
individual is dependent on the collective. The question here is: where
does the individual stand in relation to society, and where does
society stand in relation to the individual? Audience: How does this axis work in one-to-one relationships?
Clare: Well, once again, it is very common for these axes to polarise
in relationships. In this case, one partner may well play the role of the
special child, creative, warm and full of potential and spontaneous
heart energy. So the individual with the Sun or several planets in Leo
or in the fifth house, or with this axis on an angle, will tend to be
strongly attracted to the cool intellectual, detachment or social
respectability and status of someone who is living out the Aquarius
pole. On the other hand, the individual who has strong Aquarian
themes in their chart, who is concerned with intellectual respectability
and with being an accepted member of society, is often attracted to –
and repelled by – the creativity and childish enthusiasm and capacity
for joy of someone who is living out the Leo pole. VIRGO-PISCES AXIS
Rulers: Mercury-Jupiter [Neptune]
Natural houses: sixth-twelfth
The Virgo-Pisces Axis is ruled by Mercury and Jupiter in their earth
and water manifestations, and is naturally associated with the sixth
and twelfth houses. The themes on this axis are order and chaos,
control and trust, form and content, the practical and imaginal worlds,
realities and dreams, service and devotion. I often equate this axis to
the grail legend, with the Pisces question being “whom does the grail
serve?” and the Virgo answer being “he who serves the grail”.
If this spectrum polarises on the Virgo side, then there will be a
strong need for control over the daily routines of life, in an effort to
keep chaos at bay. And yet, if the qualities of Pisces are not
integrated, they will emerge from the unconscious and the Virgo
individual will feel increasingly overwhelmed and tend to attract more
and more disruption into their lives and feel more and more out of
control. Virgo is analytical, self critical and perfectionist, brilliant at
spotting errors and at focussing on the details but prone to missing
the whole picture, which belongs to Pisces. If we identify only with the
Virgo end of the axis, then we may become consumed by duty and
drudgery, and we will long to escape. But until we can see the whole
picture, we will always feel that anything we try to achieve is spoiled
or imperfect in the making.
On the Pisces side of this axis we prefer to remain merged,
undifferentiated and unformed in order to avoid having to grapple with
the details and practicalities of life. In this case we are likely to find
ourselves forced to engage with the world in practical ways,
something we may bitterly resent.
One approach to this axis which I have found helpful is to
remember the mantra: “Trust in Allah but tie up your camel” – both
are necessary. So this axis describes the way we attend to the daily
necessities of life, not just for their own sake, or to earn a crust, but in
the service of something which we find meaningful.
Audience: So are you saying that if we have the Sun in Virgo, then
there is always a Piscean aspect to that, which needs to be explored
and made conscious? Clare: Yes, and if we are working in this way as astrologers, when we
encounter a person with the Sun in Virgo, we will automatically start
placing them on the Virgo-Pisces axis. Our job will be to find out
where on that axis they are identified, and hopefully it will not have
become too polarised, because that is very hard to work with. For
example, if someone has polarised on the Pisces end of the axis, or
in the twelfth house to the exclusion of sixth house matters, then it
may be very hard to reach them, because they will be so diffuse – it
can be like trying to get a grip on a piece of soap. The danger is that
the astrologer who doesn’t spot what is happening can easily fall into
acting out the unconsciously projected Virgo end of the axis, and find
themselves taking a particularly analytical, problem solving or critical
viewpoint, or alternatively start over-emphasising the importance of
work, diet and routine, all of which are likely to be meaningless to the
client.
Equally, if someone is polarised on the Virgo end of the axis, or in
the sixth house to the exclusion of the Pisces or twelfth house end,
then we can find that we have been ‘Pisced’. We may become
confused and muddled and lost – unable to communicate
satisfactorily to our client. This will be equally meaningless to our
Virgo-identified client. Our only hope is to place ourselves firmly at the
centre of the axis, which gives us a chance to navigate the whole
spectrum.
Audience: So how do you know where someone is on the spectrum
– can you see this from the birth chart?
Clare: Not always, although as a general rule we normally identify
with the planets and signs in the first and second houses and project
the seventh and eighth houses onto others because it is notoriously
difficult to see that the qualities of the seventh and eighth houses
belong to us.
And because it takes a lifetime to develop the full potential of our
Sun signs, then it is not unusual to encounter people with the Sun in
Virgo who are chaotic and diffuse, prone to giving themselves away,
taking on too much and becoming overwhelmed. There seems to be
a gradual process of increasingly refining and defining their personal
boundaries. And this is also true of people with the Sun in Pisces, who often present as Virgos, being very dutiful and efficient, practical
and down to earth.
Audience: I have met that a lot. Perhaps they are just embarrassed
to be Pisceans? Especially if they are teachers or parents or
something. It doesn’t seem to be very acceptable to be a Pisces if
you have to work hard and hold it all together.
THE ANGLES IN THE BIRTH CHART
The angles in a birth chart are of great importance, since it is through
the angles that we meet and relate to and connect with the outside
world. The angles function as doorways into the world – they provide
us with our basic physical and spacial orientation and pin us down
into our incarnation. They are like our personal cross of matter or tree
of life, with the Ascendant-Descendant axis reaching out horizontally
to connect with the world around us, and the vertical MC-IC axis
providing our central stability, our root system from which we draw the
strength to grow tall in the world. The Cross of Matter Using the natural zodiac, you can see that the parental axis is
vertical and hierarchical. The natural signs on this axis are Capricorn
and Cancer, and the planetary rulers are Saturn and the Moon,
symbolising parent and child. The natural elements are earth and
water, indicating that this axis has to do with our basic needs for
safety, support and containment. The MC-IC axis also describes our
biological origins, the relationship between our parents and therefore
our primal experience of the masculine and feminine. This remains a
powerful influence for our entire lives, and one which is repeated in
our adult relationships to the extent that our relationships are driven
by a need for security, safety and a sense of belonging, or by the
need to resolve parental issues or childhood insecurities and fears.
We all have valid dependency needs, because we have all been
children and we all have, or become, parents.
The horizontal relationship axis, on the other hand, represents our
potential for equal, adult-to-adult relationships. The natural signs on
this axis are Aries and Libra, and the planetary rulers are Mars and
Venus, the adult manifestations of the masculine and feminine
principles. The natural elements are fire and air, signifying the desire
for self expression and communication in relationships.
There is, of course, an inherent tension between these two sets of
opposites, between the parental axis, which is yin in character, and
the relationship axis which is yang in character. Jung wrote that: “In
the square the elements are separate and hostile to one another and
must therefore be united in the circle.”5 In the birth chart the opposites
are already potentially united in the circle, and our task is to bring
these axes into a conscious, creative and dynamic relationship with
each other.
Four is the minimal number by which order can be created and
represents the pluralistic state of the man who has not yet
attained inner unity, hence the state of bondage and disunion,
of disintegration, and of being torn in different directions – an
agonizing, unredeemed state which longs for union,
reconciliation, redemption, healing and wholeness.6
Ascendant-Descendant Axis The horizontal axis describes the drama of adult relationships
between two people who are potentially equals. No matter which pair
of opposite signs are found on the Ascendant-Descendant axis, this
is the battleground on which we build a sense of ourselves as
individuals, not in isolation but through our relationship to our partners
and significant others.
Audience: What if your ruling planet is in the seventh house?
Clare: Well, that would mean that you will find yourself, your identity,
through your relationship with others. This also means that the whole
area of relationships is going to be a major theme in your life. For
example, both Freud and Jung had their Sun in the seventh house,
and both worked extensively throughout their lives with their clients in
significant and committed one-to-one relationships, out of which each
developed his own particular ideas and schools of psychological
thought.
If the Ascendant describes our personal interface with the world
around us, the Descendant, which lies directly opposite the
Ascendant and marks the western horizon, describes how we meet
‘the other’. The Descendant describes the quality of our one-to-one
relationships and it is here that we are challenged to engage in the
balancing act of compromise and adjustment. The seventh house
almost always describes what we project and all relationships
inevitably catalyse some form of projection, which can be both
positive and negative.
Audience: Does that mean that both Freud and Jung met themselves
through all the clients and patients they had?
Clare: Yes, that’s a good point and certainly true. Freud’s AscendantDescendant axis was Scorpio-Taurus, with his Sun in Taurus in the
seventh house. Jung’s axis was Aquarius-Leo, with his Sun in Leo in
the seventh house. It is no accident, therefore, that, broadly speaking,
Freud’s work centred around sexuality and the buried emotions which
can have such a powerful effect on the body, and Jung’s work centred
around the discovery of the Self, and the relationship of the individual
to the collective. In fact, we can never tell from the chart itself exactly where, on any
particular spectrum, an individual will be identified. It is equally
possible that we may identify with the Descendant, particularly in our
childhoods, when our personal survival (Ascendant) is literally
dependent on others (Descendant). So we tend to develop an early
and heightened sensitivity to the reactions and attitudes of others
towards us. Our sense of identity is often derived from the way we
are ‘mirrored’ by others, an empirical discovery which led to the
development of the field of ‘object relations’ in psychology. What this
means astrologically, is that we often perceive ourselves not through
our own lens (the Ascendant) but through the mirroring we receive
from others (the Descendant).
Take the example of a child born with Aries rising into an
environment where good behaviour, good manners and consideration
for others are given the highest priority. This child will receive positive
reinforcement for being ‘good’, ‘considerate’ and ‘accomplished’, and
negative reinforcement for being ‘selfish’ or ‘self willed’. It can take
many years for that individual to develop the courage to develop their
Aries ascendant, even though it is strongly imprinted from the
moment of birth. It is therefore important not to assume that the
Ascendant is fully developed and fully functioning. In fact, I think it is
normal to identify more readily with the descendant complex in our
youth. Perhaps this is why our adult relationships are so valuable and
necessary in helping us to find ourselves, since they activate this
axis.
Conversely, people with a Libra Ascendant are natural arbitrators
and mediators, concerned with avoiding confrontation or disputes.
This approach can be the result of having been born into an
environment which was at war, or in which the parents were in deep
conflict. The Libra rising individual often has a real fear of discord,
anger or violence, since in their childhoods this would have been
experienced as deeply threatening to their survival.
The price which has to be paid for identifying with the Libra end of
the axis is that Mars will be projected, which means that individual’s
sense of personal potency, agency and focus is also projected onto
partners, which can become an uncomfortable double bind, if they are dependent on their partners for energy, decision making and
direction.
Audience: Sorry Clare, but you are referring to the Descendant as
the parental relationship, but surely the parental relationship is
described by the fourth-tenth house axis? How can the seventh
house describe the parents?
Clare: It is true that the fourth-tenth houses describe the parental
relationship, but it is also true that the Ascendant-Descendant axis
describes the way we locate ourselves, as children, in relation to the
parental relationship. This is the classic Oedipal triangle, with the
child on one side and the parents on the other, and our role we
played in this triangular relationship will inevitably affect our adult
relationships.
Audience: But we are also talking about the Aries-Libra axis in
general, aren’t we?
Clare: That’s right. We all have the Aries-Libra axis somewhere in our
charts, so these themes are archetypal, although they will find
personal expression in the houses across which these signs fall.
Would anyone like to have a look at their own AscendantDescendant axis?
Audience (Jane): Can we have a look at my Ascendant-Descendant
axis, which is Leo-Aquarius?
Clare: Let’s start by considering the general nature of the LeoAquarius axis, which we know is going to be constellated in your
relationships. This is the axis of identity, of ‘finding ourselves in the
crowd’, of discovering how we can make our own unique contribution
to the group or collective to which we belong. And your relationships
will no doubt provide you with the kinds of circumstances and
experiences which enable you to define and understand yourself
more clearly in this context.
Let’s have a look first of all at the Aquarius descendant to see how
you are likely to have been ‘mirrored’ by others at an early age. Aquarius is a cool, detached, intellectual sign concerned with
conforming to, or rebelling against, the expectations of parents,
authority figures in general, and social rules and norms. I would
therefore imagine that you were particularly sensitive to the
expectations of others from a very young age, and adapted and
adjusted your behaviour accordingly in order to gain their acceptance
and approval. The personal ruler of the descendant is Saturn in the
fourth house, which indicates early responsibility and a desire to gain
your father’s love and respect by working hard, being sensible and
adult. At the same time, with Uranus as collective ruler of your
descendant and in the twelfth house, it seems as if the rebel or ‘free
spirit’ part of you provides an imaginative and creative escape from
the responsibilities of relationships, as if a part of you will always
remain detached and free. With Aquarius on the descendant, you are
likely to be attracted to cool, detached, intellectuals or people who are
unusual in some way. With Saturn in the fourth house, your
relationships are likely to involve hard work and family
responsibilities, although with Uranus in the twelfth house there is a
need to remain separate and detached from the world. Does any of
this ring true?
Audience (Jane): Yes it does, particularly the Saturn ruler of my
Descendant. In fact I was literally rejected and had to live with my
grandparents from an early age because my parents couldn’t cope.
So I felt very alone in my childhood and I suspect that I did have to
adapt and adjust to the rules and learn to stand on my own feet at an
early age. But I can also relate to the Uranus ruler because there is a
part of me that refuses to conform or obey the rules, so I had many
fantasies of escape and freedom, and in fact I still do! And my
husband was exactly as you describe – cool, detached and
intellectual, leaving me to look after all the practicalities but at the
same time he did not support me at all.
Audience: And although Jane has a Leo Ascendant, the Sun, which
is her chart ruler, is in Capricorn, which is a similar kind of Saturn
story, isn’t it? Clare: That’s exactly right, so a strong Sun-Saturn, fire-earth theme is
already emerging from this relationship axis. The personal ruler of the
descendant is Saturn in the fire sign of Sagittarius, and the ruler of
the Ascendant in fire is the Sun but it is in the Saturn ruled earth sign
of Capricorn. With Leo rising and the Sun in Capricorn, I suspect that
your marriage has been the catalyst which has taught you to value
and stand up for yourself, in order to gain the recognition your Leo
ascendant needs, and to develop the self sufficiency and personal
authority of the Capricorn Sun? Jane: Data withheld for reasons of confidentiality
Audience (Jane): That’s right, although it has been a long and
difficult journey, but I have grown up a great deal as a result of my
marriage. I am sure that the twelfth house Uranus was also an
important factor because it helped me to eventually separate from my
husband when I felt just too trapped. And now I am developing my
own writing, which I could never have done before, so my SunMercury conjunction in Capricorn has come to life and it feels really
good. Audience: How does this work if you have Virgo and Pisces on the
Ascendant-Descendant axis?
Clare: With Virgo on the Ascendant we are usually extremely selfcritical, expecting nothing less than perfection from ourselves. So
much attention goes into the details of the world and into getting it
right, that our partners can get away with murder. Virgo Ascendant
people will have an immense attraction to and admiration of Piscean
types, those who are fluid, artistic and inspired in some way, or
alternatively, those who are vulnerable or sick, because then they can
use all their practical talents and capabilities to care for their partner.
Audience: What about someone born with Pisces on the Ascendant
and Virgo on the Descendant? Are they likely to attract Virgoans?
Clare: Yes, Virgo type people. So that could be someone who has
their Sun in Virgo or Gemini, or someone who is Mercury ruled or with
a strongly tenanted third or sixth house. With Pisces on the
Ascendant we tend to instinctively absorb and merge with our
surroundings. This is a very chameleon-like Ascendant and people
with Pisces rising are normally so well camouflaged that they tend to
attract partners who take on the role analysing and defining and
structuring all this fluidity. This can easily feel like criticism, if you
have Virgo on the Descendant, but it is of course one’s own projected
ability to develop the analytical skills which give shape to, and
complement the Piscean sensitivity and imagination.
Audience: So presumably you will also be aware of the Virgo side of
the axis as well?
Clare: It is usually the case that, with Pisces rising, we are born into
an environment where practical skills and an orderly, precise and
businesslike approach to the world were highly valued. For many
years we may try to define ourselves according to the way we have
been mirrored. But as we mature and enter into adult partnerships,
we will want to let ourselves off the hook and allow ourselves to
merge and float, leaving the precision, order and control to our
partner. I think that our Ascendant-Descendant axis often works like this – that we are subconsciously looking for someone else to inhabit
the Descendant for us so that we can develop the qualities of our
Ascendant.
Audience: But Clare, if you have Pisces rising would you not be
subconsciously critical of others, but just not recognise that you are?
Clare: Although we tend to assume that the qualities of the sign on
the Descendant will be projected, it is not always immediately obvious
‘who is doing what to whom’. However, if we think of the opposites
signs on this relationship axis as belonging to one complete
spectrum, then we can immediately understand the general quality
and the nature of the themes which will emerge in our relationships.
We know that the Virgo-Pisces axis will involve themes of merging
and separating, accepting and judging, order and chaos, control and
trust, sickness and health, and with this axis on the AscendantDescendant we are going to end up doing a Virgo-Pisces dance with
our partner.
Incidentally, our discussion seems to have turned into a VirgoPisces dance as we speak. I sense from your questions that you are
trying to get precision, to analyse this axis so that it can be clearly
understood, but remember that we are also talking about Pisces here,
so we will also have to allow it to remain mysterious to some extent
and beyond our analytical grasp.
Midheaven-IC Axis
As we have already seen, the fourth and tenth houses are the
parental houses, with the fourth house describing the family
background and the environment within which we grew up, and the
tenth house describing our family’s social status and relationship to
the world. These houses also describe our perception of the parental
relationship itself and it is likely that, to some extent, the roles played
by our parents were or are interchangeable. Biologically, of course,
we are the product of the union between our parents, so the fourth
and tenth houses reflect the tension and the creativity of the meeting
of opposites which resulted in our conception.
The conflicting demands of our private life and public life, our home
and our work, our inner and outer worlds, create the kind of tension and stress which I suspect we have all felt from time to time.
No matter which house system we are using, it is worth pointing
out that the meaning of the MC-IC axis is not identical to the meaning
of the fourth and tenth houses, which describe the qualities and
attitudes of our parents and what we learned on our mother’s or
father’s knee.
At the end of the day, the MC-IC meridian is a uniquely personal
axis. It is our vertical axis, our central pillar, describing in the deepest
sense where we are coming from and where we are going. And
although this may very well be an extension of our parents’ goals,
ambitions and achievements, eventually our task appears to be to
extract ourselves from the parental matrix, put down our own roots
and to find our own place in the world.
The MC describes our true vocation or ‘calling’, that ‘something’ we
need to achieve in the world in order to fulfil our unique potential.
Unlike the tenth house, it is driven from within, rather than from
without. And the IC describes the roots of our being, which support
and sustain and nourish us on an inner level, and which are the
source of our potency and power in the world. As the midnight point
in the birth chart, it is the point where the Sun dies and is reborn, and
in traditional astrology it signifies ‘the end of the matter’, which also
makes way for new beginnings. The vertical axis of the MC-IC can be
compared to the chakra system, our central pillar, with the IC
functioning as the base chakra. As with all axes, the MC and IC
depend upon each other, because our capacity to grow upwards will
always depend on the strength of our roots.
In the equal house system, the MC-IC axis will normally be found
in the tenth and fourth houses, in which case our own direction in life
may well be an extension of that of our family and parents. But if it
falls outside the tenth and fourth houses, then our direction in life may
be very different from that of our parents.
If, for example, the MC-IC axis falls across the ninth-third houses,
then our vocation may involve education, teaching, law, philosophy,
travel, or any of the themes associated with these two houses. We
might be the one person in the family, for example, who has gone to
university, or who lives in another country or culture, or who adopts a
different religion or philosophy from the rest of the family. With the MC-IC axis across the eighth-second houses, we are
unlikely to feel particularly comfortable with the traditions and values
of the culture we grew up in. We will want to plunge deep into the
buried issues which that culture or society is not looking at and, with
the IC in the second house, to live according to our own inner values,
which will be described by the sign on the second house cusp, the
planetary ruler of the second house and any planets in the second
house.
If the MC-IC axis is in the eleventh and fifth houses, then we are
likely to have a more political, socially conscious or creative vocation
and path in life than that of our parents and family. No doubt we will
find ourselves kicking against the old traditions, assumptions and
perceived complacency of the tenth-fourth house culture into which
we were born, and seek to make our own unique contribution (IC in
the fifth house) to the development of political or social awareness
(MC in the eleventh house).
The curious thing about the MC-IC axis is that it seems to describe
talents, goals and potentials which our parents have denied or
suppressed; what they would have liked to have been or done if they
had only had the opportunity. And so this axis can put us directly in
touch with particular gifts and challenges we have inherited from our
parents but which have not been lived out by them. There is a poem
by Rainer Maria Rilke called Separate Lives, which expresses this
beautifully:
Sometimes a man stands up during supper
and walks outdoors, and keeps on walking,
because of a church that stands somewhere in the East.
And his children say blessings on him as if he were dead.
And another man, who remains inside his own house,
dies there, inside the dishes and in the glasses,
so that his children have to go far out into the world
toward that same church, which he forgot.
There is always a powerful ancestral ‘charge’ around this axis, and
it is on this axis that we seem to inherit the as yet unfulfilled, incomplete, still to be manifested or resolved, destiny and calling of
our family line. In this sense the MC-IC axis connects us to the
archetypal parents which always stand behind or beyond our ordinary
human, mortal parents. The parental archetypes, the male and
female principles, are symbolised in astrology by the Sun and Moon,
which leads us back to questions about the Spirit and Soul. It would
be symbolically valid to suppose that the Spirit and Soul might be
made manifest through the MC-IC axis.7
For example, if we relate the MC-IC axis to the ancient system of
chakras, there is a correlation between the MC, Spirit and the crown
chakra, which relates to consciousness as pure awareness. When
fully developed, this chakra brings us knowledge, wisdom,
understanding, spiritual connection and bliss. “It is our place of
mergence with God, the Oneness, the All.”8 By the same token, there
is a correlation between the IC, Soul and the base chakra which, in
the body, is located at the base of our spine. As such, it is related to
our survival instincts, to our sense of grounding and connection to our
bodies, our ability to be present in the here and now. It also relates to
our ability to draw nourishment and strength from within, through our
physical bodies, and describes how we feel about being incarnate,
about being on the earth. Tension here often points to a fundamental
sense of insecurity or fear, or as a threat to our survival.
Audience: But it is difficult to think of the MC-IC axis as our central
pillar because in charts it is always veering around, changing its
relationship to the Ascendant-Descendant all the time. The Seven Chakras in the Human Body
Clare: That is certainly how it seems, and this is simply because in
modern birth charts it is the convention to keep the AscendantDescendant axis horizontal. However, from a geographical point of
view, it is the north-south meridian, the MC-IC axis which stays the
same, while the Ascendant-Descendant axis veers around this
meridian, with the Ascendant being anywhere from south east right
through to north east, as we stand in the centre of our charts looking
south.
Audience: But what if you have nothing on the IC? Does that mean
you have no root system or that you have to wait for a transit to get
that going?
Clare: We all have important stories around the IC, whether or not
there is a planet there. The IC will be in a sign and that sign will have its planetary ruler or rulers, which will be in certain signs and houses
and make certain aspects, so that is where we would look for the IC
story. Let’s have a look at some planets on the MC-IC axis.
Audience (Tom): I have two planets on the IC, Saturn and Uranus.
Can we have a look at those?
Clare: Yes, let’s have a look at them both and see how they function.
This is a good example because your MC-IC axis is in SagittariusGemini and falls in your eleventh and fifth houses. This indicates that
your own personal vocation in life has been very different from that of
your parents and from the themes described by the tenth-fourth
houses. No doubt your personal journey has led you to discover your
own ideas and your own particular talents and capabilities (IC in the
fifth house) and to develop and explore them across a wide spectrum
of society, or even of the world? (MC in Sagittarius in the eleventh
house.) I would imagine that your life has been lived on a much larger
scale, and with more political or social involvement than that of your
parents? Tom: Data withheld for reasons of confidentiality
Audience (Tom): That’s right and very interesting. Can you say some
more about this?
Clare: Let’s have a look at the parental background first, to try and
understand something about your family background and the role of
your parents in your life. Your tenth-fourth houses are ruled by the
fixed signs of Scorpio and Taurus, the axis of exchange. Taurus on
the fourth house cusp indicates stability in the family and Venus, which rules your fourth house, is in Scorpio in the tenth house which
indicates that your father may have had a powerful role in the world,
perhaps dealing with other people’s money or resources? Scorpio on
the tenth house cusp, ruled by Mars and Pluto, indicates that your
mother was a powerful, determined, ambitious and opinionated
woman, since the Mars ruler is in Aries in the third house, and the
Pluto ruler is conjunct your Descendant in the seventh house.
Perhaps you experienced her as rather controlling and invasive?
Audience (Tom): Yes, that is certainly true. I do come from a large
landowning family who have been farmers for generations, although
my father was a merchant banker in the City. He was certainly a very
powerful man, and he was determined that I would also become a
banker and follow in his footsteps. My mother was an intelligent
woman who ruled the roost at home, devoting all her energies to her
family and children. Had she been born in another era I suspect she
would have been a successful career woman.
Clare: From the point of view of your MC-IC axis, I imagine that you
may have found your family background and your parents’
expectations rather oppressive. The Gemini-Sagittarius axis is one of
space, expansion and exploration, and with Saturn and Uranus
conjunct your IC, it looks at if, in order to forge your own way in the
world, you have had to sever your family connections and learn to
stand on your own feet. This cannot have been easy, with Saturn on
your IC, but no doubt you have felt compelled to break away from
family ties.
Audience (Tom): I think this all started when I was sent to a Jesuit
boarding school at a young age. That was a huge shock to me at the
time, but it also opened up my mind and I will always be grateful for
the education I received. I learned to think and to question and to
challenge ideas, and that has stood me in good stead throughout my
life. And I did cut off entirely from my family for a while because I
refused to go into banking and there was a huge row. In fact, my
father did literally ‘cut me off’ and out of my inheritance. Clare: This is a very graphic description of Saturn in Taurus and
Uranus in Gemini on the IC. Saturn in Taurus in the fourth house
describes your duty to your family, the importance of tradition and the
heavy sense of responsibility imposed upon you by your father as
well as the denial of your inheritance. But Uranus in Gemini is even
closer to your IC, and that describes the rebel and the free thinker
and the fact that you had your own ideas. So I think we can see why
you had to break free and follow your own path, which is very flexible
and expansive and autonomous. It is particularly interesting that both
Saturn and Uranus are your chart rulers, since you have Aquarius
rising, so no doubt this has been a major theme in your life.
Audience (Tom): And as it happens I went into marketing and ended
up being the MD of a multinational company. I have been travelling
extensively my entire career, negotiating and dealing with people
from all over the world until recently, when I was suddenly and
unexpectedly asked to take early retirement. But at least it has given
me the time to study astrology.
Clare: Well, that is a perfect description of your Sagittarius MC, with
its ruler in Gemini in the fifth house. It is also another example of
being suddenly cut off at your roots and from your income. But
Uranus is often associated with astrology, so perhaps this is also
about finding your vocation in life, or a way of making sense of it all?
But the MC-IC axis can also indicate where we have inherited the
unlived lives of our parents, or particular gifts and talents from our
ancestors, so I am wondering whether your father may have been a
free spirit himself who was unable to escape his family
responsibilities and duties, and whether your mother, who was such a
powerful force in your life, was unable to fulfil her intellectual or
educational potential? If so, then on a deeper level, by breaking away
from the expected family pattern you may even have been fulfilling
and living out the unlived lives of your parents?
Audience (Tom): Well, certainly it is true that my father was obliged
to follow in his father’s footsteps, and my mother met and married my
father when she was very young, and at that time married women did not pursue their own careers. This has given me a great deal of food
for thought.
Clare: That is a wonderful example, Tom. Thank you.
Notes
1. Adolf Guggenbuhl-Craig, From the Wrong Side, p.143
2. Dane Rudhyar, The Astrological Houses, p.154
3. King Midas and his daughter who has turned to gold. Nathanial Hawthorn, A
Wonder Book for Girls and Boys (1892), illustrated by Walter Crane, British
Library. Júpiter . Illustration. Frederick Lord Leighton, Persephone’s Return.
5. C.G. Jung, Psychology of the Transference, p.42.
6. Ibid, p.46.
7. Diagram of the Seven Chakras in Titus Burckhardt, Alchemy.
8. Rosalyn L. Bruyere, Wheels of Light, p.44 LESSON 5
The Nodes of the Moon
There is more to human life than our theories of it allow. Sooner
or later something seems to call us onto a particular path. 1
Looking back over the course of one’s own days and noticing
how encounters and events that appeared at the time to be
accidental became the crucial structuring features of an
unintended life story through which the potentialities of one’s
character were fostered to fulfilment, one may find it difficult to
resist the notion of the course of one’s biography as
comparable to that of a cleverly constructed novel, wondering
who the author of the surprising plot can have been …2
While we are on the whole subject of axes, I want to spend time this
week exploring the Moon’s nodal axis, which is the third axis of
particular significance (in addition to the angles: the AscendantDescendant and MC-IC axes) in our charts.
We need to begin, as always, by understanding what the Moon’s
nodes actually are from an astronomical viewpoint, since this
provides the basis and foundation of our astrological understanding
and interpretation.
Have a look at your birth charts and you will no doubt see the
North Node symbol , but the symbol for the South Node is not
always shown on horoscope print-outs, which explains why this
important axis may not be immediately obvious. As with all axes, the
South Node is exactly 180° from, or opposite, the North Node.
You can see from the following diagram that the plane of the
Moon’s orbit is at an oblique angle of approximately 5° to the plane of
the Sun’s orbit (the ecliptic). The nodal points mark the position
where these two planes cross, and every month the Moon crosses the ecliptic twice, once travelling north [at the North Node] and once
travelling south [at the South Node]. Nodal Axis
When the Moon crosses the ecliptic then, from the point of view of
the earth, the Sun and Moon are in alignment. This means that, when
a new or full moon coincides, or nearly coincides, with one of the
nodes, then there will be an eclipse, and of course eclipses are
powerful celestial events which have always had immense
significance throughout the history of astronomy and astrology.
The nodes have been known from ancient times as the head and
tail of the celestial dragon – a monstrous creature which devours the
Sun or the Moon at eclipses. They have played a particularly
important role in Indian, vedic astrology, where the north node
(‘Rahu’) is the dragon’s head and the south node (‘Ketu’) is the
dragon’s tail. So I am sure you can understand why both nodes were
considered to be dangerous, or malefic. Serpent in the Sky3
We will look at eclipses in much more detail next term, but perhaps
the main point I want to make now is that, when they do occur, we
look upwards, away from the earth and all our day to day concerns,
and stand in awe as we watch these great events take place.
Audience: They sound like rather scary points.
Clare: That’s right, particularly since they have always been
associated with fate and with fated events, in both vedic and western
astrology. Traditionally, eclipses are associated with tragedies,
catastrophes and deaths, particularly the death of kings. As
psychological astrologers, I think we still have to find another way to
understand them. Now that we have identified where everyone’s nodal axis actually
is, the next question is: how do we interpret it – and this is actually
rather more complicated to answer.
Audience: Do you interpret the node like the Moon?
Clare: Well, the nodes are in fact empty places in space except
during eclipses, so we have to resist the temptation to interpret them
as if they were ‘simply’ planets. They seem to have a profoundly
metaphysical meaning, since it is on these points that the Sun, Moon
and Earth are in alignment, so they are the meeting place,
symbolically, of spirit, soul and matter, both collectively and
individually.
Another important point about the nodal axis is that it is moving in
the opposite direction to the Sun and to all the other planets. As the
angles and all the planets move forwards, or anti-clockwise around
our charts, they describe how we engage with and relate to the world
around us. The Ascendant-Descendant axis and the MC-IC axis are
doors into the world, describing our struggle to extract ourselves from
the parental matrix, to put down our own roots and find our own place
in the world, and to define ourselves through partnerships. In
contrast, the nodal axis moves backwards, or clockwise around our
charts. It is not so tied up with the dramas of life. Rather, it seems to
function as a doorway into other dimensions, where we can
sometimes glimpse or sense our soul’s purpose and pattern, our
entelechy, the deeper purpose and function of our existence. And this
can be very different from the more conscious or worldly goals we set
for ourselves.
There is no doubt that the nodal axis is of immense significance in
our lives. It is an axis of tension and compulsion, around which ideas
of ‘fate’ and ‘destiny’ always seem to hover. As Richard Idemon
writes: “It’s as if life constantly returns you to this axis to work
something out.” Júpiter Those of you who are already familiar with the
nodes, what do you think of when you see them in a birth chart?
Audience: Lessons to be learned. Audience: Past and present. About time, with the south node having
to do with the past and the north node having to do with the future.
Audience: The north node is what we are striving to become.
Audience: Is it something to do with reincarnation?
Audience: It’s about special people coming into your life.
Clare: Just for a moment, take the nodal axis out of your chart – what
does it feel like?
Audience: Directionless
Audience: We lose our soul.
Clare: That’s very interesting. So without the nodal axis we lose our
direction and we lose our soul. Let’s have a look at some of the other
ideas you have mentioned. Although both the nodes were originally
considered to be malefic, at some point in the development of
western astrology their interpretation began to polarise.
In traditional horary astrology, for example, a planet conjunct the
north node is said to be helped, strengthened or increased.
Conversely, a planet conjunct the south node is said to be harmed,
weakened or decreased. In addition, the north node began to be
interpreted as the “evolutionary path” the direction in which we are
‘meant’ to be going in our lives, and the south node started to be
interpreted as the “regressive path”, the direction from which we have
come, or our past.
In western astrology, it seems that Alan Leo is responsible for
making the specific connection between the nodal axis and karma.
The Theosophical movement out of which astrology was reborn at the
end of the nineteenth and beginning of the twentieth centuries, was
strongly influenced by Indian culture and religions. As an astrologer,
Alan Leo did much to breathe new life into western astrology and as a
Theosophist he was convinced that the natal chart could only be
properly understood in the context of karma, past lives and
reincarnation. It is important to recognise straight away that the horoscope itself has nothing to say on this subject. A horoscope is
just a horoscope. The meaning we impose on it depends upon our
specific cultural and historical background, as well as upon the
individual philosophies and world views of astrologers themselves.
And so we have inherited an interesting conundrum because
western astrology has developed enormously since Alan Leo’s day,
and we no longer see astrology in terms of cause and effect, so it
seems that our interpretation of the nodes has become rather stuck.
For example, we don’t tend to look at the whole chart in terms of
karma, do we? We wouldn’t look at someone’s Saturn-Mars
conjunction and start wondering if they might have been a murderer
in their past lives – we simply don’t work like that any more.
Audience: I hope not, because I have a Saturn-Mars conjunction in
my own chart.
Clare: Let’s go back and look at the diagram again. You can see that
the north node is the point where the Moon moves ‘upwards’ into the
northern hemisphere, and the south node is the point where the
Moon moves ‘downwards’ into the southern hemisphere. Perhaps this
explains why the north node came to be associated with the spiritual
path, because our astrological symbolism tells us that spirit is
fundamentally solar – associated with height, light and
transcendence. Spirit is abstract, linear and vertical, calling us
upwards, forwards and outwards. As such, the north node has
become associated with our individual heroic quest, requiring the
development of our personal will so that we may fulfil our spiritual
destiny. And because of this, there is often an assumption that our
south nodes are regressive and tend to pull us backwards and
downwards, away from our spiritual path. And so a good/bad split and
a future/past split has crept into our interpretations, along with a kind
of moral imperative. For example, it is not uncommon for astrologers,
who are otherwise working very psychologically, to start using words
like ‘should’ and ‘ought’ when they are interpreting the nodal axis.
Going back to the actual astronomy of the nodes, however, we can
see that they are in fact the meeting point of the Sun, Moon and
Earth, and that they are therefore the symbolic meeting point of the spirit, soul and body – liminal places where opposites come together
and merge. From an alchemical perspective, the nodes represent the
sacred marriage of the sun and moon, of the masculine and feminine
principles, the mysterium coniunctionis which is the goal of the
alchemical opus. Throughout our lives there is an equal emphasis on both nodes –
they are equally active, since eclipses, whether solar or lunar, occur
on both nodes. Perhaps the best way to demonstrate this is to show
you an illustration of the DNA double helix represented in complete
symmetry as a pair of serpents.5
Naturally, because of the way our minds are wired, we are likely to
find ourselves falling into our habitual either/or kind of thinking, but all
the same, although we know that the Sun and Moon are opposites, it
is important to try not to polarise, since we also know that opposites
cause and depend upon and complete each other. Have a look at this table (see following page), which lists some of the words associated
with the Sun and the Moon.
Let’s consider the lunar side of this table. The Moon is symbolically
associated with the soul – being diffuse, immanent and collective. It is
circular, dark and has to do with the body and with matter. It calls us
downwards into our birth charts, into nature and into our incarnation.
Because the nodes are the points where the Sun and Moon come
together – places where the opposites merge, both sides of the table
need to be taken into equal account in our interpretations.
SUN MOON Spirit Soul Linear Circular Vertical Horizontal Focused Diffuse Time Space The One The Many Transcendence Immanence Will Destiny Individual Collective Audience: Yes, I can see what you are saying now. We seem to be
using mainly solar words or coming from a solar perspective when we
look at the nodes.
Collective nature of the Nodal Axis
Marking the two points where the Sun and Moon cross each other’s
paths, meet and come together, where the spirit and soul unite from
the point of view of the earth, we can see that the nodal axis is
equally solar and lunar – and it is therefore of both personal and
collective significance.
From a collective point of view, everyone born within a particular
eighteen-month period will have the nodal axis across the same signs. We studied the six axes last week and, if we are working
alchemically in the interests of the development of individual and
collective consciousness, it appears that our task is to work with, and
endeavour to integrate to opposite poles of the particular axis we
were born on. We could say that we have been born into a particular
polarity – into an unresolved imbalance in the collective – and that
our personal efforts to recognise the equal validity of both poles of
any archetypal spectrum will make a difference to the entire human
endeavour, “for nature’s continued existence depends ultimately on
the kind of consciousness we bring to bear on it”.6
Developing the collective, lunar aspect of the nodal axis further, we
know that in the western mystery traditions within which astrology
developed, the collective aspect of the soul is known as the anima
mundi, the ‘soul of the world’, a living, breathing dimension of reality
which is teeming with life. I have come to think of the nodal axis as a
threshold or doorway between the manifest, physical world and the
soul of the world, the ‘anima mundi’.
The world soul is itself liminal, mediating between the divine and
human realms, between the gods and mankind and it is not only “full
of gods”, as Proclus wrote, but, astonishingly, it also appears to be
interested in us.7 So we may not be as alone as we think. The
existence of this permeable, intermediary realm and of the beings
which reside there was, once upon a time, taken for granted. The
more mystically inclined ancient Greek philosophers, believed in the
existence of a whole range of intermediaries and messengers –
archons and daemons – which inhabited the liminal realms between
this and other worlds and which were of both personal and
impersonal significance.
Audience: This sounds a bit like the ‘otherworld’ in the Celtic
tradition.
Clare: Yes, and in fact these intermediary or other worlds are found in
all traditions and cultures. To mention just a few, in Tibetan Buddhism
they are known as the bardos, the place between life and death. In
Australian aboriginal culture they are known as the dream time; in
Hindu culture it is the akasha – a vast memory store which belongs to
all of human kind and within which we can move anywhere in human history instantly. In the western tradition this realm is known as the
anima mundi.
The other worlds are accessed through the imagination, in myths,
stories, dreams and in altered states of consciousness. They are
particularly perceptible when we find ourselves at liminal times and
places in our lives, at crossroads or on thresholds or in the moments
between sleeping and waking. If you are familiar with rebirthing, or
regression therapy or shamanic practices, then no doubt you are
already familiar with these realms, in which neither time nor space
conform to our normal expectations. The past, present and future
exist simultaneously, always and everywhere, behind and beneath
the surface of our everyday perception. This is unknown and yet
strangely familiar territory. When we visit the other worlds we have
access to a vast store of experience which is both personal and
collective, which is both individual and which belongs to all of
humanity. In this sense, we could see the nodes as the meeting place
of temporal, or time based dimensions with the spacial dimensions
where all of human experience is occurring all the time.
Personal nature of the nodal axis
Although the signs describe our collective, inherited nodal axis
imbalance, it is the houses in which the nodes are found and the
planetary rulers of the nodes which describe our personal relationship
to this axis and our personal experience of the liminal realms and this
will, of course, be different for each of us.
In addition to the collective dimension of the other worlds, there is
also a long tradition that each one of us is attached at birth to an
individual daemon which is uniquely interested in our individual
destiny. In our own charts, we could even imagine that the nodal axis
is our individual threshold between this and other worlds, presided
over by our own personal guides, mentors, teachers, ancestors,
messengers, guardian angels and daemons.
Audience: This reminds me of the Philip Pullman trilogy His Dark
Materials, in which everyone is attached to their own personal
daemon. Clare: Exactly, and this is by no means a new idea. You can find this
in the Myth of Er in Plato’s Republic. In this myth, Plato describes
how the soul of each of us is given a unique daemon before we are
born, which selects the image and pattern which we are to live on the
earth. This sounds exactly like the birth chart, doesn’t it? Our soul’s
companion guides us towards birth, but in the process of our arrival
we forget all that and believe instead that we are alone in the world. It
is said that our daemon remembers our image and our pattern and is
therefore the carrier of our destiny.
So I am approaching the nodal axis as a threshold between the
worlds, populated by a host of intermediaries from the anima mundi
which remember, when we forget, what on earth we are doing here.
This explains why the nodal axis is so strongly associated with
significant meetings with people who may challenge us, appear to
thwart us, or who function as messengers, guides or teachers,
helping us, and sometimes forcing us, to cross thresholds which
would otherwise never occur to us, or which we are afraid to cross
without some kind of help, guidance or encouragement. Reinhold
Ebertin also found that there are often strong nodal links between
partners and in families.8 It is perhaps not surprising that people with
whom we are in close relationship are also the agents of our personal
destiny.
“Why is it so difficult to imagine that I am cared about, that
something takes an interest in what I do, that I am perhaps
protected, maybe even kept alive not altogether by my own will
and doing? Once upon a time what took such good care of me
was a guardian spirit and I knew how to pay it appropriate
attention. … Why not keep within psychology proper what once
was called providence – being invisibly watched and watched
over?” Mercúrio The influences from the other worlds remains shadowy, but they
are experienced in our intuitions, in our imagination and in fleeting
glimpses. No doubt we have all had the feeling, at different times in
our lives, that we are being blocked from taking a particular decision
or line of action. We wonder, for example, why we can’t get that job or
sell our house. No matter how hard we try to make things happen in a particular way, they just refuse to oblige. At times like this it seems
that ‘life is what happens while we are busy making other plans’, as
John Lennon so accurately said. Conversely, we will all have had
experiences when everything just seems to fall into place quite
naturally. A series of events will occur which don’t apparently need
much effort from us, and we will find ourselves, often in spite of
ourselves, on a new path. At these times it is likely that our nodal axis
is particularly active, either because it is receiving transits or because
the transiting node is making significant aspects with our natal chart.
The interesting thing about this is that, whether or not we have
other ideas for ourselves, and whether or not we know anything about
astrology, it seems that we are invariably forced into our pattern and
our birth chart comes to life.
Audience: Is there an inevitability about the nodes like Chiron? It
sounds as if there is not much choice involved.
Clare: Yes, that certainly seems to be the case, and it may well be
that our task, as far as the nodal axis is concerned, is to keep our
eyes and ears open for clues, listening for messages and for
messengers whose function may well be to help us across thresholds
or to give us a kick when we refuse to wake up. In my experience, the
application of heroic efforts and the use of our willpower are neither
relevant nor appropriate where the nodal axis is concerned, because
we don’t necessarily get what we think we want, do we?
Audience: No way!
Clare: The nodal axis seems to describe the threshold between
different realities or perceptions, between the literal and the
imaginative, and ultimately it is possible to develop the ability to stand
on this threshold, identifying with neither side exclusively but holding
the opposites. Ultimately, this is exactly our function and role as
astrologers and it is, of course, a very delicate and difficult place to
stand.
Let’s see if we can make all this a bit more real by getting down to
the natal chart and looking at some examples. Both nodes appear to
personify in the form of people who have significant influences in our lives. These people are often teachers, guides or mentors who inspire
us and give us the confidence and support to do things that we
wouldn’t otherwise do.
Audience: Would you say that our ancestors are there on the nodes?
Clare: Yes I would, because we know that in indigenous cultures
which have not lost their roots the ancestors, as well as the
descendants who have yet to be born, are considered to be living
forces, actively involved in the continuing life of the clan or tribe,
functioning as teachers, guides and mentors, so they would certainly
be included in these realms.
In our natal charts it is the houses across which the nodal axis falls
which describe particularly highly charged areas of our lives and
particularly significant relationships. The planetary rulers of the nodes
should be taken into account, since they will provide more specific
and detailed information. But tonight I want to focus on the
relationship of the planets to the nodal axis, particularly those planets
which are conjunct or square to the nodal axis, by which I mean any
planets within 8° or 90° of the nodal axis, on the Moon’s ‘bendings’.
These planets seem to demand expression in our lives, regardless of
our conscious intentions. There is something ruthless and compulsive
about them –they appear to function with absolute certainty and
conviction, driving us to fulfil our destiny.
Audience: I can understand that a planet on the nodal axis will be
significant, but can you explain what the Moon’s bendings are?
Clare: Have another look at the diagram of the nodal axis. You can
see that the Moon crosses the ecliptic twice every month, once
moving upwards at the north node and once moving downwards at
the south node. But there is a point between the nodal crossings
when the Moon has reached its maximum latitude north or south and
at this point, which is 90° from the nodal axis, the Moon changes
direction. When a planet is on this ‘bending’ point, then it seems to
make a particularly challenging connection to the nodal axis itself.
The angles and the nodal axis If the nodal axis is conjunct or square to either of the angles (the MCIC or Ascendant-Descendant axis), then it seems that we find
ourselves compelled to make some kind of personal contribution to
the world. However, our motivation in these cases has nothing to do
with ego gratification or our drive for recognition or fame. It is usually
quite the opposite. We tend to find ourselves acting as agents of
forces which drive us to engage with the world, no matter what the
personal cost may be.
One example is that of Nelson Mandela, who has his north node
conjunct the Ascendant in Sagittarius and his south node conjunct the
Descendant in Gemini. The collective challenge of the GeminiSagittarius axis is to speak out and act on our beliefs, something
Mandela did with great effectiveness, eventually changing the face of
African politics. Mandela qualified as a lawyer and joined the African
National Congress, leading the resistance to the ruling National
Party’s apartheid policies. After the banning of the ANC in 1960, he
advocated the use of violent tactics, and in 1963 he was tried for
plotting to overthrow the government and sentenced to life
imprisonment. Mandela’s nodal axis is in the twelfth and sixth houses,
on the axis of service, personal sacrifice and devotion to a cause.
The twelfth house is associated with incarceration and imprisonment
and the sixth house is associated with hard labour. During Mandela’s
twenty-nine years of imprisonment, his reputation grew steadily and
he became a potent symbol of resistance as the anti-apartheid
movement gathered strength, consistently refusing to compromise his
political position in order to obtain his release. His autobiography,
published in 1994, is the very appropriately named The Long Walk to
Freedom, a perfect Gemini- Sagittarius title.
The Sun and the nodal axis
The Sun aspecting the nodal axis, particularly by conjunction or
square, is often found in the charts of those who have a strong inner
sense of their unique destiny and purpose, often from a very young
age, which they feel compelled to achieve in the world. This is not
necessarily something which can be explained rationally, since it is
just a fierce inner conviction. Audience: My father had his north node conjunct the Sun on the MC.
He was born in a small town in Spain but when he was fifteen years
old he wanted to go to America. His mother said he was too young,
he could not go alone, and anyway he was needed to work on the
family farm. But he cried for three months until eventually he got
permission, and then he went to live with some distant relatives in
Argentina. He became very successful and one day I asked him why
he had done that, and he said, very simply: “because it was my
destiny”.
The Moon and the nodal axis
Clare: When the Moon aspects the nodes we are connected on a
very deep instinctual level to the feelings, to memories and to the
past. There is also a strong connection to the earth, to nature and
also to the feminine.
Audience: I have the Moon conjunct the south node and when I
discovered Gaia theory I thought ‘that’s me’ – and from that moment
on I have tried to find out everything about Gaia.
Clare: I would imagine that this discovery would have felt like a
revelation – something which gripped you strongly. Like a door
opening?
Audience: Absolutely, just like a door opening. I knew at once that I
had found my connection. And I am still there – I am always
connected with Gaia, and trying to respect the Gaia equilibrium.
Audience: Well I have that same connection – with Moon conjunct
my south node. And I have written a book, actually, which is all about
women.
Clare: It is clear from what you are saying that this connection
between the nodal axis and the Moon is very meaningful to both of
you, and you are drawing great support from this lunar connection. If
we were working from the perspective of leaving the south node
behind, then you would be cutting off your living connection to the
support which the Moon gives you. Rather, it seems as if this configuration provides an important clue about what you are here to
do. Incidentally, it is interesting that Bob Geldof has Moon square his
nodal axis and his life long mission has been to ‘feed the world’.
Mercury and the nodal axis
As the messenger of the gods, Mercury’s function is to carry
messages from one world to another. Hermes was the only god in
Greek mythology who could visit all the worlds, and if you have
Mercury conjunct or square to the nodal axis then you may be
challenged to mediate and navigate between different dimensions,
perceptions, realities and languages. This placement also indicates
that our ideas can change radically during our lives. Carl Jung, for
example, had both Mercury and Venus square his nodal axis, and in
his personal life and work with patients he was constantly listening for
messages from the other worlds, communicated in the form of
symbols or as actual events occurring in nature. His personal
daemon, Philemon, was a living reality to him. He lived within its grip,
as it drove him ruthlessly to complete his life’s work.
Audience: My partner has his Mercury square my nodes and I think
that without him I wouldn’t have got in touch with astrology.
Clare: So he is like a teacher and a guide?
Audience: Yes, he has taught me a different way of thinking and
seeing.
Venus and the nodal axis
When Venus is involved with the nodal axis there can be a strong
appreciation of beauty and form, and an intense desire to give shape
to some kind of poetic or artistic expression. The writer, Marcel
Proust, had Venus and Mercury in Virgo in a tight square to the nodal
axis, and his writing is carefully shaped and crafted. Not only did his
life change dramatically from that of a social dilettante to that of a
recluse by the end of his life, but his monumental work, In Search of
Lost Time (A la recherché du temps perdu), consisting of seven
volumes which he worked on almost continuously for over fourteen years, gradually became substantially different from his original
conception, as he drew increasingly upon his inner world, his
imagination and personal memories.
Mars and the nodal axis
With Mars aspecting the nodal axis, there is a powerful compulsion to
act. We feel forced to take action. It seems to be our destiny to fight
for something, to find an effective channel for the use of our energy
and determination. Princess Diana, who publicly challenged the
general ignorance and prejudice towards people with AIDS, and took
up the cause to eliminate land mines, had Mars, Uranus and Pluto on
her north node in Leo, and Moon and Chiron on her south node in
Aquarius, so there is a very significant nodal story here.
Jupiter and the nodal axis
Jupiter can describe someone who has access to deep faith and a
feeling of being protected, of being specially favoured by the gods or
of having a guardian angel who protects them throughout their lives.
This may drive them to achieve more than they ever thought possible,
and which they would certainly not embark on unless they felt they
were acting as agents of divine providence. Although this contact
brings faith, it is not necessarily easy to live with, particularly if Jupiter
is conjunct or square the axis, because then it will have us in its grip –
driving us to fulfil our destiny, however hard this may be on a
personal level.
Martin Luther, whose passionate conviction that human beings
have direct access to God led directly to the Reformation, had Jupiter
and Mars on his south node. On a personal level, Luther’s journey
caused him immense suffering and hardship, but eventually he felt he
had no choice but to act and to challenge the established Catholic
Church with his doctrine of ‘justification by faith alone’.
Saturn and the nodal axis
When Saturn is connected to the nodes there can be very strong
barriers and boundaries between the worlds and a fear of trusting or
opening up these thresholds. Saturn is a hard task master, throwing obstacles in our way, teaching us lessons and insisting that we learn
to stand on our own feet and develop self discipline, responsibility
and mastery. We may well turn back from this threshold because it is
so hard and decide, because it is safer, to confine our activities solely
to this world. Alternatively, we may continue to meet teachers who
force us to undertake long and difficult periods of apprenticeship,
hard work and discipline, which eventually lead us to becoming ‘gate
keepers’ ourselves, guarding the thresholds between the worlds on
behalf of others.
One example is Tina Turner, who has Saturn conjunct the south
node in Aries. Her task has been to learn to stand up for and defend
herself and to become her own authority, and it has been a
extraordinary journey, although extremely difficult, with the kind of life
and death struggle which is indicated by the fact Pluto is also square
to her nodal axis.
W.B. Yeats is also an interesting example, with Saturn conjunct the
north node and the nodal axis square to his Ascendant-Descendant
axis. Yeats and his wife consciously collaborated with the daemonic
realms via the medium of automatic writing. However, it is not
surprising that, with Saturn aspecting the nodal axis, this work was
disrupted by beings which Yeats called the ‘Frustrators’, which
communicated meaningless information until the ‘real’ daemons
returned.
“When I think of life as a struggle with the Daemon who would
ever set us to the hardest work among those not impossible, I
understand why there is a deep enmity between a man and his
destiny …. I am persuaded that the Daemon delivers and
deceives us, and that he wove the netting from the stars and
threw the net from his shoulder …”10
Chiron and the nodal axis
In relation to the nodal axis, Chiron appears to have a doubly
daemonic function, as teacher and the healer. If Chiron is connected
to our nodal axis, that can indicate shamanic illnesses, crises,
suffering and unwilling initiation into our true vocation – or calling –
which is never chosen by the ego, but which is both our gift and our curse, since it leaves us with the unmistakable stamp of the outsider.
It is interesting that Princess Diana had a strong Chiron Node
connection.
Healers, teachers and astrologers often have such a strong Chiron
emphasis in their charts. When Chiron is connected to the nodal axis
our function and purpose is to be guides, helping people to
understand and accept their own inner wisdom and truth, which they
are never likely to find reflected or supported or even recognised by
the outside world.
The outer planets and the nodal axis
When the outer planets are connected to the nodal axis we are
subject to and in the grip of powerful collective forces.
With Uranus here, for example, there can be a brilliance and a
blinding clarity and absolute conviction which enables the individual
to break through the normal patterns and see the whole picture, all at
once. It is an evolutionary and Promethean force which can feel like a
revelation. Those with Uranus connected to the nodal axis can, like
Charles Darwin, be at the forefront of scientific innovation and
breakthrough. The definition of the word revelation is ‘the act of
revealing or disclosing, a dramatic disclosure of something not
previously known or realised’. In the theological sense, revelation is
the manifestation of divine will or truth, and this is what it can feel like
with a nodal connection to Uranus.
In Mozart’s chart the nodal axis is in Virgo and Pisces across the
twelfth and sixth houses, picking up his Ascendant-Descendant axis,
which indicates that his sense of personal destiny was clear to him
and to all who came in contact with him. His nodal task was to find a
container or a vessel (sixth house) for the expression of the divine
(twelfth house), and his music is a clear expression of this. But
Uranus is also there, and he was writing full concertos by the age of
three. It is also said that he could hold entire symphonies in his head
and write them down without any errors or hesitation. It is as if they
were given to him whole, and his music was astonishing, new and
unexpected. Although his genius is unquestioned, Pluto and the
Moon are also square to his nodal axis, and it was out of his emotional pain and loss in his family (fourth house) that the intense
depth of feeling which is present in his greatest music emerged. Wolfgang A. Mozart
27 January 1756, Salzburg, Austria, 8.00pm LMT
It is very difficult to be born with such a powerful destiny, because
it is a driving force which has us in its grip and it is never easy or
comfortable. James Hillman explores this subject in The Soul’s Code,
which I would highly recommend if you are interested in finding out more about the subject of destiny, and the role of daemons, guides
and mentors in our lives.
One way of working in more detail is to consider the positions of
Jupiter and Mercury, which rule the nodal axis. This will give us more
information about the specific expression which this particular nodal
axis might take. Jupiter in Libra in the second house indicates that he
will seek to find a physical expression for balance and harmony and
the creation of beauty. Mercury is closely conjunct Saturn and the
Sun in the fifth house in Aquarius, which indicates that Mozart’s
creativity will be expressed in a clear and structured way, and it also
describes his father’s role as a stern mentor and teacher. I think you
can see how helpful the planetary rulers can be when we are working
to make the nodal story more precise and personal.
Audience: Would you use Neptune as well, since it is the
transpersonal ruler of Pisces, or would you just stay with Jupiter?
Clare: I would certainly include Neptune, and in this case it is in the
eleventh house in Leo, opposite the Saturn-Mercury-Sun conjunction.
Once again we can read this opposition as the personal creative
struggle to give structured shape and form to the magical, mythical
and beautiful realms which opened up to Mozart from the collective.
And because he was also only human, we can see how this
opposition polarised at difficult times in his life. When his work got too
much, or his sense of duty and responsibility to his father, or his
sensitivity to criticism were particularly strong, he would escape to the
Neptune end of the spectrum, and go drinking with his friends. On the
other hand, when he was open to the Neptunian realms of the
imagination, he would work hard to give this structure by writing them
down in the form of music.
Neptune is such a sensitive planet, and so in touch with other
dimensions of reality that it tends to go one of two ways when it picks
up the nodal axis. The individual may surrender completely and give
over their own will such as, for example, in the case of mediums or
healers. Alternatively, the individual may feel that the demands of the
other realms are so overwhelming that they seek to push them away
and turn their back on them. Audience: That is interesting because I have Neptune squaring my
nodes and in fact I used to work as a medium.
Clare: With Neptune aspecting the nodal axis the veil between the
worlds is particularly thin and permeable, and it is likely that if we
ignore them the daemons will continue to knock on the door or start
to create chaos. Dante Gabriel Rossetti had Neptune on the
Midheaven square the nodal axis and Chiron and the Moon on the
south node. His destiny was to create a more beautiful and romantic
world, and his life was consumed by his imagination and by the
dreams, fantasies and visions which informed his paintings and the
paintings of the other artists who joined his Pre-Raphaelite
Brotherhood. He was immensely sensitive to and attracted to
beautiful, wounded and unobtainable women, and succumbed to a
drug addiction which eventually killed him. So we could say that,
although his personal life was full of tragedy, nevertheless the world
would be a much poorer and less magical place without the paintings
of the Pre-Raphaelites.
Audience: I have Neptune square my nodal axis and there are lots of
spirits and other entities in my house. I am always trying to get rid of
them because they are very disruptive.
Clare: If the nodal axis represents a threshold through which we have
axis to all of human emotion and experience, it may be that our task,
with Neptune here, is to listen to these spirits and to find out what
they want.
Audience: I spend most of my life doing that.
Clare: Well in that case it may well be that is your nodal task.
Audience: But it’s very exhausting. I have a friend who is a medium
who helps me to get rid of them, and I asked him once why they
continue to plague me. He said that I should imagine standing in the
middle of Wembley Stadium, which would be crammed with souls that
can’t move on. That image really helped me not to take it so
personally. Clare: With Neptune aspecting the nodal axis we are likely to be very
sensitive to and possibly overwhelmed by the other realms because
there is an enormous amount of grief and unresolved pain, brutality,
cruelty, poverty and starvation in our collective inheritance. As
individuals we seem to get our little piece of that inheritance and
there is work for us to do. This brings us back again to Chiron
because we are not born into a perfect world where everything is
resolved. There is a balancing and healing which needs to be done
on behalf of the collective, an integration of the sign opposites across
which our nodal axis falls.
Finally, with Pluto connected to the nodal axis then somehow the
individual has to live on the threshold between intense
destructiveness and creativity, travelling into the psychic underworld
on a regular basis, connecting to the life force which resides there,
and re-emerging before going down again. This is a very compulsive
picture and the issues can revolve around power and the surrender of
power, as in the case of Tina Turner.
Audience: Are these interpretations similar when someone else’s
planets aspect your nodal axis?
Clare: Yes, particularly in relationships which feel fated or inevitable
in some way. For example, I have a friend whose ex-husband’s
Saturn is on her north node, and that was immensely difficult for her
because, in order to stay in that relationship she had to deal with
Saturn, to feel very alone in the marriage and to learn some hard
lessons. In the end she couldn’t stand it any longer and bailed out,
partly because she also has Venus in Sagittarius. But she is well
aware that the marriage was part of her destiny, and the
responsibilities continue because they have three children. The only
way she could have stayed in the marriage would have been to have
changed her relationship to Saturn, and in fact this nodal connection
has forced her to become much more adult and self sufficient.
Audience: I have that connection with my partner – is there any
hope? Clare: It indicates that you have work to do together, building lasting
structures, and it can also feel very safe.
Audience: What if your nodal axis makes an aspect to your partner’s
nodal axis?
Clare: Then I would imagine that your respective daemons have
chosen to engage, whether you like it or not. There is a meeting of
souls.
Now that we live in such a rational, secular age, the daemons are
having a hard time communicating with us because, as a general
rule, we no longer believe they exist. This could be one reason why
they appear to us as ordinary people – as guides, teachers, mentors
and messengers – people who help us remember our soul’s purpose.
Audience: But everything I have read about the nodes is that they
are directional, and that we are meant to leave behind what we are
born into because it can hold us back.
Clare: I am not sure why we would want to cut ourselves off from that
which supports and sustains us, unless we are deeply alienated from
ourselves and invested in a heroic vision of personal progress and
spiritual development or, equally possible, that we are victims of the
‘tyranny of perfection’ which is so prevalent in our culture. But you are
right that this is a very common interpretation of the south node,
although every time we fall into the either/or trap – which is very easy
to do, of course – then we have effectively got out a knife and
chopped our psyches in half. This is exactly how the analytical mind
works. My question is ‘who or what says we are meant to do this?’
There are no moral imperatives in astrology. But it is all too easy for
us to take a judgmental stance which has nothing to do with
astrology, but everything to do with our personal opinions, which are
so easily affected by fear or by a kind of rigid adherence to what we
believe to be the rules, whether we assume that these rules are
temporal or spiritual. This is why I think it can be helpful to focus on
the planetary rulers of the nodes, their function in the chart and their
relationship with each other. This releases us from approaching the
nodal axis as if it were primarily an axis of time. As astrologers, it is particularly easy to fall into judgements. For
example we might think that Mars in Aries ought to be more
considerate. Well, actually, no. Mars in Aries is Mars in Aries and it is
what it is. In its essence, astrology is descriptive, not critical. So we
need to ask, instead, what does this Mars want? How does it act, and
give it some space to be what it is. Let off the leash, it can be a
tremendously positive and powerful force in our lives.
If we deny the liminal realms which are the meeting place of spirit,
soul and earth as symbolised by the nodes, then we lose the
connection between opposites. If you are interested in this subject,
then I recommend that you read Patrick Harpur’s book Daimonic
Reality, which is an absolutely splendid exploration of this subject.
If our world view is purely scientific or mechanical, then a living
relationship with an enchanted, living and densely inhabited universe
is impossible because it does not exist for us. Our astrology becomes
mechanical and there will be no surprises to be found, just rules to be
mastered. If our planets are not living gods assisted, each one of
them, by a host of messengers and intermediaries, then we are no
longer in dialogue with the anima mundi, with the intermediary
realms. We are just very clever mechanics.
If we can accommodate the presence of the anima mundi in our
astrology, then we can find a place for a magical dialogue, and many
of the so-called afflictions of the mind, such as delusions, complexes,
neuroses, depressions or paranoia, to name just a few, may not after
all need to be pathologised or medicalised as they have tended to be
in mainstream psychology. This is why Jung wrote that “the Gods
have become diseases”. As his work developed, he realised that the
psyche was not just subjective, projecting all kinds of images onto the
world, but that it was also objective – out there in the world as well.
And synchronicity was his proof. When we are working with astrology
it is clear that the planets manifest both within us and outside in the
world in the form of concrete facts and events. So it seems to me that
astrology belongs absolutely to the daemonic realm and that, as
astrologers, we have a daemonic function, as intermediaries and
messengers standing on the threshold between the heavens and the
earth. Ultimately, it is our function to help our clients to remember
their pattern, their soul’s purpose. For this reason it is always worth checking our client’s nodal axis in
relation to our own charts to see how we might have a role to play in
their lives. Let’s look at some examples of the nodal axis in the
houses.
Nodal Axis in the First and Seventh Houses
Audience (Vicky): I have my north node in Leo in the first house and
Saturn conjunct my south node in Aquarius in the seventh house, and
it doesn’t feel that good.
Clare: Let’s look first of all at the meaning of the Leo-Aquarius axis.
Collectively, this has to do with finding a conscious relationship
between the individual and the collective, between doing our own
thing and contributing to group or community efforts and causes.
Specifically, this has to do with discovering your unique and individual
gifts and talents and offering them to the world. Because this axis
falls across your first and seventh houses, we know that it will be
through personal relationships that you meet and grapple with these
themes. With Saturn there as well, partnerships will be of particular
significance in your life, involving difficult but valuable lessons to be
learnt.
Audience: Is Vicky looking for a father figure, with Saturn in Aquarius
in the seventh house? Vicky 1st/7th house nodal axis.
Data withheld for reasons of confidentiality
Clare: That could certainly be the case and, because the nodal axis
is here as well, then it is likely that Vicky will find herself in
relationships which force her to develop genuine self respect and
personal authority, and to gain the support, respect and friendship of
her partner. This is a parent-child axis, with the Leo end representing
creative, spontaneous self expression and the Aquarius end
representing the adult qualities of detachment and objectivity. Leo without Aquarius can be fairly demanding and childish, and it seems
that Vicky’s eventual fulfilment is to is to learn to value and take
responsibility for herself as an adult.
Audience (Vicky): I do have a real fear of being judged and I hate to
be criticised. I don’t like anyone who challenges me.
Clare: If you find yourself polarising on the Leo end of this axis then
you may feel more and more isolated and unappreciated and afraid of
the criticisms and judgements of others. But Saturn may eventually
turn out to be your greatest friend, and there is much of real value for
you to learn about yourself from others.
Nodal Axis in the Second and Eighth Houses
The second-eighth house issues revolve around the theme of
personal security and sharing our material and emotional resources
with others. Life circumstances will force us to find the balance
between developing our own values and learning to trust ourselves,
and putting our trust in others without depending solely upon them.
Audience (Jane): I have the south node in Aries in the second
house, and north node in Libra in the eighth house.
Clare: The Aries-Libra polarity concerns the relationship between
independence and compromise. In the second and eighth houses,
the question is how you can learn to trust and share yourself with
others, and yet not lose your autonomy and personal security in the
process.
Audience (Jane): I kill myself trying to compromise, but it never
seems to work. I find it fascinating to watch how other people manage
their relationships as if they were easy things to do. My sister is a
good example – she just met a guy, got together with him, got
married and now she has two kids. And I find myself thinking: ‘how on
earth do you do that?’ The most scary thing in my mind is the thought
of getting married. Jane 2nd/8th house nodal axis
Data withheld for reasons of confidentiality
Clare: Do you remember the Julia Roberts’ film Runaway Bride? That
is a good example of the Aries-Libra dilemma.
Audience (Jane): That’s right, I really get that. Give me the horse
and get me out of here. But do you think that something just happens
and you get helped along? Because I am fed up with trying and failing
with relationships. Clare: With the nodal axis there, then yes, I do. It sounds as if you
are trying to force yourself into a relationship because you feel that is
expected of you. But perhaps your gift is that you are independent
and focused and goal oriented. I think your task is to enjoy this gift
and to give it full rein, knowing all along that, when the time comes,
events and circumstances and other people will no doubt come along
and open up whole new areas of your life which you never thought
were going to be possible. It is not about applying the will, but about
keeping your eyes and ears open for clues. I think this is something
which will happen anyway, since it is already built into your chart.
Audience: So if we ignore our north nodes, then somebody or
something will come along which will make sure we pay attention?
Clare: Yes, and that is the nature of the fated quality this axis seems
to have.
Audience: This all sounds a bit like the outer planets. If we ignore
them, then they will get us anyway.
Clare: Exactly. (Laughter)
Audience (Jane): So I shouldn’t be trying so hard but to have more
faith in the area of relationships?
Clare: That’s right. I think the solution is just as likely to emerge from
meeting people who constellate your south node in Aries in the
second house – people who have, for example, emerged strong and
independent and personally secure after a marriage breakdown or
the collapse of a longstanding relationship. People who can say ‘I’m
glad that marriage is over’, and that could give you the confidence
and faith to trust in life a bit more, knowing that if things don’t work
out it won’t be the end of the world, because nobody has the power to
take your sense of self away. That might be a great help, rather than
standing on the Aries brink, being terrified to plunge into a
relationship. Audience (Jane): That’s very interesting, because when I was going
through a difficult relationship a few years ago, I did meet a number
of women who were just fine on their own.
Clare: There you are. And they demonstrated to you that
relationships and marriage are not, in fact, the end of the world, or
irretrievable in any way. Perhaps these women were performing the
function of guides and mentors, who may not have been in your life
for long but who showed you the way forwards and taught you to
have faith.
Audience: Is it true that the south node is like a comfort blanket?
Clare: Not necessarily. It all depends on the house and the aspects
made to it. If, for example, we have Saturn on the south node, as
Vicky does, then it can be a very uncomfortable place indeed – our so
called comfort blanket can be made of barbed wire. We may well feel
utterly alone in the world, unsupported, cast out and abandoned, but
our task with Saturn on the south node appears to be to develop
inner resources and personal mastery and to learn to stand on our
own feet. Our lives are a constant dance between opposites, so it is a
question of finding a way to navigate the entire spectrum without
either end taking over.
Audience: I have always found my south node to be very powerful,
so it is a relief to hear that I don’t have to fight against it.
Nodal Axis in the Third and Ninth Houses
Audience (Paul): What about the south node in Leo in the third
house opposite the north node in Aquarius in the ninth house?
Audience: Would that be about collecting information for teaching?
Clare: Yes, and we need to look at all the layers here. The LeoAquarius axis is the relationship between the individual and the
group. And the third-ninth house axis about learning and teaching, so
the theme here is the relationship between your personal ideas on
the one hand, and collective beliefs on the other hand. And because the nodal axis is here as well, then we know these issues will be
highly charged. We would also anticipate that your teachers, and your
brothers and sisters and your fellow students are going to be
especially important figures in your life.
Audience: What are the myths associated with the third-ninth
houses? Paul 3rd/9th house nodal axis
Data withheld for reasons of confidentiality Clare: This axis describes the powerful archetypal relationship which
exists between the student and the teacher. It is about absorbing the
essence of the teacher, incorporating what we have been taught, and
passing on our knowledge to others. It is both our apprenticeship and
our vocation.
Audience: Could it also be writing about what you’ve learned?
Clare: Absolutely, because the writing process itself is about
analysing and trying to understand your own relationship to the
greater picture.
Nodal Axis in the Fourth and Tenth Houses
Clare: With the nodal axis in the fourth and tenth houses, it is likely
that our parents, family and ancestors may be our greatest teachers,
mentors and guides. Or we may have a boss who sees our potential
and who encourages us to develop it. We may have a particular
function to play in the world, as well as a strong connection to family
traditions and to history. Lillian 4th/10th house nodal axis
Data withheld for reasons of confidentiality
Audience (Lillian): What if you have the south node in Sagittarius in
the fourth house? Does that show what I will be moving away from?
Clare: Well, this means that you have the nodes in Gemini and
Sagittarius across your tenth and fourth houses and the north node in
Gemini in the tenth house. Does anyone want to have a go at that? Audience: This means that Lillian’s vocation is to do with learning
and teaching, and that she may be encouraged to do this by her
family or by her boss.
Clare: We will find out more if we know where Jupiter is, as the ruler
of that south node.
Lillian: Jupiter is in the ninth house, in Taurus.
Clare: Well in that case I think it may well be that, you have inherited
a particular belief system, religion or philosophy from your family
which sustains and supports you? It could also indicate that your
family originated from another country.
Audience: Well, my parents came originally from Jamaica and
settled in England. And it is true that I am interested in Jamaican
culture and in the history of slavery.
Clare: So can anyone suggest what Lillian’s north node in the tenth
house in Gemini might be about? The ruler is Mercury in Aquarius in
the fifth house.
Audience: Struggling to be a writer?
Lillian: I keep hearing that – writing or teaching. But it doesn’t
register at all.
Clare: Would you like to be a writer or a teacher?
Lillian: I wish I could be – that would be great.
Clare: But it is very hard?
Lillian: Yes.
Clare: Well, we could say that this is your vocation, although it does
look challenging because the planetary rulers of your nodes are in
square aspect to each other. But no doubt you will find yourself
constantly running into people or circumstances or doing work which points you in this direction, no matter how difficult you feel this to be.
It is also perfectly possible that the Gemini north node in the tenth
house indicates some kind of public communication or public
speaking or teaching.
Lillian: That’s all very well, but I am always asking myself what I am
meant to be speaking about?
Clare: It may be that you are taking a rational or intellectual
approach, since Mercury in Aquarius can be rather detached and
objective. I suspect that it is through the Sagittarian end of this axis
that you may discover what you are really passionate about and what
carries deep meaning for you, and since Jupiter is in Taurus this
could well have something to do with the land of your ancestors.
Once you have allowed yourself to trust the vision and faith of the
south node, which will come from deep within you, and from your
family or cultural inheritance, then I suspect you will know what you
need to speak about. I think this is about learning to trust that you will
be given your direction and your voice.
Nodal Axis in the Fifth and Eleventh houses
Clare: With the nodal axis across the fifth-eleventh houses then our
challenge is to find a balance between our contribution to groups and
to the wider community, and yet still having enough time to do our
own thing, and develop our unique gifts. As with all axes, these
activities may feel mutually exclusive, as do the natural fifth-eleventh
house Leo-Aquarius dichotomies of individual and collective
motivation, and the demands of the head as opposed to the demands
of the heart.
This axis also suggests that our children and loved ones, our work
colleagues and friends will play particularly important roles in our
lives, as guides, mentors and teachers. If we are to integrate and fulfil
the meaning of this entire axis, it seems that our task is to make
some kind of creative and unique (5th house) contribution to the
group (11th house), without sacrificing our personal integrity and
indeed we may well feel compelled to do so. Susan: I have my nodal axis across these houses, in Leo and
Aquarius, but Pluto is conjunct my south node in Leo.
Clare: I think we can understand that, with Pluto conjunct your south
node in Leo, you clearly have a marked creative drive which calls you
to live with great intensity. Perhaps you only feel truly alive when you
are fighting for your personal survival or engaged in extreme
activities? And you are likely to be intensely and even obsessively
occupied with your personal creations, such as your children. If you
are to fulfil the purpose of this axis, then at various times in your life
the north node will beckon from the 11th house, encouraging you to
contribute all this personal power to the wider world and to get
involved with the transformation or restructuring of groups and
communities which you feel need to be challenged? Susan 5th/11th house nodal axis
Data withheld for reasons of confidentiality
Susan: Yes, that’s interesting because a few years ago I became
involved in an organisation which was badly in need of restructuring,
and I felt strongly that it was my task to do that. It took all my energy
for a while, during which time I felt that my personal life and interests
were neglected. And it is certainly true that I would lay down my life
for my children. Clare: And yet of course our ultimate task as parents, as described
by the 5th/11th house axis, is to release our children out into the
world, where they can find their place in the wider community and
make their own unique contributions.
We can find out more about these nodal axes by considering the
sign and house positions of the planets which rule the nodes. In your
case, the rulers of your nodes are square to each other. The Sun,
ruling the south node, is conjunct the IC at 0° Cancer, so your power
base is at home and in the family, where you no doubt feel most
comfortable. This is challenged by Saturn, ruler of the north node,
which indicates that your most significant lessons and real personal
achievements will occur when you engage with significant others in
group situations who appear to thwart or block you.
Susan: Absolutely right – there were certain individuals in the
organisation whom I felt compelled to challenge, which was extremely
difficult and demanding. But I felt it had to be done for the benefit and
future health of the organisation – certainly not for my own personal
gratification – but I am grateful for the experience, since it made me
grow up and I became more aware of being an adult with my own
authority. I have learned to pick my battles.
Clare: Yes, so it was an important Saturn square Sun experience,
which demanded a more adult maturity, and which will no doubt
continue to stand you in good stead.
Nodal Axis in the Sixth and Twelfth houses
Audience (Penny): What about the north node in Pisces in the twelfth
house? I also have Pisces on the Ascendant, but they are about nine
degrees apart.
Clare: In the sixth-twelfth houses the nodal axis will describe the
tension between engaging with, and wishing to retire from, the world.
There is also likely to be a struggle to find a balance between
needing to be in control and longing to surrender control. Because
the nodal axis is here, these themes will be particularly highly
charged. In the twelfth house there is likely to be a strong desire to retreat
from the world, to avoid having to define oneself or to be held
accountable or responsible for one’s actions. In the sixth house there
is an equally strong desire to develop practical skills and areas of
personal expertise which can be put to use. The challenge of this axis
is to dedicate our practical skills and talents in the service of
something greater than ourselves – to construct a container or a
vehicle for that which we serve, so that it can be made manifest in
this world. It is like sweeping the steps of the temple, practical service
as ritual through which we express our devotion. Without the content,
we end up with empty jars. Penny 6th/12th house nodal axis
Data withheld for reasons of confidentiality
This was once explained to me by a woman whose husband
decided that it was time she got someone in to do the ironing, to
relieve her of the drudgery. Her husband saw the ironing only as a
meaningless chore, and my client was extremely upset about this
because, for her, it was a practical expression of her love and care for
her family, something she realised her husband did not appreciate.
On the other hand, as a thing-in-itself, cut off from the Pisces end of the spectrum, then having to do the ironing could well have made her
feel resentful, put upon and not sufficiently appreciated, which can
easily slip into a feeling of martyrdom. So this is a very subtle axis
and quite hard to understand, certainly from the outside.
With the nodal axis across the sixth and twelfth houses we will be
called to find a way to serve both areas of life. And it is often very
helpful to look at the position of the planets which rule both nodes,
which in your case would be Jupiter and Mercury, with Neptune also
there on a collective level. Have you always worked?
Audience (Penny): Yes, I took six months off once and I was
miserable. As soon as I started working again, just a few hours a
week, I felt better.
Clare: It certainly seems to be true that a Virgo without something
useful and practical to do is an unhappy Virgo. But that is not the
whole picture, of course. There must be something calling to you from
the Piscean twelfth house north node?
Audience (Penny): Yes, it is the longing to stop working. (Laughter)
Clare: Yes, what calls you is the desire to escape from the routine
and all the demands of daily life. But, as you know from your own
experience, giving up work is not the solution and doesn’t solve the
problem. Perhaps this indicates that you need to work at something
you find really meaningful?
Audience (Penny): I think Vicky was right when she said the reason I
was doing this course was to become more of a Piscean. It has
opened up a whole new spiritual realm for me. I do find it hard but I
am determined to do it. It is terribly important to get away from my
everyday work and do something of this nature. This is a very big
issue on my mind at the moment.
Notes
1. James Hillman, The Soul’s Code, p.3
2. Joseph Campbell, The Inner Reaches of Outer Space, p.110
3. Image reproduced from John Anthony West, Serpent in the Sky, p.70. Júpiter . Richard Idemon, The Magic Thread, p.105.
5. Christopher Wills, “Exons, introns and talking genes”, in Jeremy Narby, The
Cosmic Serpent: DNA and the Origins of Knowledge.
6. Baring, A. & Cashford, J., The Myth of the Goddess, p.681.
7. Kathleen Raine & George Harper, (eds). Thomas Taylor the Platonist: Selected
Writings. Quoted in Patrick Harpur, Daimonic Reality, A Field Guide to the
Otherworld, p.49.
8. Reinhold Ebertin, The Combination of Stellar Influences. Mercúrio . James Hillman, The Soul’s Code.
10. W.B. Yeats, Mythologies, quoted in Patrick Harpur: Daimonic Reality: A Field
Guide to the Otherworld (2003), Pine Winds Press, p.40 LESSON 6 Introduction to the Aspects - Part 1
Now we have studied the planets, signs and houses, or the what, the
how and the where, we are now going to look at the aspects. The
reason I have left the aspects until now is that people often assume
that they are difficult and complex, whereas in fact they simply follow
on logically from what we already know. Aspects are about relationships. They are dynamic – they bring
various chart factors – planets, nodes, signs, angles and houses –
into an active relationship with each other. Rose Window at Chartres Cathedral
But aspects are more than that – they are also beautiful, because
they remind us that the birth chart is yet another expression of the
sacred geometry which has always been a central feature in the
mystery traditions. There is something inherently magical and
fascinating and deeply satisfying about the shapes and patterns
formed by mathematical division and they can be found everywhere
in nature, art, architecture, music and, of course, in the human
psyche.
We are already familiar with the symbolism of the circle and the
square, the fundamental components of a horoscope. The circle is
considered to be the most perfect shape of all, and is the symbol for
pure spirit, eternal and unchanging. The square is the symbol for the
earth, for all physical manifestation and for our orientation on earth
via the four directions, four seasons and four elements. The symbol
for the earth and the structure of the horoscope show us that the
earth is at the centre, surrounded by the circle of spirit, within which
all of life is contained. One of the questions which has fascinated philosophers,
theologians and mathematicians throughout history is how to ‘square
the circle’. In other words, how do we find a relationship between
spirit and matter, between the gods and ordinary mortals, between
the eternal and the temporal? An image which includes both symbols
is proof of our dual nature. And this is, of course, exactly what a
horoscope is – in essence it is a wonderfully simple symbolic map
which does in fact square the circle.
Leonardo da Vinci’s Vitruvian Man is one of the most famous
images of all times and is still reproduced everywhere in the world
today. The drawing symbolises the essential symmetry of the human
body and, by extension, of the universe as a whole. Drawn by
Leonardo around 1490, this beautiful figure first appeared in the
second of three books entitled Divina proportione, or ‘Divine
Proportion’, published by Leonardo’s close friend, the mathematician
Pacioli. It is a wonderful example of the integration of art and science
during the Renaissance. Audience: Do you know why this drawing is called the Vitruvian
Man?
Clare: Vitruvius was an ancient Roman architect who wrote a series
of ten books on architecture which fortunately survived into the
Renaissance. In the third volume he writes that the proportions of
temples should be based on the proportions of the human body,
because the human body is the model of perfection. He justifies this
by stating that the human body with arms and legs extended fits into
the perfect geometric forms, the circle and the square.
This takes us back again to the Pythagorean number symbolism
which is so fundamental to astrology, since it describes the inherently
identical structure of all systems. Last term we looked at the tetractys,
the symmetrical and well balanced model of the universe, which is
reflected in the structure of the zodiac and which describes the
generation of symbolic numbers out of the original unity.
Audience: Can you say more about this, Clare, since I am new to the
class this term?
Clare: Simply expressed, the Pythagoreans believed that the nature
of all things could be understood according to the powers of the one,
the two, the three and the four as an unfolding sequence of creation.
These numbers are not just quantities, they are also archetypes in
their own right, so that ‘oneness’, ‘twoness’, ‘threeness’ and
‘fourness’ each have their own qualitative meaning.
The astrological chart is an exact representation of the tetractys,
being itself a one (the whole chart) a two (with each of the twelve
signs of the zodiac being polar – active or passive), a three (the
cardinal, fixed and mutable) and a four (the elements of fire, earth,
air, water). The number twelve is a remarkably complete number in
which the polarity is repeated six times, the three modes are repeated
four times and the four elements are repeated three times. Number as an Archetype of Cosmic Order So we are going to look at the aspects in exactly the same way as
we looked at the structure of the horoscope last term – as an
expression of the sequential division of the chart by One
(conjunction), Two (opposition), Three (trine) and Four (square), in
which One equals unity, Two equals division and separation, Three
equals reconciliation and mediation and Four equals manifestation.
Every birth chart has its own particular shape, its own geometrical
structure, its own unique physical and psychic patterning. And the
most significant point about aspects and aspect patterns is that they
bring the birth chart to life as a series of stories which help us
transform our two dimensional horoscope into a living, breathing
reality.
Have a look at this table, which lists the aspects which are most
commonly used in modern astrology. You will see that these aspects
are formed by dividing the 360° circle by two, three, four, and by the
product of these first three numbers: six (which is 2x3), eight (which is
4x2) and twelve (3x4). The Astrological Aspects All numbers have symbolic meanings, and it is perfectly possible,
of course, to go on dividing the circle by five, seven, nine, eleven and
so on into infinitely greater divisions.
Orbs
You will see from the table above that each of the aspects has an
‘orb’, which means that each aspect holds for a certain number of
degrees either side of exactitude. The closer the orb, the stronger the
aspect. For example, an opposition between two planets 172° apart
(8° orb) will not be as powerful or as intensely felt as an opposition
between two planets 181° apart (1° orb).
You will see that the orbs become smaller as the circle is
increasingly divided. So we are much more likely to have major
aspects in our chart (those with an orb of 8° or Júpiter °) than we are to
have minor aspects in our chart (those with 2°), but when they do
occur they will be of equal importance.
Audience: Does this apply to all the planets? Sometimes you come
across people who use a larger orb when the Sun or the Moon is involved.
Clare: The whole question of orbs is, like everything else in astrology,
open for debate and subject to personal preference. Basically,
because we need to start somewhere, it is useful to begin with some
nice clear rules. Later on, we are of course free to experiment with
the orbs for ourselves and to develop our own ideas.
In practice, we know that although the planets are caught in a
‘freeze frame’ at the moment of birth, they are actually moving all the
time in relation to each other. So if, for example, the Sun is Mercúrio ° behind
Pluto in a birth chart, then it is an applying aspect because the Sun
will make an exact conjunction to Pluto nine days after birth. Using
the technique of progressions, the Sun will make an exact
conjunction to Pluto nine years after birth. Naturally, this could be of
immense significance, and we will be looking at the moving chart –
transits, progressions and directions – in much more depth next term.
So I think it is perfectly acceptable to stretch the orbs a bit when an
aspect is applying. If the Sun was Mercúrio ° ahead of Pluto in a birth chart,
then it is already separating from the exact conjunction which will
have taken place nine days before birth, and I would be much less
inclined to build it in as a factor in interpretation.
Audience: But presumably what occurred before our birth is also
significant?
Clare: Absolutely right. This gets very interesting when we start
looking at the planetary cycles, but all this will have to wait till next
term, I’m afraid.
The point to remember about aspects is that, if two or more planets
or points in the birth chart are connected in any of these
mathematical relationships, they can no longer work by themselves.
They are unable to function without each other – their destiny is
shared.
It is helpful to study the aspects as two evolving sequences
unfolding, respectively, out of the first odd and the first even number.
In the Pythagorean system, the number two has the nature of yin, the
first female number and the number three has the nature of yang, the first male number. This system was developed by Aristotle in his
famous Table of Opposites:
Table of Opposites
Male Female Limit Unlimited One Many Right Left Odd Even Resting Moving Straight Curved Light Dark Good Bad Square Oblong As you will see from this table, its fortunate for Aristotle that he lived
well before the age of political correctness.
Audience: But surely the number one is the first odd number?
Clare: That is a good point and of course you are factually correct.
But when this is seen symbolically, unity – or the One – is primordial.
It is the original creative force of the universe which pre-exists any
kind of differentiation. The One is the seat of the original wholeness
out of which all numbers emerge. All the principles in the table of
opposites are included in the One, merged with their primal source.
This explains why the conjunction is not, strictly speaking, an aspect
at all.
We can learn some interesting things from this Table of Opposites,
particularly in view of the fact that it was the ancient Greeks who first
constructed the system of the astrological aspects. Using the
analogies and associations contained in this table, it is not so difficult
to understand why hard aspects, those which unfold from the original even, female number two, have traditionally been interpreted as
difficult, tense, effortful, challenging (moving), devious (curved),
unfortunate, malefic and just plain bad, whereas soft aspects, which
unfold from the original odd, male number three, have been
traditionally interpreted as easy (resting), pleasurable, straight, light,
fortunate, benefic, harmonious and good. Margarita philosophica
G. Riesch, Freiburg 15031
If we extend this analogy to equate matter with the feminine
principle and spirit with the masculine principle, we can also see how
the aspects emerging from the number two are doing aspects,
engaged with actual manifestation and embodiment, providing the
resistance, the reflection and the container for the inspiration, clarity
and light of the male spirit. The aspects emerging from the number
three are being aspects. As I mentioned last term, it is important to remember that the
masculine-feminine, spirit-matter, active-passive, yang-yin polarities
in astrology and in mathematical symbolism do not refer to our
biology but to our psyches. So we may have a prevalence of ‘doing’
or of ‘being’ aspects, regardless of our gender.
For the Pythagoreans, the first union of the masculine and
feminine principles does not occur until we get to the number five,
which is two plus three. The quintile, which is the aspect of 72°
created when the horoscope is divided by five, describes creativity,
joy and consciousness. The five pointed star and the pentagram are
sacred symbols in many cultures, and it is from this figure that the
golden section is derived, a proportion which has been used in many
sacred buildings, from ancient Greek temples to the Gothic
cathedrals, and which creates a particularly pleasing sense of
harmony and balance. There is a point I want to make before we start looking at the
actual aspects themselves. Although the symbolic numerical meaning
of an aspect tell us something about the general nature of the
relationship between two or more planets, at the end of the day the
meaning of every aspect and every aspect pattern is unique to a
particular individual and to a particular chart. Whether we are
interpreting aspects which belong to the two series or to the three
series of numbers, and whether or not we are thinking in terms of
being or doing aspects, every single aspect and aspect pattern needs
to be analysed entirely in its own terms, which will include the intrinsic meaning of the planets involved as well as the houses and signs in
which they fall. What we are really looking for is the story, and if we
pay good attention to all the factors involved, then the meaning of the
aspect and the themes of the story will gradually come to life.
Audience: So does this mean that we shouldn’t pay too much
attention to the meaning of the aspect itself?
Clare: Well, I think it is important in the first instance, because it is the
mathematical relationship which tells us that two or more planets are
linked together in a certain way. But once we have identified that,
then I think our focus should be to extract the unique story revealed
by the planets involved, according to the signs and houses they are
in. What I am really trying to say is that squares are not necessarily
difficult and trines are not necessarily easy – it all depends on the
context. Hopefully, as we go through some examples, this will
become clearer.
THE CONJUNCTION
We are going to start by looking at the conjunction which, strictly
speaking, does not really qualify as an aspect at all. The conjunction
signifies unity, undifferentiated energy, the merging of two or more
planets in such a way that they always operate simultaneously.
Whether or not the planets concerned are inherently sympathetic to
each other, they are irrevocably joined together. Two planets or any two points in the chart, such as a planet and an
angle, will be in a conjunction if they are within 8° of each other. This
is a relationship of unity, of oneness – there is no separation or
differentiation between them, and there is no objective awareness of
either planet as a separate entity.
For example if you have a Sun-Mercury conjunction then your
identity is going to be connected to your thinking process, you cannot
separate them.
Planets in a conjunction aspect are normally in the same sign and
house, which indicates a concentration or focus in the area of life
associated with that house.
Audience: What happens if two planets are in conjunction but they
are in different signs or houses? How do you interpret that?
Clare: This is an example of an aspect breaking the rules – and I’m
afraid it can happen with all aspects. In a nice simple conjunction, the
planets involved will be in the same sign and house. But if, for
example, one planet is right at the end of a sign or house, and the other planet is right at the beginning of the next sign or house, the
conjunction is neither supported nor strengthened by the signs or
houses in which it occurs. The mathematical symmetry is broken. In
these cases, I think the intrinsic meaning of the aspect itself breaks
down and our task is then to analyse both planets individually as
separate entities, by sign and house, before bringing them together in
our aspect interpretation. The technical term for these kinds of
aspects is that they are dissociate or dissociated.
Audience: Can you give an example of this, Clare?
Clare: Let’s assume, for example, that one planet is right at the end
of Pisces and the other is right at the beginning of Aries. This means
that the two planets will be coming from very different perspectives
and there will be a tension between them which is not normally
present when planets are in conjunction. The interesting thing about
adjacent signs and houses is that they have absolutely nothing in
common. Pisces is a mutable water sign and Aries is a cardinal fire
sign, so they are unlikely to be able to understand each other. So in
this case, we have a ‘dissociated conjunction’ and the tension of that
has to be built into our interpretation.
A ‘dissociated opposition’ will occur, for example, if one planet is at
25° Gemini, and the other planet is at 1° Capricorn. In this case the
planets are still in opposition with a 6° orb, but the symmetry is lost,
because a natural opposition would be between planets in GeminiSagittarius or Cancer-Capricorn.
Let’s look at some actual examples. Who has a conjunction of two
or more planets?
Moon-Venus-Neptune Conjunction
Audience (Beth): I have Moon, Venus and Neptune conjunct.
Clare: So that means that all three planets work together. This is a
good example, because as you can see from the chart, Neptune is
not strictly conjunct Venus because they are more than 8° apart, but
the Moon is in between them, linking them both to each other. Let’s
see if we can find a composite image or picture for these three planets together. This is a stellium, which is the technical jargon for
three or more planets in conjunction. It functions rather like a
complex, and is certainly an area of focus and emphasis in the chart.
What ideas come to mind?
Audience: Idealised emotion.
Audience: Generous and giving.
Audience: Deceptive.
Audience: Do you drift around, in a cloud?
Clare: With both the personal feminine planets involved here, this
tells us something about yourself as a woman, your relationship with
your mother, and with women in general. With Neptune here as well,
we might start thinking about being in love with love, possibly even
addicted to love. There could be an idealisation of the perfect
feminine, and even themes around sacrificial women. Would you say
you had a romantic nature? Beth
Data withheld for reasons of confidentiality
Audience (Beth): Yes, I think I do. And I see my mother as trying to fit
into the wife role rather than being true to herself. She has always
been concerned about how people see her, more concerned about
other people’s values than about her own.
Clare: Do you find it rather hard to define your relationship with your
mother, as if she was rather mysterious or unavailable to you in some way? She may also be a very devotional figure dedicated to serving
others, particularly in her role as wife and mother. Let’s add the sign
and the house and see what additional information this stellium can
give us.
All three planets are in Scorpio in the eleventh house, which
makes the stellium more hidden and intense. Scorpio adds an
underlying emotional intensity and complexity, so we might suggest
that you, and perhaps your mother as well, derive your power as
women through relationships, but equally that you may well feel that
you sacrifice yourself in relationships. Do you recognise these
themes in your own life?
Audience (Beth): Yes, I certainly think there are two sides to this
Venus.
Clare: Moon, Venus and Neptune in Scorpio are a powerful force,
seductive, rather unearthly and very mysterious. An image or story for
this composite picture might be something like the sirens in Greek
mythology, using their power and their beauty and their singing to
hypnotise and seduce passing sailors, who would be pulled towards
them in a trance and end up being drowned on the rocks. So it has a
magnetic and rather dark aspect to it as well. In the eleventh house
we might imagine that your female friends are very important to you
since Scorpio generally makes few, but very intense, friendships.
Since the eleventh house is also about your social or political ideals,
then you may well find yourself involved in organisations which are
concerned with women who may have been exploited or manipulated
in some way.
Audience (Beth): Well I generally find it easier to be friends with guys
than with women.
Clare: Perhaps you find women a bit dangerous?
Audience (Beth): I think it is important for me to fit in. To be
accepted. Clare: So we could say that you value (Venus) belonging (Moon) to
the group (eleventh house), and perhaps you will do whatever it takes
(Neptune) to be accepted?
Audience (Beth): This is a very difficult combination for me. I think
Neptune is quite a negative influence, being connected to such
personal planets.
Clare: As part of the Neptune in Scorpio generation, you will no doubt
have a longing for and an attraction to intense emotional encounters,
and with the Moon and Venus there as well, it is these kinds of
experiences which will transform how you feel about and value
yourself as a woman. No doubt you will experience many different
manifestations of this combination during your life, which are likely to
revolve around issues of both power and powerlessness, both in
yourself, amongst your friends and in your work.
Sun-Mercury Conjunction
Audience (Susan): I have a conjunction of the Sun and Mercury.
They are in Gemini in the eleventh house.
Clare: OK, let’s see how that works. A general word first about the
Sun-Mercury conjunction. You will remember that Mercury is the
closest planet to the Sun, never more than 27° from the Sun, and
prone to changing direction on a regular basis. This means that the
Sun-Mercury conjunction is very common – and many of us will have
it. In fact, the conjunction is the only exact aspect which can occur
between Mercury and the Sun. Perhaps this explains why so many of
us identify (Sun) with our ideas (Mercury) – to the extent that if
someone criticises or disagrees with us, it is all too easy to take that
as a personal criticism, rather than as a simple disagreement with our
ideas. When Mercury is not conjunct the Sun, or in a different sign
from the Sun, then it is easier to be more objective. Susan
Data withheld for reasons of confidentiality
This particular conjunction in Gemini indicates that you are likely to
be flexible, adaptable and articulate, and since it is in the eleventh
house no doubt you are also sociable and friendly, quick to make
connections and functioning as a messenger or go-between or
communicator in some way, particularly amongst your colleagues and
in any groups with which you are involved. Audience (Susan): That’s absolutely right and in fact I am a teacher.
But I also tend to find myself in the position of being an arbitrator
between two people, husband and wife, for example. But, because I
am a Gemini, I don’t really want to get too involved and actually I
think I am rather flippant.
Clare: I would imagine that, because this conjunction is in your
eleventh house, you are not as flippant as you might imagine. This is
a fixed house and, associated with the sign of Aquarius, so I suspect
that, although you no doubt prefer to remain objective and detached,
you are, perhaps, rather more loyal, consistent and reliable than you
give yourself credit for. As a matter of interest, what do you teach?
Audience (Susan): I teach English.
Clare: Well that is perfect for a Gemini Sun-Mercury, because your
profession is to communicate and you are actually teaching a
language, which is a vehicle of communication.
While we are looking at Susan’s chart, I want to illustrate how the
house ruler can provide valuable additional information about the way
a house functions. You will see from the chart that Taurus is on the
cusp of the eleventh house, so we can find out more about Susan’s
eleventh house by seeing where and how Venus, the ruler of Taurus,
is placed. In fact, her Venus is in Aries in the tenth house. What extra
information does this give us?
Audience: Well I would imagine that this makes her more ambitious
and that she is a natural leader, not afraid to be an authority figure?
Audience (Susan): Funny you should say that, because I am actually
Head of the English department in the school where I work.
Sun Conjunct Moon
Audience (Jan): I have a Sun-Moon conjunction in Libra in the fourth
house, so I suppose that means my emotions and my identity are
very tied up with each other? Does that mean that I am not able to
observe myself objectively? Jan
Data withheld for reasons of confidentiality
Clare: With a Sun-Moon conjunction we tend to start by identifying
with the Moon, because that is the child in us. So we start off needing
(Moon) recognition (Sun). We need (Moon) to be seen and
recognised (Sun). Gradually, there is likely to be a shift of emphasis
as we begin to identify more with the Sun, and eventually, if we can
make the transition, then we are likely to become (Sun) very nurturing
and caring and giving (Moon). So, although these two planets are conjunct, there is usually a natural progression as we grow up from
Moon identification towards Sun identification.
This conjunction also tells us that you were born at a new Moon,
which is when the Sun and Moon come together. But these two
planets are also parental significators, so I would imagine that your
experience of your parents is that they function as one unit, that they
are coming from the same place. For example, they may well have
worked together at home, since this conjunction is in the fourth
house. This would be an ideal placement if your parents ran a hotel,
for example, or perhaps an art gallery, since both planets are in Libra.
Audience (Jan): Yes, they did both work together. They ran a
business together from home, when I was growing up, doing market
gardening.
Clare: Well that is a perfect example of a Sun-Moon conjunction in
Venus-ruled Libra, since Venus also rules gardening and flowers and
all the fruits of the earth. It would be interesting to know where your
Venus is, since it rules your fourth house as well as both your Sun
and Moon.
Audience (Jan): My Venus is in Scorpio in the fifth house.
Clare: So it looks as if the relationship between your parents may
have been so complete and intense that there may not have been
much space for you in there? Since your Sun and Moon ruler is in the
fifth house, can you tell us something about your childhood and about
your personal passions?
Audience (Jan): Well, I have devoted most of my life to self-growth in
one form or another, and I have always interpreted my fourth house
as more to do with the roots of consciousness. My life theme has
been going inwards through therapy and meditation. I like my home
to be beautiful but I am not really a very homey person and I have
never lived in one place for a particularly long time.
Clare: So you need (Moon) to understand yourself (Sun) – to self
(Sun) nurture (Moon). To find harmony and balance within, which would be the Libra? Like all conjunctions this can be very subjective.
And the fourth house, in your case, seems to be more about your
private inner space – finding where you belong within yourself, than
about your outer home?
Audience (Jan): Yes, that’s right. I actually like spending a lot of time
on my own.
Let’s turn our attention now to the ‘two’ series of aspects.
THE OPPOSITION 180° When the circle is divided into two, the result is the opposition
between planets which are 180° apart. We have already studied the
whole principle of duality and polarisation in quite a bit of depth, and
so we know that this is going to be an aspect of maximum tension,
with the planets at each end of the opposition appearing to be
mutually exclusive and yet at the same time complementing and
balancing each other. As we have seen, the usual tendency with an opposition is to polarise and project, identifying with one side of the
opposition and dis-identifying with the other side, which means that
we are always meeting it in the form of outer events or other people.
This aspect is particularly unstable and frustrating and can lead to
feelings of paralysis, of being caught between two poles.
The attraction of opposites is the counter-tendency to this
polarisation and its resolution depends upon finding some kind of
conscious relationship between the two poles.
Audience: So if you have an opposition, then your task is to
recognise and then accept and integrate what you project outside? Creation
William Blake
Clare: Yes, although this is one of the hardest things to do. But our
entire charts are constructed as a series of oppositions, opposite
houses and opposite signs, so life itself seems to be an expression of
this great drama of opposites. Having planets in opposition simply
makes the drama more personal and immediate. However uncomfortable this may feel, nevertheless, planets in
opposition ensure that neither side becomes too extreme. It is the
nature of all the aspects created by the division of the circle into two,
four or eight that the planets struggle and confront each other, which
means that something can happen and the relationship between the
two planets can become more conscious. And it is out of that tension
that awareness is born. After all, there is no possibility of a conscious
reconciliation if we don’t have the struggle in the first place.
Let’s look at some oppositions, to get a feel for the way they work.
Mercury Opposite Pluto
Audience (Sue): I have Pluto in Leo in the ninth house opposite Sun
and Mercury in Aquarius in the third house. I am obsessed with
astrology – I have loads of books and am reading about it all the time,
but I keep that part of my life very secret and never talk about it to
anyone. Could that be because of Pluto?
Clare: This opposition is across fixed signs, and therefore particularly
resistant to integration. The Sun and Mercury in the third house
indicate that learning is very important to you and that you love being
a student. You have a clear, rational and objective mind, and I would
imagine that thinking astrologically comes very naturally to you, since
Aquarius is very comfortable with the conceptual clarity of models
and maps. It could even feel as if your fellow students are your true
intellectual brothers and sisters. Sue
Data withheld for reasons of confidentiality
The addition of Pluto to the picture adds intensity and describes
penetrating thought and your sense of the immense power of words
and of ideas. But it is clear from what you say that you feel there is
something unacceptable or dark or dangerous about your interest in
astrology. And that could be for religious reasons, since Pluto is in the
ninth house. So, on the one hand you are naturally attracted to unusual or
unconventional ideas, and to the larger patterns which include us all.
But on the other hand, Pluto in the ninth house no doubt appears to
threaten your identity in some way and to sabotage your studies. How
would we interpret Pluto in Leo in the ninth house?
Audience: Breaking down the philosophy?
Audience: Total absence of belief?
Clare: Yes, a Sun, Mercury, Pluto combination describes someone
who thinks very deeply, who is inclined to test their ideas to
destruction, and who is not going to take anything at face value. We
know that whenever you get into this third house intellectual structure
you are also likely, in some sense, to feel you are being plunged into
very deep waters which could even feel threatening and dangerous,
because Pluto is always about survival. And it is to do with religion
and philosophy, isn’t it?
Audience (Sue): Well, I am a non-believer, but I do come from an
Irish Catholic background.
Clare: This is a perfect description of Pluto in Leo in the ninth house.
It sounds as if you have already tested your religious inheritance to
destruction and rejected it, on an intellectual level at least. But
Catholicism is a very powerful force and no doubt there is a huge
dilemma between pursuing your natural interest in learning, your
belief in freedom of thought, and your fear of going to the devil –
literally.
Audience (Sue): Yes, I think it was only a few years ago that the
Pope forbade Catholics to consult astrologers.
Clare: So you are very understandably caught in a conflict between
your intellect and your instincts, and this opposition can easily feel
like a kind of paralysis.
Audience: So Sue doesn’t believe intellectually in god, but she does
believe instinctively? Clare: That certainly seems to be the case. Intellectually, there is no
difficulty. Sue loves studying astrology. But if this is to become a
powerful transformative aspect of her life and of her understanding,
then she is going to have to find some kind of relationship between
her love of astrology as a pure and clean, intellectual Aquarian
discipline, and the issues which are haunting her about astrology
being evil and dangerous. So the way she is dealing with this at the
moment is to keep her astrology and her astrological studies secret,
which is easier than ‘coming out’ because it means that her SunMercury in Aquarius can just get on with studying, and Pluto can go
underground. But of course, it will always be there on some level. So
I imagine these are the kinds of things that you are going on for you?
Audience (Sue): Normally I am absolutely fine with this, but
sometimes I have really bad nightmares about dreadful punishments
and being burned at the stake and other things happening, and I don’t
seem to be able to shake them off.
Clare: That is exactly what one would expect. Having been
consciously banished, Pluto is now communicating with you through
your unconscious, while you are asleep. And, since this is a ninth
house placement, whether or not you consciously believe in god, your
god is becoming angry and destructive and you feel you will be
punished for your ideas. The difficulty with this particular opposition is
that Aquarius is so rational, civilised, detached and idealistic. The
more extreme this becomes, then the more threatening, primitive and
irrational the dark becomes. Your task, with a Sun-Mercury-Pluto
combination, appears to be to recognise the real power of ideas by
exploring whether true understanding of any subject might include
both the light and dark, rational and instinctive aspects. We can find
out more about this by looking at Saturn and the Moon, which rule
your third and ninth houses.
Audience (Sue): That’s interesting because I have Saturn in Virgo in
the tenth house and my mother is a strict Catholic, very dutiful and
into service. Clare: So with Saturn in the tenth house and ruling your third house
mother is also, in some sense, the law.
Audience: Does that mean that Sue is going to have to reject her
mother as well? Sue – 2
Clare: No. It means that she is going to have to become her own
authority in these matters. Saturn is also the personal ruler of Aquarius, so it rules Sue’s Sun and Mercury. This is about taking her
own authority and giving herself permission to think what she thinks
and to believe what she believes. And the transpersonal ruler of
Aquarius, which is just as important, is Uranus in Gemini – the free
thinker. So we can begin to see where this particular struggle is
going. It won’t be easy, but Sue has Scorpio rising as well, so she is
bound to live her life intensely, experiencing repeated periods of
personal metamorphosis as she goes through the fires and
regenerates herself. The other interesting feature of your chart is that
your ninth house is ruled by the Moon in Pisces in the fourth house,
so essentially we could say that you have an extremely devotional
nature and that eventually you may be able to make peace with your
god.
Audience (Sue): That is all really helpful, thank you. But it is also
very hard.
Clare: Yes, particularly because this is a fixed opposition, so in
addition to the compulsion to change there is going to be a resistance
to change. This theme is always present anyway in the sign of
Aquarius with its two rulers – Uranus seeks change and Saturn
resists change. If we have a cardinal opposition we will feel
challenged to actively resolve the tension. And a mutable opposition
isn’t going to be quite so tense or fraught because both planets will
be inherently more inclined to adapt and adjust and to be more
flexible. But a fixed opposition will go on resisting until some kind of
change is forced. And it can be a very stressful and tense experience.
Sue: Well, I did in fact have a kind of mental breakdown when Pluto
went over my Ascendant. That was a few years after my brother died
in a car crash, and I completely lost my faith. It was a really difficult
time in my life.
Clare: Learning astrology may well help you understand and come to
terms with this very painful period in your life. You can see for
yourself that the third house describes your brother and your very
close relationship to him, and how his death affected your faith. I think
we can find great comfort from astrology, since it helps us make sense of the events which occur in our lives. After all, as Jung said,
only suffering without meaning is unbearable.
Sun Opposite Pluto
Audience (Tricia): I have something similar, with Sun in Aquarius in
the second house opposite Moon-Pluto in Leo in the eighth. Could we
look at that?
Clare: Yes, and once again we will be working with the themes of
light and dark, the intellect and the instincts. The Sun is how and
where we seek to shine, to be recognised. However, with Pluto
opposite the Sun we can feel that our true identity is buried or
sabotaged or somehow unacceptable. As a result we can build a kind
of ‘false self’ which poses as our identity but which never feels
completely authentic. With the Sun in the second house of self worth,
no doubt your journey will be to learn to value yourself, just as you
are, which will involve some kind of conscious integration between
your Sun, Moon and Pluto.
Sun in Aquarius is clear, rational, detached, idealistic and very
civilised. The Moon with Pluto is deeply instinctive, primitive and
archaic, and in the eighth house it is not only deeply buried but also
likely to be projected onto mother and onto women generally. Again,
this opposition is across fixed signs and the Sun Moon opposition
points to a fundamental split between the masculine and the feminine
principles, with the masculine being light and clear and the feminine
being very intense, dark and mysterious. You may well have
experienced this in your own life as deeply entrenched power
struggles between your mother and father? Tricia
Data withheld for reasons of confidentiality
Audience (Tricia): That’s right, and I also experience this as a power
struggle with women. I always get the feeling that women think I am
too powerful and that they fear me, so they want to break me or
subdue me or something like that.
Clare: Yes, that is exactly the feeling you are likely to have. A useful
image for Moon-Pluto in the eighth house is the witch, which can, of course, be both positive, in the form of the wise woman, or negative,
in which case you may feel that women want to sabotage you or wipe
you out altogether?
Audience (Tricia): Yes.
Clare: And that can lead to a powerful conviction that you are not
allowed to be who you really are. And so, like Hades himself, you
have to wear a cloak of invisibility and to keep your true identity
hidden.
Audience (Tricia): If I try and be sweet and nice, with my Venus in
Pisces, then they think I am a wimp and walk all over me. But if I try
to be strong, then they think I am a powerful, dominating bitch. So
either way I can’t win. I don’t seem to be able to find that balance.
Although I am quite well balanced in myself, I always find that other
people try and control me. I feel really strong within, and men always
say they like strong women. Perhaps that is my own experience of
the Moon Pluto coming out?
Clare: Although power struggles are something you experience in
relationships, we could say that this is something as yet unresolved
within you, which is constellated in relationships. That is exactly how
oppositions function. Outside the arena of relationships you can no
doubt function quite comfortably as an Aquarian and keep all your
ideals intact. But it is close emotional relationships which plunge you
into that Plutonic realm of power and survival and issues about who is
controlling who.
Audience (Tricia): Is there anything you can do about it?
Clare: Yes, recognise it. Which means that ultimately some kind of
conscious relationship between your intellect and your instinctual
nature. Learning to express your solar purpose and personal
authority as an expression of your intense and passionate nature,
rather than trying to be who you think you ought to be, according to
the values of others, which will never really work. Audience (Tricia): I think I used to be much more intense and
passionate, but nobody seems to be able to handle that. When I was
younger I was always being told not to be so intense.
Audience: I have been thinking about this during the week. If you
have Pluto in aspect to your Sun or Moon or Venus or whatever, then
when one is triggered the Pluto will be triggered at the same time.
This can be quite a burden to carry.
Clare: Yes it can. Particularly if the Sun or Moon or Venus otherwise
wants to be very light, detached and rational.
Audience: And there is nothing really that one can do about it, apart
from trying to understand and accept it and work with it?
Clare: There is a tremendous depth to Pluto, and Plutonic people –
by which I mean people with Scorpio rising, or Sun in Scorpio, or
strong eighth house placements, or several Pluto aspects – are going
to go deeper on an emotional level and seem to have to spend
periods of their lives in the underworld. But the underworld is a place
of immense wealth, and the purpose of being there is to connect to
the life force itself and to the wisdom which comes from that.
Audience (Tricia): It helped me to understand Pluto better when I
started thinking of it more as a goddess than as a god. There is a
whole other model of feminine power which is very ancient, but which
is judged and condemned in the world, or just not understood
properly. So you have to go right back into history, where the high
priestess was honoured. So I think that learning how to be powerful in
a feminine way is an issue of our times, instead of trying to be like GI
Jane and taking on male values. My favourite saying is there is
nothing so powerful as true gentleness and there is nothing so gentle
as true power.
Clare: Although I understand what you mean, it seems to me that this
is your Aquarius Sun speaking, because it sounds so rational and
detached, and because slogans are usually Aquarian things. There is
an immensely destructive aspect to Pluto which has to do with the force of nature itself. For example, earthquakes, tidal waves and
hurricanes are anything but gentle. They are absolutely ruthless and
destructive. And there is nothing gentle about the dark and
destructive side of human nature. The question is whether we can
bear to look our own darkness in the face and accept that it belongs
to us.
Audience (Tricia): Well, I know that when Pluto is active in my chart it
is always horrible and shocking. But at these times I also feel
intensely alive and energised in a way. When it is not active in my life
then I tend to feel rather frozen and dead.
Clare: That is a good example of the black and white quality of Pluto.
We cannot negotiate with Pluto, it is totally uncompromising. So it will
either be in its ice phase, completely cut off from our consciousness,
or in its fire phase in which we find ourselves burning, and very little
in between.
Audience: In one of our lessons you mentioned the word ‘scapegoat’
in relation to Pluto aspects. How does that work?
Clare: Scapegoating occurs whenever a group, a family, tribe or
society, refuses, either consciously or unconsciously, to take
responsibility for its own primitive darkness – in other words, for its
own Pluto. In these cases, the darkness will be projected onto an
individual or another group, tribe or race. They are blamed and
scapegoated for the qualities which the group is not prepared to own.
In families, there is often a kind of unconscious contract, in which one
member of the family, usually the most sensitive one, lives out the
family taboos because they can’t bear the weight of the dishonesty or
the poison of the unconscious collusion. This person will not only
bring the taboos to the surface but will also be blamed for doing so.
This is where the idea of the ‘black sheep of the family’ comes from,
which is another aspect of the scapegoat. Take, for example, the
case of a white European family, outwardly civilised, well adjusted
and morally upstanding. Suppose that this family is secretly
harbouring racial prejudices. With what seems like uncanny
predictability, the adolescent daughter who takes on the role of the family scapegoat may find herself in a relationship with a young man
from a different culture and with a different skin colour. Imagine, then,
the scene when she introduces him to her family. Pluto has been
evoked and all hell will be let loose.
This same mechanism occurs with all kinds of collectives and with
countries as well. Other groups or nations or races will be
scapegoated in an effort to maintain the moral high ground. Someone
or something else has to carry the evil and the darkness which is not
being recognised within. Jung wrote a great deal about this
phenomenon in terms of racism and apartheid and religious hatred,
and he believed that, until we are each prepared to accept our own
individual burden of darkness, we will continue to see it only ‘out
there’ in others, and not in ourselves.
Sun-Neptune Opposition
Audience (Lillian): Can I ask something about Neptune? My Sun is in
the first house in Pisces opposite Neptune in the seventh in Virgo.
Clare: Well, let’s start by looking at the Sun-Neptune principle. What
does that say about our identity and about our experience of the
masculine principle, which will include our experience of our father?
Audience: There is something nebulous about this combination and
hard to grasp. Does that mean that Lillian finds it difficult to reach her
father, and difficult to find her own identity too? I have read
somewhere that this could describe an alcoholic father.
Clare: Neptune is the dream, it describes ever changing images and
impressions and feelings. Neptune is our access to realms and
landscapes which exist in the imagination. Questions of a clear or
fixed identity are not really relevant to a Sun-Neptune person,
because their identity is fluid, likely to change shape all the time,
reflecting the environment they find themselves in.
In so far as the Sun-Neptune aspect is associated with father, then
we would expect that he was not around very much, certainly not
available on a psychological or emotional level. It seems that he was
lost to you in some way? This can lead to an idealisation of father and of the masculine as well as a longing for him, since Neptune is where
we are always thirsty. And of course this aspect may well describe
more concrete manifestations, so that your father may be a priest, or
in the navy sailing the seven seas, or he could even be an alcoholic,
as someone suggested.
Audience (Lillian): My father was around, but he wasn’t around. He
was usually too busy.
Clare: And presumably you idealised him or adored him from afar? Lillian
Data withheld for reasons of confidentiality
Audience (Lillian): When I was younger I suppose. I didn’t know him
very well.
Clare: We are also talking about your own identity, of course, and
with Neptune in the seventh house it is unlikely that you received any
kind of clear mirroring in your childhood, so on some level you may
even be a mystery to yourself. This means that you can easily find yourself becoming whatever other people want you to be, because
you have no personal investment in being a particular shape, so any
one identity may well be just as good as any other identity.
This is an immensely creative and artistic combination, ideal for
photography, dance, acting, film making or painting, for example,
since you have a heightened sensitivity to beauty, form and shape.
Because this opposition is across the first-seventh houses, your
sensitivity to others is also particularly strong, and you have a
remarkable ability to devote yourself to the needs of others. The
question is whether this devotion drains you or energises you, and
this could go either way, depending on the strength of your personal
ego container. With a strong enough ego you can choose whether
and when to make yourself available to others. You can define your
own boundaries, so that you are not left exhausted by others.
Audience: But isn’t the opposition the struggle between the self and
the other?
Clare: Yes, because we know that the theme of the first-seventh
house axis is to do with self definition in relationship, and about
discovering where the boundaries are between who I am and who the
other is, defining what is me and what is the other.
So it is particularly easy for Lillian to seek to define herself through
relationships, and in addition to that, with a Pisces ascendant the
boundary between herself and her environment is likely to be diffuse.
So this adds to the general theme of the Sun in Pisces and Neptune
in the seventh house.
This is all so transpersonal and collective that we need to make it
more personal by bringing in Jupiter, which is the personal ruler of the
chart and of the Sun, and also Mercury, which is the ruler of the
descendant. This should help us get a better handle on the way this
opposition works.
Audience: Why is Jupiter the ruler of the chart?
Clare: Because Pisces, the sign on the Ascendant, has two rulers.
The personal ruler is Jupiter, and no doubt you can see how
important Jupiter is, because it is also the ruler of the MC which is in Sagittarius, so Jupiter rules both angles. With Jupiter in Aries in the
second house the picture changes quite dramatically, because this
indicates a particularly strong sense of self worth and an ability to
fight for one’s own values and beliefs.
In this chart there is a particularly strong relationship between the
first and seventh houses because there is a mutual reception
between Neptune and Mercury. A mutual reception between two
planets occurs when they are in each other’s signs or houses. In this
case, Neptune, the ruler of the first house, is in the seventh house
and Mercury, the ruler of the seventh house, is in the first house. Can
you recognise these patterns in your own life, Lillian? Lillian 2
Audience (Lillian): Actually I can’t take too much – it’s almost the
opposite.
Clare: So I wonder if the people you tend to attract are Neptunians –
people with no boundaries, who are both unavailable but at the same
time completely merged with you. So you can feel drowned by their
demands and need to define the boundaries yourself? Audience (Lillian): That’s true, but the strange thing is that they are
not needy to start with, only when you get to know them.
Clare: Funny how that happens. And as you get to know them in all
their Neptunian ways, you increasingly find yourself taking the
opposite, Virgoan, attitude and becoming very boundary conscious
and self contained.
Audience (Lillian): That’s exactly right.
Notes
1. Illustration from Robert Lawlor, Sacred Geometry (1982), p.7. “Arithmetic is
personified as a woman with the two geometric progressions on her thighs
(symbolising the generative function) The first series, 1, 2, Júpiter , 8, goes down the
left thigh, associating the even numbers with the feminine side of the body. The
second series, 1, 3, Mercúrio , 27, goes down the right thigh, associating the odd
numbers with the masculine side, an association which goes back to the
Pythagoreans, for whom the odd numbers were male and the even numbers
were female. The Greeks called these two series the Lambda, and Plato in the
Timaeus uses them to describe the World Soul. On the woman’s left sits
Pythagoras using an abacus system for computation. In this system, number
notation is dependent upon spatial arrangement. Boethius sits on her right, using
Arabic numerals in a modern system of calculation with which number notation
has become an abstract system independent of its geometric origin.” LESSON 7 Introduction to the Aspects – Part 2
THE SQUARE 90°
As we have already seen, the division of a circle by four brings about
manifestation, as symbolized by the four elements, directions, and
angles in the birth chart. The geometrical symbol for the earth is the
cube and, for Jung, the number four describes the way we make
sense of the world, as can be seen from the universal fourfold
structure of the mandala. The square is an aspect of 90°, and planets in square confront and
challenge each other. Squares are much more tangible than oppositions. They symbolise resistance and motivation in equal
measure. Although this does not necessarily feel comfortable,
squares provide the energy and determination we need in order to
make things happen and to achieve our goals. Planets in square generally share the same orientation, since they
will both either be in cardinal, fixed or mutable signs. As you can
imagine, with planets in cardinal signs, the challenge of the square
may well be rather welcome, because each planet will stimulate the
other to express itself in a dynamic, focused and goal oriented way.
With a fixed square, on the other hand, each planet will resist the
challenge of the other, and this can become very rigid and unyielding.
A mutable square is much easier, since both planets are inherently
more inclined to accommodate, adapt and adjust to each other. The tension of this aspect is explained by the fact that, although
the planets will normally have the same modality, they will be in
different elements, and so they will have a different way of processing
information. This creates a friction between the two planets which
may never be entirely resolved, but this tension also provides energy
and motivation.
Has anybody got any squares that they would like to look at?
Audience (Anna): I have a cardinal square between Moon in Libra in
the eleventh house and Mars in Capricorn in the second house. Anna – Data withheld for reasons of confidentiality
Clare: Let’s start by looking at the Moon in Libra in the eleventh
house. What does everyone think that Anna needs? What nourishes
her and makes her feel safe and comfortable?
Audience: Well, I should imagine that she needs everything to be
nice and harmonious, and she will probably also need a partner who
is also a friend, in order to feel complete. Perhaps she is nourished by her friends or by being involved in social events. I should think she
gives great dinner parties.
Clare: How are we doing so far?
Audience (Anna): So far, so good. That is definitely an aspect of my
role as a wife and mother.
Clare: Now let’s have a look at Mars in Capricorn in the second
house. What do you think that is about?
Audience: Since the second house is about self worth, I would
imagine that Anna is ambitious and hard working and that her self
esteem is connected to earning her own money and standing on her
own feet financially?
Clare: Exactly. But there is an inherent tension between Libra and
Capricorn because, although they are both cardinal signs, Libra is an
air sign and Capricorn is an earth sign. So I would imagine there is a
struggle for Anna between her rational principles (air) and her need to
achieve something practical and concrete (earth). So how can she
reconcile her need to be there for other people, for her husband and
children, and her need to stand on her own feet and earn her own
money? I suspect that when you are achieving your goals
(Capricorn), you may well feel energised (Mars) but guilty because
you are not looking after the needs of your family. On the other hand,
when you are in your wife and mother role (Moon in Libra), you may
well find yourself feeling angry and frustrated because you are not
doing your own thing.
Audience (Anna): That’s right – you have just put one of my major
dilemmas into words. And what I really don’t like about it is how angry
I end up feeling.
Clare: Well, the two planets involved are Moon and Mars, so it is not
surprising that the tension of this square can be expressed as anger,
a kind of emotionally fuelled rage. Let’s see if we can find out a bit
more about this. Can you tell us where Venus and Saturn are in your chart, since these are the two planets which rule your eleventh and
second houses, and which also rule your Moon and Mars.
Audience (Anna): I have Venus in the first house in Sagittarius and
Saturn in the tenth house in Libra.
Clare: This tells us that your Moon ruler is expansive, restless and
adventurous (Sagittarius in 1st house) and Venus is going to feel
physically restless and frustrated unless she is on the move and
having fun. But your Mars ruler is particularly ambitious, because
Saturn is in Libra in the tenth house. This is a dutiful and responsible
placement and it is very important for you to be respected as a
professional woman (Saturn in the tenth house). How can you bring
both these things together in your life? Professional achievement and
status on the one hand, and the constant broadening of your personal
horizons (Venus in Sagittarius in the first house) on the other? Anna – 2
Audience (Anna): I am an anthropologist by training and have lived
in many different countries, studying the social behaviour of different
tribes. There is so much more work I want to do on this, and yet since
I had children all that has had to stop. I am beginning to think I am
going to need to find space in my life for both things.
Clare: That’s right, and although that may never feel completely
comfortable, nevertheless you will at least be living both ends of your square. And that can be a dynamic and successful combination. If
you are working, the energy of Mars can be used to achieve your
goals, rather than having nowhere to go and ending up with you
feeling angry and frustrated and venting your rage on your family.
Audience (Maria): I have a T-square in my chart. What does that
mean?
T-SQUARE
Clare: The T-square is one of the major aspect patterns which can be
found in the birth chart. A T-square is formed when there are two
planets in opposition and one planet square to the opposition. Once
again, T-squares are likely to be either cardinal, fixed or mutable. The planet at the apex, which squares both ends of the opposition,
functions as the catalyst, mediating between the planets in
opposition. This is an open, unstable, stressful aspect pattern but, like
all aspects in the ‘two’ series, it is often extremely effective and
dynamic. Let’s have a look at your T-square. Would you like to
describe it? Maria – Data withheld for reasons of confidentiality Audience (Maria): It is a really horrible one. I have Uranus in Leo in
the eighth house opposite Venus and Chiron in Aquarius in the
second house, all of which are square to Moon in Taurus in the fifth
house.
Clare: Before we go into the details, what kind of story are we looking
for with a Moon-Venus-Chiron-Uranus cast of characters?
Audience: Well, we have the two feminine planets at war with each
other in some way, since they are square to each other, and Uranus
makes the whole thing more edgy and unpredictable?
Clare: Yes, the square between the Moon and Venus is always
interesting because it describes some kind of tension between our
basic security needs and our adult desires. In a woman’s chart this
often seems to manifest as competition between mother and
daughter, the grown woman (Venus) and the young girl (Moon). This
square seems to be particularly powerful during adolescence, when
Venus becomes active and the girl begins to grow into her
womanhood, which can be seen as a threat to the mother (Venus
conjunct Chiron). The presence of Uranus in this picture suggests
that one, if not both, of these aspects of the feminine may well be cut
off, in an effort to avoid confrontation. If this is the case, then Uranus
is likely to wreak havoc from the unconscious, creating all kinds of
emotional chaos. But first of all, let’s find out more about these two
aspects of the feminine. Can you think of some images for Venus in
Aquarius in the second house?
Audience: Is this a love of ideals?
Audience: I think this is objective and friendly. I would imagine that
Maria values honesty and that she values her friends.
Clare: Yes, this is a very rational, fair-minded, intellectual, objective
and adult Venus. I would imagine that you value quite a bit of
personal space and autonomy?
Audience (Maria): Definitely. Clare: So what does Moon in Taurus in the fifth house need?
Audience: Security and the time to do what one wants?
Clare: Yes, this is a fixed square and the tension is between the
elements of air and earth, between thinking and doing. Does that
describe your relationship with your mother in any way?
Audience (Maria): Well, actually, I find her rather mad. She seems to
be completely cut off from her feelings and she is very unpredictable.
She has had loads of relationships, but none of them have worked
out. I am afraid I am going to end up like her.
Clare: OK, so we now have Uranus in the picture, and it looks as if
you are living out the Moon in Taurus and she is living out what
appears to be a negative expression of the Venus-Chiron-Uranus
opposition. Does that seem likely?
Audience (Maria): That’s certainly how it feels. I have always felt as if
it was my job to look after her and to provide some kind of security
and stability in her life. So I can definitely relate to the Moon in
Taurus. In fact I think I have always played the role of mother in our
relationship.
Clare: So you find yourself holding the apex planet in this T-square,
in order to provide an element of stability for your mother. This is a
very graphic picture and the challenge is to find some kind of positive
relationship between these three planets for yourself and in your own
life.
Audience (Maria): But I really don’t believe in the way she conducts
her relationships. She has always been very promiscuous and I
believe strongly in commitment and in having a stable family life.
Clare: I can hear both your Venus in Aquarius speaking here, in
terms of your beliefs and ideals, and also your Moon in Taurus, in
terms of your need for a stable family life. But I can’t hear Uranus,
which is perhaps not surprising, since it is buried in the eighth house
and most likely to be projected onto others. So you may experience others as unstable and unpredictable, rather than seeing this as part
of your own nature. I don’t mean to say that you are either unstable or
unpredictable, of course, but that you may not be recognising your
own need for space and freedom and autonomy, so you will be
confronted by this kind of behaviour in its negative manifestation in
people who are close to you?
Audience (Maria): That’s what I mean about this being a horrible Tsquare. I thought I had managed to create a stable family life of my
own, but then my husband just upped and left, so I have been a
single mum for years. And I haven’t been able to find a stable
relationship since, which is why I am afraid I will end up like my mum.
Clare: Well, fixed T-squares are never going to be easy, but no doubt
you have found great fulfilment in your role as mother and I would
imagine, with Moon in Taurus in the fifth house, your children have
grown up feeling very safe and secure. Perhaps you will soon have
some more space and time for yourself? A Taurus Moon in the fifth
house can be very creative, and you could get great pleasure from
gardening, singing, sculpting or any other kind of Taurean pursuit.
Audience (Maria): I really hope so. Thank you for that, it was very
helpful.
GRAND CROSS
A grand cross is another aspect pattern which is created from
squares and oppositions, and this configuration consists of two
oppositions at right angles to one another. The oppositions are
related to each other by squares, making this a closed aspect pattern
which is particularly dynamic, self motivated and fiercely self
sufficient. People with a grand cross are very driven, and do not tend
to rely on anyone other than themselves. It is a very resourceful and
willful pattern, and people with this configuration often relate to the
world as if it was a series of challenges and obstacles demanding to
be conquered, which can lead to remarkable achievements. Audience (Mary): I have a cardinal grand cross in my chart, with
Chiron and Mercury in Capricorn in the tenth house opposite Uranus
in Cancer in the fourth house, and Jupiter in Aries in the first house
opposite Saturn in Libra in the eighth house.
Clare: Before we look at this in more detail, let’s just think about a
story in which Chiron, Mercury, Uranus, Jupiter and Saturn all have a
part to play. Does anything come to mind?
Audience: Well, Jupiter and Saturn are the social planets, so that is
about opportunities and restrictions, the tension between expansion
and contraction. And Chiron and Uranus are outsiders, so there might
be a theme about doing the right thing and gaining acceptance in the
eyes of the world, and doing your own thing, regardless of what other
people think. And Mercury is the mind, trying to make sense of all
this, to mediate and bring all these things together?
Clare: That’s excellent, and I think that helps us to start
understanding the tensions and possibilities in this combination, in
the most general sense. Now let’s consider the houses in which this
drama will occur. We have the tenth, fourth, first and eighth houses
here.
Audience: The tenth and fourth houses are about family and the
world, public life and private life. The first house is about fulfilling your
personal goals and the eighth house is about sharing.
Clare: So we are already getting a general sense of the story.
Focusing in on more detail now, we could consider the Jupiter-Saturn
opposition across the first and seventh houses in Aries and Libra.
What kind of story do we have here? Audience: Jupiter and Saturn are the principles of expansion and
contraction, so Mary will feel caught between these two things.
Perhaps her personal goals seem to be incompatible with her
responsibilities and duties to her partner?
Clare: That’s right. And because Saturn is in the normally projected
seventh house, Mary is likely to feel that her partner restricts her or
criticizes her whenever she tries to do her own thing. In actual fact,
this is an inner conflict which is difficult to resolve. How can Mary be
both free to follow her own path and direction and yet at the same
time be a dutiful and responsible partner or spouse?
Audience (Mary): I would love to know the answer to that. My
husband always comes up with loads of very sensible reasons why I
can’t do what I want to do, and it drives me crazy. Sometimes I feel
that the only solution is to leave the marriage, but we have worked
hard at it and, apart from the frustration, he is a good provider and a
responsible father. Mary – Data withheld for reasons of confidentiality
Clare: I think we can all understand how paralyzed this opposition
makes you feel. I suspect that you find yourself oscillating between
these two positions. With Saturn in Libra in the seventh house you
will be aware that a successful marriage demands hard work and
commitment. But it also feels constricting and limiting from a personal
point of view. Jupiter in Aries in the first house is independent and
goal oriented. With Uranus squaring both Jupiter and Saturn from the
fourth house, it is not surprising that, when the tension of the opposition gets too much, you have a strong urge to escape
altogether by leaving the marriage and your home. The JupiterUranus square needs space and freedom, and the Saturn-Uranus
square indicates a struggle between staying the distance in your
marriage, and escaping from its confines.
But let’s have a look now at the Mercury-Chiron conjunction in
Capricorn opposite Uranus in Cancer across the tenth and fourth
houses. What does everyone think this is about?
Audience: This describes the parental relationship, doesn’t it?
Mercury in Capricorn in the tenth house indicates that Mary has
conventional and traditional ideas, particularly about being a
responsible member of society. But at the same time there is
something very unconventional about her, because the ChironMercury conjunction means that she thinks differently from other
people and she probably finds it hard to be understood, the MercuryUranus opposition describes an unusual mind, with sudden flashes of
insight, and the Chiron-Uranus opposition is the mark of the outsider.
Clare: Yes, so we have a theme here which indicates that Mary both
believes and doesn’t believe in traditional values and roles. This is
supported by the fact that Uranus is in the fourth house. This is likely
to be a reflection of the tension between her parents, and it may well
be that in her own marriage she has found herself repeating the
parental pattern, since the grand cross involves both the relationship
houses and the parental houses. In this case, the ruler of the MC is
Jupiter in the first house in Aries, so it looks as if Mary’s mother was a
free thinking and independent woman who never really felt
comfortable in her role as wife and mother. And with Uranus in the
fourth house and Mercury, which rules the IC, in the tenth house,
perhaps her father was also unconventional in some way. However,
with Jupiter opposite Saturn and Mercury square Saturn in the
seventh house, perhaps Mary’s parents felt judged or constrained or
limited in some way. And because this is in your chart, you have
inherited a story which they have been unable to resolve in their own
lives. Audience (Mary): This is rather alarming because I can now see how
closely I am repeating the family pattern. In my childhood I was
always embarrassed by my parents, because they were never like
everyone else’s parents – they thought differently and didn’t follow the
rules. My father was a university lecturer who taught politics, but he
was also an activist and lost his job in the sixties when I was still very
young. This caused real hardship and disruption in the family. So I
have spent most of my marriage trying to conform to everyone else’s
expectations and it has just made me miserable and frustrated.
Clare: Now that we can see the whole picture, perhaps this makes it
easier for you to appreciate that this cardinal grand cross represents
a dynamic and potentially extremely creative inner challenge, rather
than just a problem which can be projected onto your husband or
onto your marriage, or solved by leaving the marriage? I think it is
clear from this grand cross that you need to find some more space in
your life to develop your own ideas and direction, and there is no
reason why this cannot be achieved within your marriage. Jupiter in
Aries in the first house is your ruling planet, so this is about
developing personal courage and self belief. And the Mercury Chiron
conjunction square Saturn encourages you to develop your own
ideas, whether or not they are judged or misunderstood by others.
Audience (Mary): Thank you for all this food for thought, which is
really helpful. As I get older I am beginning to admire my father for his
courage and convictions, although they made me deeply
embarrassed when I was younger. I used to be a teacher myself, but I
left the profession because of all the government interference in
education. In fact I think that coming to this astrology class is a
significant first step for me. Although my husband can’t understand
my interest in astrology and thinks it is a waste of time and money, I
have told him that it is very important to me, and he is beginning to
accept that this is what I now do on Wednesday evenings.
SEMI-SQUARES AND SESQUI-QUADRATES 45° 135° Clare: Let’s move on to the aspects which are created when the
circle is divided by the number eight. Planets 45° apart are in semisquare aspect and planets 135° apart are in sesqui-quadrate aspect.
Like the opposition and the square, these aspects have the nature of
two-ness, and are therefore active and challenging. Although they are
deemed to be minor aspects, with an orb of only 2°, they are
nevertheless very dynamic and effective, because they do not suffer
from the paralysis of the opposition or from the same level of
resistance as the square. They are easier to manifest and to work
with.
Audience: So do you consider them to be as important as the
square?
Clare: Yes, they are extremely effective and productive aspects. Do
you have an example you would like to discuss?
Audience: I have Pluto at 8° Virgo in the second house and Saturn at
23° Capricorn in the sixth.
Clare: So that is a sesqui-quadrate, with the planets three and a half
signs apart. The planets are both in earth signs, so there is a
similarity between them in that respect. Saturn in Capricorn in the
sixth house indicates that you take your work seriously, and this could be driven by the fear of not being good enough, or by your need to
get everything right. Together, these two planets can be a very
powerful and effective force. There are also messages here about
your health and about your body, since these planets are both in
earth houses and signs. Does any of this make sense?
Audience: Well I have always been accused of being a
hypochondriac and I am always careful about my diet. I know I can be
really disciplined about my body and I used to work obsessively but I
am trying to get away from all that now. Clare: Perhaps you are afraid of getting stuck in routine, and yet in a
sense you need it as well. Audience: So how would this work if it was a square? Would it be
more difficult?
Clare: Yes, much more difficult, because there may well be a sense
of being sabotaged or undermined or undervalued at work, and this
could either lead to a refusal to work because of the issues which
always seem to arise, or alternatively the challenge would be to
accept the power and control and ruthlessness of the Pluto Saturn
square and use it to become an authority at work. It would depend on
the individual chart. With a sesqui-quadrate and a semi-square the
two planets will work together more easily.
Audience: I have a Moon semi-square Uranus in my chart.
Clare: What happens when we put the Moon and Uranus together?
Audience: An unusual woman or an unusual mother? Perhaps an
intellectual mother.
Audience: Wanting to belong and wanting to be free?
Clare: Yes, there is something high voltage and unpredictable about
our emotional responses. This often describes inconsistent mothering
at an early age. For example, when we are in our primal lunar, baby,
stage of life, our basic sense of safety and the way we learn about
the world depends on our mother’s emotional responses to our
needs. With a Moon-Uranus aspect we may never have experienced
a basic feeling of safety, which can leave us in a state of emotional
shock, a high level of emotional tension.
Audience: Everyone in the family has lots of water in their charts
apart from my mother, who doesn’t have any. So she is always having
sudden eruptions which the rest of us have to deal with. I can
certainly relate to what you said about not feeling particularly safe.
Clare: The semi-square between Moon and Uranus indicates that
you can work very positively and effectively with this aspect. Your
need is for freedom and autonomy, and you probably have
unconventional or original ideas about the role of women or of families, or the care of children, which you will want to do something
with, since this aspect is active and effective. And you may have
some ambivalence yourself about becoming a mother.
Audience: Well I have never wanted children, but I have been
involved in setting up a crèche at work, so that mothers can continue
to work when they have children.
Audience: How would the Moon-Uranus square and opposition
work?
Clare: With a Moon-Uranus square, the challenge would be harder to
resolve and you may have more difficulty resolving the freedomcloseness dilemma in your life. With a Moon-Uranus opposition it is
likely that you could swing between the two poles, either cutting
yourself off from your needs, and feeling frustrated about other
people’s neediness, or alternatively feeling that your security is
always threatened by others, who are likely to be perceived as
unreliable and disruptive.
Before we finish tonight, I just want to introduce you to two other
aspect patterns which are formed from hard aspects. As with all
aspects and aspect patterns, each configuration will be unique,
depending on the planets involved, as well as the signs and houses
they are in. So the approach is to analyse each combination in its
own terms, knowing that all the planets involved are linked together
and cannot function separately. The first is known as the Finger of the World, a pattern which
involves two planets in square to each other, both of which form a
sesqui-quadrate to a third planet.
The focal planet here is the one which makes two sesquiquadrates, which will drive the individual to integrate and actively
resolve the challenge of the planets in square.
The second is known as the Hard Rectangle, consisting of two
oppositions, the ends of which are joined by two semi-squares and
two sesquiquadrates. Like the grand cross, this is a closed aspect pattern, which means
that it is self contained and fiercely self sufficient, although there is
less resistance than the grand cross because the hard rectangle
belongs to the eight series of numbers. All the hard aspects and
aspect patterns are tense and stressful in their own particular ways,
but as you will see when we compare them with the soft aspects next
week, they do force us to grapple with the resistances and difficulties
we encounter in life, without which we are unlikely to develop our full
potential or sense of personal mastery. Hard aspects and aspect
patterns can lead to significant achievements, personal growth,
increased consciousness and self knowledge. LESSON 8 Introduction to the Aspects – Part 3
The ‘Three’ series of aspects emerges when the circle is divided by
three, six and twelve. Symbolically three is the number of reconciliation and mediation,
creating a harmonious relationship between opposing forces. In
astrology the three modalities are known as cardinal, fixed and
mutable, or initiating, resisting and mediating. It is the third force
which creates harmony and balance.
TRINE ∆ 120° When we divide the circle by three we have three sections of 120°,
the aspect of the trine. When planets are in trine, there is an easy,
flowing, pleasurable relationship between them. The planets will be in
the same element, and so they understand, accommodate and
support each other. Two planets in a fire sign trine, for example, will
share the same qualities of enthusiasm, optimism and faith. Two
planets in an earth sign trine will share the same practical, realistic
approach to the world. Two planets in an air sign trine will share the
qualities of detachment and objectivity. And two planets in a water
sign trine will flow and merge together in a harmony.
Audience: I read somewhere that the difference between the hard
and soft aspects is like the difference between the carrot and the
stick. So that squares and oppositions force us onwards, and trines and sextiles are something we enjoy and therefore something we
want to move towards.
Clare: Yes, I think that is a very helpful image, since it illustrates the
fundamentally different motivations in the soft and hard aspects. As
far as I know, nobody has ever visited an astrologer to discuss their
trines. In fact, we almost always take them for granted, which is a pity
in a way because they are gifts indicating real talent and the easy,
joyful expression of that talent. I am sure you can all think of people
you know who seem to take their talents and gifts completely for
granted.
Let’s use an example. Imagine two people planning a trip abroad,
one with a Mars-Jupiter trine and one with a Mars-Jupiter square. The
person with the Mars-Jupiter trine will find it easy to put their plan into
action, since action and vision flow easily together and there is no
resistance or hesitation. No doubt the bookings will fall into place
effortlessly, and the journey will be dynamic and enjoyable. The
person with the Mars-Jupiter square, however, may well find the
planning process extremely frustrating. They may not be able to find
exactly what they want, spending many frustrating hours on the
internet, or they may end up getting very angry with the travel agent,
who seems to be obstructive and difficult, so that the whole thing can
be a tense and stressful experience.
When I describe to my clients the inherent gifts and talents
indicated by their trines, they usually find my comments easy to
accept but of no real consequence, nothing special, since surely
everyone else can do this too. Well of course that is just not the case.
Trines are very accepting and allowing and an important factor in
generating self esteem and self acceptance. They are so self
accepting that we can even say things like: ‘I’m hopeless at this’ or
‘I’m useless at that’ without it being an issue. With planets in square,
on the other hand, there is a real issue, there is a complex. The
challenge or struggle inherent in the square strikes to the core. It is
sensitive and vulnerable, and definitely not something to be taken
lightly. Has anyone got any trines they would like to look at?
Audience: I have a trine between Jupiter in Gemini and Mercury in
Aquarius. Clare: So here we have an air trine. First of all, how would we
interpret a Mercury-Jupiter connection?
Audience: Expansive intellect, big thoughts.
Audience: Lots of talking. Perhaps lots of travel.
Clare: Yes, this has a kind of Bill Bryson feel about it. Jupiter in
Gemini is going to be very communicative, full of ideas. And Mercury
in Aquarius is detached and objective. The two principles will flow
easily together.
Audience: I have a Mercury-Pluto trine.
Clare: Then I would imagine that you are naturally a very good
listener, and that people trust you with their deepest thoughts.
Audience: I have Saturn in Capricorn in the first house, trine Moon in
Taurus in the fifth.
Clare: So this is an earth trine, naturally stable, realistic and practical.
Saturn is in its own sign, so it is strong and comfortable there. In the
first house no doubt you have a real sense of your own personal
authority and self sufficiency. The Moon in Taurus works in harmony
with the Saturn, it is comfortable and well grounded, and in the fifth
house it indicates the joy and pleasure you gain from the simple,
tangible things in life, like children, for example. Your gift is that you
are naturally reliable and stable, this doesn’t need to be worked on,
and people will value this quality and respond positively to it.
A Moon square Saturn, on the other hand, would be much more
hungry, much more inclined to feel isolated and needy and
abandoned. In the case of a square there is a conflict between the
neediness of the child (Moon) and the responsibility of the parent
(Saturn). With the Moon trine Saturn it is much easier to be a grown
up, an adult, so I imagine that this trine is no big deal for you?
Audience: No, it’s not. You might like to know that I am the principal
of a nursery school, so working with and looking after children comes very naturally to me.
GRAND TRINE Grand trines occur when three planets are in trine to each other, so
they will share the same element. All ‘closed’ aspect patterns have a
feeling of self sufficiency about them, and the grand trine is so whole
and complete that it tends to cancel itself out. In our culture, which
values the work ethic and the achievement of goals, the grand trine
tends to be on the receiving end of judgements such as laziness,
inertia, a lack of self discipline and the avoidance of responsibility. These criticisms do not allow for the inner sense of harmony,
wholeness and completion which is a feature of the grand trine.
Audience: Would you say that the grand trine is unconscious?
Clare: I certainly think it can be. The way I have come to think about
them, mainly because this does seem to be recognised by my clients,
is that they represent an inner reservoir of immense strength which
we don’t know is there until we need it. Let’s look at this in terms of
the different elements. If you have a grand trine in fire, for example,
this would indicate that, when all else fails, you will find within yourself
an inner reservoir of faith and optimism which supports you through
difficult times. You can draw on it when you need it. In the normal
course of everyday life, however, it is unlikely that you will even notice
it is there.
Audience: So, until everything falls apart, you are not going to bother
about your grand trine?
Clare: Yes, I think that is right. A good example of a grand trine in fire
is Winston Churchill. As you may know, Churchill suffered from
periods of intense depression, which he called his ‘black dog’. And
yet I imagine that during these periods he was able to draw on the
deep faith of his grand trine, trusting that he would pull through again,
no matter how black they were at the time.
A grand trine in earth does not necessarily mean that the individual
will find it easy to cope with life on a day to day level, or to make a
living. These things demand work and effort. It seems to me that cats
are a good example of grand trines in earth – they are content simply
to be, to find the sunniest and most comfortable spot and to sleep for
anything up to twenty hours a day. But if you have a grand trine in
earth and everything is stripped away from you, then you will find that
you have a strong inner stability and confidence which will support
you. We are just talking theoretically here, because I have never seen
a grand trine just on its own which is not connected by other aspects
to the rest of the chart. Aspects to the grand trine will immediately
make it less passive and inert, since they provide the grand trine with
an outlet. Audience: I have a grand trine in water, Jupiter, Chiron, Neptune.
And Jupiter is on the Ascendant.
Clare: A grand trine in water indicates a deep reservoir of emotional
support when we need it. In times of emotional difficulty or trauma, I
suspect that you your emotional strength will support you. In
psychological terminology this is known as the ability to ‘self sooth’,
which enables you to find comfort within, even when you are feeling
abandoned or alone. This is the resource which enables people to get
through difficult emotional periods in their lives without cracking at the
seams or falling apart.
Audience: How does a grand trine in air work?
Clare: Well, this would be the gift of detachment and objectivity under
stress. I suppose it would be like being lost in a desert and running
out of water. Rather than giving in to the situation and lying down to
die, the individual with a grand trine in air is more likely to draw on
their thinking process to deal with the situation. They are likely, for
example, to work out which direction to go in, from observing the
Sun’s position during the day and the stars at night. So in order to
survive they would use their intellect.
Audience: So they would deal with a difficult situation by becoming
detached and rational.
Clare: Exactly right. Rather than getting caught up in the fear, they
would try to stand outside this and look rationally at it and work out a
way to get through. This would be an extremely valuable gift. But in
general terms, a grand trine in air might indicate a kind of mental
inertia. Perhaps it might describe a perpetual student, since that
comes easier to them than going out and getting a job.
DIVIDING THE CIRCLE BY SIX
The next division of the circle in the three series is the division by six.
The number six is the product of the primal feminine and masculine
numbers, two and three, and the six pointed star and the sextile are
both examples of harmony and balance in action, representing a synthesis of male and female. The upward pointing triangle is the
masculine triad and the downward pointing triangle is the feminine
triad. The meaning of the number six is not unlike the meaning of the sixth
sign and natural sixth house of Virgo. It is both active and stable. It
combines the ease and natural talent of the number three with the
energy of the number two. It always reminds me of the industrious
and productive activity of bees, whose honeycombs are constructed
in the form of six-sided hexagons.
SEXTILE 60°
The sextile, which is the 60° aspect created when the circle is divided
into six, is not as passive as the trine. Sextiles, like bees, are
industrious, practical, energetic and skilful. Planets in sextile aspect work rhythmically, fluidly and effectively
together. This is an active, productive and talented aspect which
functions with ease. There is an interesting feature with these two
unfolding number sequences. As the two series unfolds, from the
opposition to the square to the semi-square and sesqui-quadrate, the
aspects gradually become easier, less paralysed and tense and more
effective. As the three series unfolds, on the other hand, from the
trine to the sextile, to the semi-sextile and quincunx, it becomes less
passive or inert and more dynamic and active and, eventually,
stressful.
Planets in trine share the same element, and planets in sextile
share the same polarity, such as fire and air, which are both yang
energy, or earth and water, which are both yin energy. So you can
see that the sextile combines elements which are not identical but
complementary.
GRAND SEXTILE On very rare occasions, a grand sextile forms in the heavens, with six
planets evenly distributed around the chart at 60° angles from each
other. This is a very beautiful pattern, of course, and there is
something particularly pleasing, harmonious and well balanced about
this aspect pattern. However, it is extremely rare and I have yet to
see a chart with a true grand sextile. Because this is such a desirable
pattern, people will sometimes bring in asteroids and fixed stars and
all sorts of other celestial bric-a-brac in order to force a grand sextile
out of their charts, but I am not sure this works because, by its nature,
this pattern is inherently joyful, gracious and immensely talented – I
think it is a gift which is either given to us in its entirety in the form of
six planets in sextile to each other, or not at all. Audience: But do you think it would be valid to include Chiron, the
nodes and the angles?
Clare: Yes, that would be worth considering, but as I said I have
never seen one, even including these extra points, so it is outside my
personal experience.
KITE
Our next aspect pattern is a development of the grand trine and
occurs when a planet makes sextiles to two of the planets in the
grand trine. This means that it will also be opposite the third planet in
the grand trine. That is a kite. The planet at the apex of the kite provides an active and talented
outlet for the otherwise self-contained grand trine. The apex planet
will, of course, be opposite the remaining planet in the grand trine, but
this opposition is not isolated or unresolved because each end is fed
back into the kite. In fact, the opposition provides the backbone of this
entire pattern, just as it does with a real kite. Without the central post,
the kite would clearly not be able to fly.
Audience: Can you give an example of the way a kite works?
Clare: Yes, although, no matter what the general rules are, every
aspect and every aspect pattern needs to be individually analysed and interpreted entirely in its own terms. This means that we need to
examine and try to understand how each unique combination of
planets, signs and houses comes together to create a particular story.
I have some examples here, and maybe you will find a kite in your
own charts. Am I overwhelming you? Is this all too much to take in at
once?
Audience: No, it’s getting interesting.
Clare: Here is a woman with a grand trine in air with the Sun in
Aquarius in the tenth house, Uranus in Gemini in the second house
and Neptune Chiron in Libra in the sixth house. The apex planet
which forms the kite is Pluto in Leo in the fourth house.
A grand trine in air is very intellectual, isn’t it, and there is
something particularly electric about this one, since we have the Sun
in Aquarius and Uranus, which is the ruler of the Sun, in Gemini. So
this represents a high level of mental energy. And the high energy of
those planets flows into Neptune in Libra, which longs for beauty,
harmony and balance. The presence of Chiron with Neptune
describes her sensitivity to beauty and her devotion to her work. With
an Aquarian Sun in the tenth house she will want to ‘break the mould’
in her profession and gain recognition for being unusual or innovative
in some way. Uranus in Gemini in the second house indicates not
only that this is a free thinker but that she is a free agent, living by her
wits and working for herself. Neptune and Chiron in the sixth house
indicates that she will devote herself unconditionally to her work, but
also that she is physically vulnerable in some way. Jacqueline du Pré 26 January 1945, 11.30 am, Oxford
All this sensitivity and electricity will find an outlet and be anchored
through Pluto in Leo in the fourth house, which intensifies the entire
pattern and gives her a rather obsessive Sun-Pluto opposition.
Incidentally, Pluto is the only planet in a fire sign, so it carries all the
intense, creative energy of fire in her chart. This also indicates the
importance of her family.
This kite belongs to Jacqueline du Pré, the cellist, who was an
exceptionally talented musician and a very powerful performer. If you have ever heard her play Elgar you will know what I am talking about.
It is an astonishing experience, quite electrifying. With her Sun in
Aquarius in the tenth house it is not surprising that there is a
biography about her called “A Genius in the Family” and it is also
interesting that Jacqueline’s mother was her first teacher, no doubt
recognising her unusual talent at a very young age. Jacqueline went
on to have an extremely successful career, performing all over the
world and receiving a host of awards and prizes.
Audience: I am thinking of the Chiron-Neptune conjunction in the
sixth house because of the illness she had.
Clare: Yes, she was only twenty-eight when she started to lose the
feeling in her fingers, which was the onset of the multiple sclerosis, a
progressively debilitating illness, which eventually led to her death at
the age of forty-two. But we could also interpret this Neptune-Chiron
conjunction in the sixth house in Libra as her close working
relationship with her husband, the pianist Daniel Barenboim. No
doubt this was both a magical and creative partnership, but also
intensely painful for her as well.
Audience: The marriage broke down, didn’t it? That must have been
very painful for her.
Clare: Yes, although they stayed married until her death.
Audience: Have you seen Hilary and Jackie, which is the film about
her life? According to the film she had an affair with her sister’s
husband. All the pressures of her professional life led her to a near
nervous breakdown, and the affair was her way of escaping from all
the demands and trying to create a private life of her own.
Unfortunately, the private life she wanted already belonged to her
sister.
Clare: Pluto in the fourth house is not going to be simple, indicating
hidden and taboo issues in the family, and no doubt an element of
intense jealousy and rage as well. Hopefully you can see from this particular example that every
aspect pattern needs to be carefully interpreted in its own terms.
Although we are likely to think of kites as fortunate patterns, and
there is no doubt that they describe inherent talent and the
opportunity to express that talent through the apex planet, you can
see that, in this case, it was also extremely difficult and painful.
THE MINOR GRAND TRINE
More common than the kite, the minor grand trine is composed of two
planets in a trine aspect which both make sextiles with a third planet.
Here, the ease, enjoyment and talent of the trine is activated and
expressed through the apex planet. GRAND RECTANGLE There is another aspect pattern which is comprised entirely of
sextiles, trines and oppositions, and this is usually known as a ‘mystic
rectangle’. Personally, I think this is a rather confusing and unhelpful
name for this aspect pattern, since the word ‘mystic’ always seems to
throw us off track, and I can see no reason why this pattern is any
more ‘mystic’ than anything else in the chart. So I am going to use
some artistic licence and call it a grand rectangle.
This is not a particularly common aspect pattern but, like the kite, it
is potentially creative and talented. By themselves, the two trines are
not particularly active, but they are put to work by the two sextiles,
and two oppositions lend dynamism to this rather pleasing pattern. This is a particularly well integrated shape in which the planets
occupying the four corners are harmoniously linked and able to
function extremely effectively together.
Audience: Is it still a grand rectangle if the angles make up one of
the oppositions?
Clare: The question of whether or not the angles and nodes should
be included in aspect patterns is open to debate. There are certainly
many astrologers who consider that it is only the planets which form
aspect patterns. Personally, I think each chart has to be considered
carefully in its own terms, and sometimes it seems as if the nodal axis
and angles should be included, and sometimes not.
Dividing the Circle by Twelve Matter Spiritualised Spirit Manifested
The number twelve is of particular significance in astrology, of course,
since we have twelve signs and twelve houses. The number twelve is
the product of spirit and matter combined. If we take the trine of spirit
and multiply it by four, then we have spirit made manifest. If we take
the cross of matter and multiply it by three, then we have matter
spiritualised. So the number twelve reveals once again astrology’s
central concern with the marriage of spirit and matter, the marriage of
the heavens and the earth. And it is the tension between spirit and
matter which is expressed in the two new aspects which emerge
when the circle is divided by twelve. These two new aspects are the Semi-sextile and the Quincunx,
or Inconjunct aspect. These are awkward aspects because it is
difficult for the planets involved to recognize and therefore to
accommodate each other. Semi sextile 30° In the case of the semi-sextile you can see visually that the two
planets only exist in each other’s peripheral vision. They don’t see
each other clearly. They will also be in adjacent signs and, in the
equal house system, they will be in adjacent houses. And adjacent
signs have nothing in common. For example, Aries is a positive,
cardinal fire sign and Taurus is a negative fixed earth sign. What is
their relationship?
Audience: Chalk and cheese. Quincunx 150° Clare: Exactly. The semi-sextile and the quincunx are awkward and
vaguely annoying aspects because the two planets have nothing in
common. They can’t function separately because they are in aspect,
but at the same time they don’t recognise each other.
Audience: That certainly sounds like the relationship between men
and women.
Clare: When it comes to the quincunx, let’s use the example of Aries
and Virgo. In the equal house this also describes the natural
relationship between the first and the sixth houses. Aries and the first
house are about identity, action, movement, self, focus. It is not going
to be very happy with Virgo and the sixth house, which is modest, self
effacing and conscientious. Aries doesn’t care about that, Aries wants
to act, Virgo wants to get it right. Aries to Scorpio is another example. Scorpio is sensitive to and
aware of the environment, picking up underlying nuances and hidden
emotions. Aries doesn’t even notice. Aries is positive cardinal fire,
and Scorpio is negative fixed water, so there is an immediate tension,
since Aries wants to act and Scorpio wants to stay put.
Audience: I have that. I have Neptune in Scorpio in the third house
and Sun Mercury in Aries in the eighth.
Clare: Neptune in Scorpio in the third house is imaginative and
indicates a kind of instinctive, diffuse awareness. Mercury in Aries in
the eighth house describes focussed precision and penetrating
thought. These two planets do not confront each other, as they would
with a square, or support each other, as they would with a trine or
sextile, but they are connected in a rather awkward and
unsatisfactory way.
Audience: I have Chiron in Aquarius in the eighth house quincunx
Sun in Virgo in the third.
Clare: Just putting Sun and Chiron together, what do we have?
Audience: A wound around our identity?
Audience: Self expression as a healer or teacher?
Clare: The Sun in Virgo in the third house indicates that you identify
with your analytical skills and with your ability to communicate them.
But Chiron is the outsider, so you may feel that, in some way which is
hard to define, it is not acceptable to be yourself or to say what you
think. Since Chiron is in Aquarius in the eighth house, perhaps you
sense that you could be scapegoated for your ideas and opinions,
excluded from the group. Do you sense that?
Audience: I have always felt that. I have never really been able to
say what I think, because people never seem to be able to
understand what I am talking about.
Clare: Has anyone got any semi-sextiles we could look at? Audience: Yes, I have Mars in Taurus and Moon in Gemini.
Audience: So does that mean that Mars lives in the body and the
Moon lives in the head?
Clare: Yes. Mars is practical and the Moon is intellectual. Mars wants
to act and Moon wants to think. Does that feel right?
Audience: Probably, but it is difficult integrating them.
Clare: Yes, and that is the whole point about semi-sextiles and
quincunxes. They feel awkward, as if there is something we can’t
really get to grips with although we know they are there. They
describe a kind of background tension and aggravation, and there is
no nice clean resolution.
Audience: That’s what it feels like, but I have been unable to put my
finger on it. It’s like feeling that something isn’t quite right, that I must
have forgotten something.
YOD Clare: The aspect pattern which is formed from two quincunxes and
one sextile can provide a synthesis, because it creates balance
where there was no balance before. This is known as a Yod, or as the
‘finger of fate’, which can be quite dramatic and dynamic. As you
would imagine, the focal point of the yod is the active planet at the
apex of the two quincunxes. This planet functions like a pivot point,
like a point of destiny around which our lives can change direction.
Audience: What happens if you have a planet right in the middle of
the sextile, in semi-sextile to both the planets in the sextile and
opposite the focal point of the yod?
Clare: Then you have a kind of ‘dart’ with three planets in a row
exactly 30° apart and an opposition. There is a very nice symmetry
here, although I am not sure if it has been named as an aspect
pattern. Once again, we would need to examine the specific configuration in its own terms, but I suspect that the planets in
opposition will be of particular significance.
I thought you would be interested to know that we have a yod in our
own chart, which I drew up at the beginning of our class last term. We
have Jupiter at 11° Gemini as the focal point inconjunct to both the
MC at 12° Capricorn and Venus at 12° Scorpio. And, as it happens,
we also have Pluto and Chiron in Sagittarius in the eighth house
opposite the focal Jupiter and semi-sextile to the MC and Venus. So
this is the dart pattern you mentioned. CPA Class Júpiter October 2000 7.00 pm, London
So we have all come together to give substance (second house) to
our learning process, because that is what we value (second house).
Jupiter in Gemini is very busy and active and believes in learning
about philosophical subjects. Jupiter is in quincunx to the Midheaven
in Capricorn, so our purpose, the direction we are going in, is to work
hard and to build our structure. There is a real focus to this cardinal,
Saturn ruled MC. The other quincunx from Jupiter is to Venus in
Scorpio in the seventh house, so we are here to meet each other (seventh house) and because we value deep feelings and have
chosen to explore the depths of the psyche together (Venus in
Scorpio). So this yod describes what we are about and what has
drawn us together. It describes our destiny as a group. More to the
point, Pluto and Chiron are in Sagittarius in the eighth house and
opposite Jupiter.
I would say that there is something very powerful going on here for
all of us, as we explore the depths of our own personal psyches.
Astrology is a powerful philosophical system and Pluto in the eighth
house is no doubt taking us all very deep. This is a private area for
us, and maybe our experiences are both painful and healing, as we
process and integrate what we are learning. No doubt there are many
personal discoveries taking place which are not being talked about in
the group, and this is quite right, since it is going on in the eighth
house. Does this ring any bells for you? Many of us will be having
profound personal insights, and the group itself is containing that.
Audience: You can say that again. There are so many things going
on for me personally as a result of what I am learning, but it is very
hard to define what is actually happening.
Clare: Because we have a yod in the chart, I imagine that many of us
will look back on this class in years to come and realise that in many
ways it was a turning point in our lives. That it was a kind of fated
encounter. That we have not found ourselves in this class by
accident. And of course we will all have our own personal reactions
and responses to this group, which will depend on the way our own
charts pick up the group chart.
Next week I want to start looking at what is not on the chart, which
seems like a contradiction in terms, but which in fact provides
extremely useful information. So we will be looking at the lack of an
element or modality and at unaspected planets. LESSON Mercúrio Chart Imbalances
Up until now we have been looking at what is in the chart, finding the
emphasis and focus and the living energy. We have seen what
happens when planets are brought together in a dynamic way by the
aspects and by the aspect patterns and we have looked at some of
the stories which emerge.
But what I want to do tonight is to turn everything on its head and
to look at what is missing from the chart, because that is important
too. In every birth chart there will be empty houses and there may be
whole areas of a chart which are empty, or elements or modes which
are absent altogether or under-represented, or planets which make
no aspects. We need to pay proper attention to anything which is
absent or lacking in a chart, because it is likely to exert a powerful
unconscious influence over us. If you would like to follow up this idea
in more depth, then I would highly recommend Richard Idemon’s
book, The Magic Thread.
Audience: I am not sure what you are saying here, because it
sounds as if everything is equally important, whether or not it is in the
chart?
Clare: That is a good point and I will try and explain what I mean.
Let’s start with what is actually there in the chart. No matter how
challenging our birth charts may be, they will feel familiar to us
because we have been inhabiting them all our lives. The birth chart
defines our personal experience of the world and tend to be more or
less under the control of the ego to the extent that they can be made
conscious.
For example, if we have several personal planets in air, then we
are likely to have a well developed thinking function which we will use
to navigate and make sense of the world. As far as we are
concerned, that is normal. And if we have several personal planets in mutable signs, then we will be naturally flexible and adaptable. And if
we have several aspects to our Mars then we will know very well how
to assert and defend ourselves. All of these ways of being feel normal
to us.
By contrast, anything which is not in the chart will be outside our
conscious or ego control. But that does not mean that it doesn’t exist.
In fact, the way this seems to work is that whatever we don’t have
inside, in our birth charts, somehow has to be manifested outside in
the world. In other words, every void or imbalance within seeks to be
filled or balanced in the outside world. This is another example of the
compensatory nature of the psyche.
However, there is a noticeable difference in expression, emphasis
and intensity between what is within our charts and what lies outside,
and we seem to have a particular blind spot about what is not in our
birth charts, with the result that whatever is lacking functions
autonomously like a complex. And we do not have complexes –
complexes have us. When a complex is activated it takes us over,
which is why we are prone to finding ourselves in the grip of anything
which is not in our birth chart.
Audience: Can you say a bit more about complexes, Clare? So that
we can understand how they function.
Clare: Yes, and I am taking a particularly psychological approach
here, because I think it makes the subject of chart imbalances very
clear and easy to understand. Complexes are powerful, compulsive,
autonomous driving forces. However, because they exist outside ego
consciousness they are only experienced in projection and never
really ‘owned’. They are highly charged – affect laden – and seem to
have a life of their own, acting independently and often
inappropriately or out of proportion to the objective reality of a
situation. One of the easiest ways to recognize complexes is that they
lack a sense of humour. I am sure you have all noticed how perfectly
reasonable and relaxed people can suddenly become rigid and
defensive and start speaking in an authoritative or strident voice
which is not normal to them. Suddenly, in the place of the person you
know, is an inflexible, intolerant, rigid, fanatical individual who is
completely certain that they are right. If that has happened to you, then no doubt you have unwittingly stepped on their complex. Does
this make sense to you?
Audience: Yes, I can think of one or two examples already.
Clare: Just to take this one step further, singletons and missing
functions constellate a variety of different psychological defence
mechanisms, which is the ego’s way of trying to keep control. We
may well attempt to deny what we lack by using another function
instead. For example, we may try and feel with our thinking, air
function. Or we may try and achieve concrete results with our fire
function. Alternatively, we may consciously devalue, neglect and
criticise what we lack, and at the same time work hard to achieve it.
This would mean that we over-compensate. Another way of balancing
ourselves is to enter into relationships with people who have plenty of
what we lack. Which is why it is so easy to fall into the habit of
criticising our partners for expressing the qualities we lack, and at the
same time being dependent upon them because they balance and
complete us.
Audience: I have no earth in my chart but I do have an angular
Saturn and several planets in the earth houses. Does that
compensate for my lack of earth?
Clare: Your reaction is not uncommon, but it could be interpreted as a
defence mechanism, an example of the ego trying to defend itself,
since it is an attempt to give yourself some earth. The same thing
might be said, for example, of a chart with no water but with an
angular Neptune or many aspects to Neptune or planets in the water
houses. The point here is that neither your angular Saturn nor its ruler
will be in an earth sign. The same thing is true of your planets in the
earth houses – they will not be in earth signs and neither will the
planetary rulers of the earth houses, so I am sorry to say that we
cannot manufacture an earth function for ourselves if none of the
planets are there.
But the main point I want to make is that our greatest gifts can
come from the imbalances in our charts. The energy which clusters
around a complex can be immensely creative for the very reason that it lies outside the control of the ego. It is important to remember that
obsession and compulsiveness are not necessarily negative. After all,
if we were all perfectly balanced then it is unlikely any of us would
bother to work obsessively on a scientific discovery, climb Mount
Everest or write a symphony or a book or paint a great painting. It is
through what is lacking in our birth charts that we may make our
greatest contribution to the world. The crib sheet shown here may help you to identify quickly how the
various imbalances in a chart might function.
Audience: What happens if you only have one angle and one planet
in an element? Is that still an imbalance?
Clare: Yes, there will still be a sense of deficiency which seeks to be
balanced. However, in a case like this, there is usually an element of
awareness of the imbalance – it is more accessible. When someone
has a total lack then it will be immediately obvious to everyone else,
but the person with the total lack can be oblivious of the fact.
Audience: What about the outer planets, Chiron and the nodes? Clare: Well, the same thing applies. In charts where only an outer
planet, Chiron or one of the nodes is in an element, then the
individual will be expressing the collective charge of that planet or
point in its purest, most autonomous and archetypal expression. The
particular individual expression of this influence will be felt in the
house in which it occurs.
Audience: I’d really like to get this counting thing straight. I know you
only use the seven traditional planets, but do you also count the
angles?
Clare: No, because the angles are not planets. For example, if you
have Sagittarius rising, then although your ascendant is in fire, it is
the element of the ruling planet which we will be looking for. I think it
is unfortunate that computer programs always include the outer
planets in the mode and element count because this encourages us
to think of them in the same way as the seven traditional planets,
whereas they belong to another order altogether, to a different
dimension. So it think we need to count again and to take them out,
but that is only my view and you are welcome to make up your own
minds about this.
Audience: What happens if you have two planets in an element?
Clare: Then that is fairly average and wouldn’t register as a lack.
Let’s have a look at the element imbalances to see how they work.
LACK OF FIRE
How would we describe someone who has a dominant fire element
with several planets in fire signs?
Audience: They will be optimistic, dramatic, radiant, forward looking
and they will believe in themselves.
Clare: Yes. For people with several planets in fire these qualities will
be an intrinsic feature of their conscious psyches. They have ‘fire
within’, or true fire, which means that they will usually have plenty of
faith in themselves and an instinctively optimistic approach to life, which feels natural, comfortable and relaxed. They have nothing to
prove. People with a lot of fire don’t have to make an effort to be
optimistic, they are just naturally optimistic because that is how they
are wired. And they don’t need to preach optimism and faith because
neither of these things are a problem for them.
With a lack or absence of fire, however, then the quality of the fire
expression will be significantly different. Someone with a lack of fire
within will need to find their faith and meaning out there in the world,
and this may well drive them in a fanatical, compulsive and extreme
way which can actually be quite exhausting for that person, and even
burn them out. This is an example of false fire, which can never be
easy or comfortable, and which cannot be taken lightly or joked
about. There is an important and very noticeable difference in the
quality of these two types of expression. A lack is harsh, exhausting
and obsessive, which immediately gives us the clue that this person
may not have that element.
Audience: This sounds like the difference between trines and
squares.
Clare: Yes. A strong element is like a trine, relaxed and comfortable.
An element lack or imbalance is like a square, there is a
confrontation, a striving to resolve and manifest something in the
world, and it is out of this struggle and tension that the most amazing
achievements come.
A shorthand way of thinking about the issues which might arise
with a lack of fire in the chart, is to think about the themes which
belong to the signs of Aries, Leo and Sagittarius. Some fire words
would therefore be: passion, competition, fame, recognition, self
belief, self expression, risk taking, the excitement of the chase,
enthusiasm, optimism and adventurousness. Without these qualities
as conscious components of our own psyches, we will be driven to
demonstrate them in the outside world.
It is no accident that many famous people and film stars, such as
Elvis Presley and Sean Connery, are lacking in fire, because there
can be a tremendous drive for recognition by the outside world. Or
that successful entrepreneurs and risk takers, such as Aristotle Onassis, lack fire. Or that cult figures, visionaries or religious leaders,
those who fire our imaginations and give us faith, may lack fire.
Anyone who is consumed by a cause. Inner fire does not have to be
preached, it just is. Nostradamus, who had a lack of fire in his chart,
was overwhelmed by powerful visions of the future.
Audience: Does this kind of overcompensation sometimes take a
long time to show up? I know several people who are lacking in fire,
but they are very passive and earthy. They are procrastinating all the
time and dreaming about doing things but never actually doing them.
They don’t seem to have any driving energy. I keep wondering if this
will come later on.
Clare: It may be that they are already living the fire in their
imaginations and dreams, and perhaps it is these dreams and
fantasies which are more important to them than reality itself. Their
driving energy may well be going into the imagination. Alternatively,
they may have fiery partners who are living this out for them.
Audience: Let’s say you are doing a chart for someone who has no
fire. Do you assume that they will be lacking in basic energy and faith
and self belief, or do you assume they are going to be all fired up with
some kind of goal? How do you approach this?
Clare: I think both are true. Most of what I am talking about tonight
has been drawn from my own experience of working with clients.
When I first started seeing clients and had a chart, for example, with
a lack of fire, I might suggest that they may have a lack of basic
optimism, faith or energy. And I learned very quickly that this was not
the right approach, because there was almost bound to be a kind of
rigid defensiveness, a flat denial or over-compensation going on, and
the client would often feel offended and start saying things like: ‘no I
haven’t’, and then go on to give many instances to prove that what I
had said was not true.
Audience: I was doing the chart of a friend of mine the other day and
I explained that she had no fire. She said that everyone was always
telling her how fiery she was. Clare: Yes, that tends to be the response you will get. Something
along the lines of ‘what do you mean?’, or ‘how can you possibly say
that?’, because it is a sensitive issue.
Audience: It is interesting that you say that Elvis Presley had no fire,
because to me he is the archetypal fiery type character. And yet he
was a Capricorn Sun, wasn’t he?
Clare: Yes, and yet he is one of the most famous cult figures of all
time, and he has become mythic, almost godlike, which is also a
common theme with people who have a lack of fire.
Audience: And he was in fact very interested in religion because a lot
of his music was based on gospel music.
Clare: For some reason it seems that exceptionally talented people
with a lack of fire can also die young but at the same time become
immortal, because they take on a mythic quality. This was true of both
Kurt Cobain and Mozart, to take two extremely different examples.
Clare: One of my favourite examples is that of Johannes Kepler, the
sixteenth century astrologer and astronomer. Kepler had no fire in his
chart except for the north node in Leo. In spite of having double
vision, he worked obsessively on the planetary orbits, producing 900
pages of tiny writing on the orbit of Mars. This is a good example of
unbalanced behaviour, but his work led him to the discovery of the
three great laws of planetary motion which made him famous. What
drove him was his desire to prove mathematically that the cosmos
was an expression of divine perfection and harmony. So we can
achieve tremendous things where there is a lack in the chart, but they
are never achieved easily, or without stress or tension.
Audience: Bruce Willis is another one without fire, isn’t he? And yet
he is out there being heroic and saving the world all the time in his
films.
Audience: And I think there is a film where he actually goes out into
space to blow up an asteroid which is heading for the earth. That is a combination of the extreme adventurer and risk taker acting as the
saviour of the world.
Clare: Quite. And we could certainly see this as a good example of
overcompensation. But films – particularly science fiction - are flights
of the imagination, so they can be a fiery medium, and it is through
film that he achieves the fame and recognition he is seeking.
LACK OF EARTH
With a lack of planets in earth signs, then we can start to think about
the kind of issues associated with the earth signs of Taurus, Virgo
and Capricorn. These will include money, security, the body, sexuality,
food, health, work, practical skills, professional status and
responsibility. But I have learned never to say to someone with no
earth that they may have issues about money or about their bodies or
about their careers, because they are most likely to deny it and say
things like: ‘I am very embodied – I go to the gym eight times a week’.
The point about this is that it does not prove they have a good
relationship to their bodies – it just proves that they have an
obsessive relationship with their bodies, because it is not normal to
go to the gym eight times as week. This will be a sensitive issue, but
the point is that it is this kind of obsession which makes exceptional
gymnasts or dancers or athletes, so it can be very creative.
Audience: I have a friend who is a great nutritionist, and she only has
one planet in earth.
Clare: That is a good example of two earthy themes, work and food,
coming together. And I would imagine that she is quite obsessive in
her own life about food and diet? So working as a nutritionist is a very
good way to earn money, to be of practical service and at the same
time it gives her a reason to focus on the thing which obsesses her.
Audience: Yes, that’s right.
Clare: I have often noticed that people with a lack of earth can have
real issues about authority figures or professionals or people who
represent structure and organisation. There can be a rather fanatical mistrust or despising of people in authority, and yet at the same time
the individual often longs for a position of authority and professional
recognition themselves. So, having a lack of an element often means
that we will simultaneously despise and crave those things which are
associated with that element. It sounds irrational and it is irrational,
but it is very useful to understand that this is an important component
of human nature.
Audience: That sounds fairly similar to the way oppositions work.
Clare: Yes, that’s right. Bill Gates is an example of someone with no
earth who is one of the wealthiest men on earth and who has built a
huge empire. And now that he has become a philanthropist, a great
deal of his money is being spent on medical research, which is an
interesting manifestation of a lack of earth and a corresponding
interest in health issues.
Audience: It’s like he is not actually interested in the money itself.
Clare: That’s right, he may well despise wealth and status on some
level, and yet on the other hand work fanatically hard to achieve it.
This can be a very useful way of helping us to see and accept our
inner contradictions. This is not easy to do, but very helpful in
understanding ourselves more fully. So Bill Gates has now made
himself whole by ‘finding his earth’ out there in the world. But that still
doesn’t give him any earth within. So, if he was your client and you
mentioned ‘money issues’ during the consultation, he would probably
agree with you. Unless, of course, he had an unconscious complex
about money, in which case he would feel offended and defend
himself rigorously.
Audience: I only have Mercury and Chiron in earth, so I suppose that
means I have a problem with the earth function?
Clare: It means that the earth function will be extremely important,
that you will find yourself driven to achieve something concrete and
useful and practical, and that is where your particular gifts and talents
may lie. Audience: What I really hate is when people are tight and mean.
Clare: So it sounds as if you judge people who hold on to their
money, and yet no doubt you also work hard to build up enough of
your own and to hold on to it, because this represents personal
security for you? This could be an example of the kind of
contradictions which are inherent when we have a lack or absence of
an element. Does this make any sense to you?
Audience: Yes, you are right.
Clare: I will just mention a few more examples of people with a lack
of earth in their charts before we move on. As I mentioned before,
this can be a feature in the charts of people with highly developed
and controlled bodies, such as athletes and ballet dancers. Or we
might see this in people’s life work. For example, Charles Darwin,
whose life was devoted to studying nature, and Thomas Hardy the
writer, whose novels strongly evoke the seasons and the English
countryside. Or Rodin the sculptor. Or even the model Elle
Macpherson, who has no earth in her chart but who is known as ‘the
body’. An extremely unpleasant example is that of Dennis Nilson, the
serial murderer who was obsessed with bodies, chopping his victims
into pieces.
LACK OF AIR
Clare: How are we going to approach a chart with a lack of air?
Audience: Will they have difficulty with detachment and with thinking
logically?
Clare: That’s right, and they are likely to have difficulty with
intellectuals, or with the education system or with people who are
experts in their field, while seeking to be respected for their
intelligence and ideas themselves. An air complex is likely to be
fanatical, opinionated and rigid. Or they may well try to do their
thinking by using one of the other elements, which is not the same
thing as true air. For example, there may be a passionate drive or
desire to communicate (fire acting as air), particularly strong feelings about relationships or social issues (water acting as air), or an
obsession to objectively prove one’s intellectual ability to the world,
by learning several languages, gaining several degrees or doctorates
(earth functioning as air), none of which are ultimately the same thing
as the thinking function itself, which is cool and logical and rational.
All of these functions masquerade as the air function, but none of
them is capable of genuinely replacing or truly compensating for the
lack of air in the chart. But if we are comfortable with our intellects we
don’t need to prove our intelligence to the outside world.
Audience: My boyfriend only has his Ascendant in an air sign, and
he is obsessed with studying.
Clare: And no doubt he has made great achievements intellectually?
Audience: Yes, he has.
Clare: I think it is important not to see this as some kind of handicap
but as the source of our unique talents and achievements.
The issues are likely to be those which are associated with the air
signs of Gemini, Libra and Aquarius. So this is not just about learning
and studying, but it also includes the principles of equality, justice and
harmony, relationships and involvement with social or political issues.
And it is certainly true that there is a long list of famous scientists,
writers, thinkers, politicians and philosophers who have a lack of air in
their charts. When the air function erupts from the unconscious, it can
bring real genius and brilliance, although the lack of an integrated air
function can also mean difficulty functioning on the ordinary levels of
thought and communication. The philosophers Bertrand Russell and
Descartes lacked air, as did the writers Tolstoy, Goethe and Walter
Scott, to name just a few examples. This can also be the case with
brilliant scientists, such as Albert Einstein, whose only planet in air
was Jupiter, and I believe that he was literally unable to work out how
to tie his shoelaces.
LACK OF WATER
A person with several planets in water is likely to be in constant touch
with the natural ebb and flow of their emotions. They are sensitive to changing rhythms in themselves and in others and normally able to
ride the emotional waves as they rise and fall. A lack of water, on the
other hand, can describe someone whose emotional responses can
be rather inappropriate, absent or overwhelming. Emotions can erupt
from the unconscious in such a way that the individual can feel as if
they are being dissolved or drowned by their feelings. The issues are
likely to revolve around the themes of Cancer, Scorpio and Pisces,
feelings about belonging and nurturing, emotional dependence on
others, empathy and compassion, and emotional pain.
With a lack of water, we may well try to feel by using one of the
other elements with which we are more comfortable. We might try
and feel with our fire function, dramatising or acting out our feelings
without actually processing them on an emotional level. Or we might
use our air function to learn a range of theories about feelings and
talk about their feelings all the time, whereas the water function itself
is mute, or we might use our earth function and work with feelings, by
becoming a therapist, for example. A more self destructive way of
trying to access our feelings with the earth function might be to cut
our bodies. These are all examples of compensating for a difficulty in
feeling and processing emotions on an inner level.
A lack of water is often found in the charts of exceptionally talented
musicians, such as John Lennon, or Claude Debussy, who wrote the
Sea Symphony. The same thing is true of many outstanding
psychoanalysts, such as Jung, Freud and Rollo May. It is well
recognised that psychotherapists and counsellors often seek to heal
themselves by experiencing their clients’ emotional problems
There can also be a very concrete obsession with water or liquid,
such as in the case of alcoholics or people who use drugs to block
out their feelings, or swimmers such as Mark Spitz, who won five
Olympic gold medals, or even those, like Virginia Woolf or Percy
Shelley, who drowned. In one way or another, the missing water
function seems to demand outward expression in the lives of those
who have a lack of this element in their charts.
Audience: I have certainly heard that people who are afraid of their
emotions also have a fear of water. Audience: Just before we end, can you say something about
unaspected planets?
Clare: Yes, although the themes are identical to the ones we have
been looking at tonight. A planet is considered to be unaspected if it
makes no major aspects – conjunctions, oppositions, trines, squares
or sextiles, or perhaps just one aspect. An unaspected planet, by
definition, lacks integration with the other planets in a chart and
therefore it is not modified by other chart factors. It is therefore likely
to function in a pure, archetypal and autonomous way, unmodified by
the influence of other planets in the chart. So unaspected planets are
always important and deserve special consideration in a chart
analysis. LESSON 10
Whole Chart Interpretation
I want to spend our last lesson this term interpreting a complete birth
chart – putting together everything we have learned so far. Inevitably,
as we take a chart apart and analyse all the different components
separately, we end up with all the pieces of the jigsaw puzzle but lose
the picture on the box.
Our task tonight is to integrate everything we have studied in the
last two terms, and hopefully we will begin to get a good idea of how
the whole chart comes together. As we do this, I am also sure you will
realise what an enormous amount you have learned in a very short
period of time.
Very many thanks to Kate for offering to be our guinea pig and
letting us use her chart. Hopefully, Kate, you will let us know how we
are doing as we go along. You also wanted to use the Placidus house
system, which is fine. In fact it is a good opportunity to experience for
ourselves how the two different house systems work.
Here is Kate’s chart. Whenever we first look at a whole chart I think
it is normal to feel a moment of sheer panic. Staring back at us from
the sheet of paper or from our computer screens is a flat, two
dimensional diagram composed entirely of meaningless
hieroglyphics.
Audience: I’m glad you said that because it is exactly what I am
feeling at the moment.
Clare: I think it is very helpful to develop a methodical and fairly
ritualistic approach to chart interpretation, for two main reasons.
Firstly, a methodical approach helps us to develop our craft. It
enables us to stay within the astrological discipline itself, listening for
clues and messages. Otherwise – and this is something which almost
always happens when a whole chart is put up for discussion – it is too
easy to go off on interesting tangents and start having our own opinions and emotions and reactions to the chart, which may well
have more to do with us personally than with the information provided
by the astrology itself. The second reason is that the whole purpose
of ritual is to evoke the gods, and this is in fact what we are doing
when we analyse a birth chart. Kate – Data withheld for reasons of confidentiality
If we can stick faithfully to our ritual, then we develop a kind of trust
in the process itself and the chart begins to come to life as we study
it.
So here is a Guide to Interpretation which you might find helpful to
start with, and no doubt you will evolve your own approach as you
gain more practice in chart interpretation. There are two sections in
this guide – the Overview and the Focus. I want to spend this evening
just looking at the overview, which alone will give us a great deal of
information.
Audience: How long does it take you to analyse a chart before you
see a client?
Clare: Well, I have been doing charts for about eighteen years now,
so it gradually becomes a more fluent process. But over the years I
have found that by developing a ritualistic approach the process is
gradually strengthened, so that it does get quicker and easier. But all
the same, I know that every time I sit down to analyse a chart I will be
entering into unknown territory and embarking on a new adventure.
Nowadays I spend about an hour or two on the preparation, and then
I always sleep on it before seeing my client – although not literally of
course. OVERVIEW
1. Shape
Clare: It is a good idea to start by standing back and looking at the
whole pattern of the birth chart from a distance. We will then see
the general shape of the chart, which immediately tells us which
areas of life are going to be significant, obviously in the broadest
terms. For example, is there a marked hemisphere emphasis,
either east-west or north-south?
Audience: Not really. Most of the planets are in the western
hemisphere, but Saturn, Chiron and Jupiter are in the eastern hemisphere. And most of the planets are in the southern
hemisphere, but Chiron, Jupiter and Moon are in the northern
hemisphere.
Clare: There is always so much information in a chart that we don’t
need to force anything to fit. In this case there doesn’t seem to be a
clear hemisphere emphasis so we can simply move on to the next
stage.
2. Lunar Phase
Audience: As far as the lunar phase is concerned, this is a waning
Moon, so it is rather quiet and mature.
Clare: That’s right. We will be looking at lunar phases next term,
but you are right that this is a quiet and mature Moon. We don’t yet
know if this will be important, so we will just make a note of it.
3. House and Sign Emphasis
Clare: Do you think there is a marked house emphasis?
Audience: Yes, there is a strong seventh house. Three personal
planets and two transpersonal planets, make five planets
altogether in the seventh house. That has got to be important.
Clare: Yes, so we now know that something is happening here
which means that relationships are going to be an important theme
in Kate’s life. Do you think there is a marked sign emphasis? Here
we will be looking to see if there is a stellium in any one sign, which
would be three or more planets.
Audience: Well, there are three planets in Scorpio – Venus, Mars
and Neptune.
Clare: What does that tell us?
Audience: That Kate has a passionate nature and that her
relationships will be deep and emotionally complicated. Clare: Good. Once again this concerns relationships, so it looks as
if we may have the beginning of an important theme emerging. But
let’s see. Júpiter . Elements and Modes
Clare: The next step is to look at the element balance, counting
just the seven traditional planets. You can see that Kate has two
planets in fire (Moon in Leo and Jupiter in Aries), no planets in
earth, two planets in water (Venus and Mars in Scorpio) and three
planets in air (Sun and Mercury in Libra, Saturn in Aquarius). What
does that tell us?
Audience: That on balance she is a naturally thinking type. And
with nothing in earth, then presumably issues of personal security,
work, money, body and health could be something of a challenge
for her?
Clare: Yes, the lack of earth tells us that Kate will need to find her
sense of security and substance outside herself, perhaps in the
form of possessions or through her work. Moving on to the modes,
Kate has two cardinal planets (Jupiter in Aries and Sun in Libra),
four fixed planets (Moon in Leo, Venus and Mars in Scorpio and
Saturn in Aquarius) and no mutable planets.
So we now have a strong theme, because with no planets in
either mutable or earth signs we are going to start to think about
Virgo issues, since Virgo is the mutable earth sign. I would
therefore imagine that Kate feels a strong need to be useful and
practical, but on the other hand her lack of mutability may haunt
her, causing uncertainty about her direction in life.
Audience: Although there are no planets in mutable signs, the
angles are both mutable. How would we make sense of that?
Clare: I think this points to the fact that, although Kate’s natural
inner orientation is mostly fixed, she feels less certain when it
comes to engaging with the outside world, where her approach is
more flexible and adaptable. As we begin to find these kinds of
inherent conflicts, the chart starts coming to life. Kate: Structured work is something I've always had a problem with,
because I find it hard to commit to regular hours and to other
people’s expectations. As a result I’ve had a series of varied jobs
including teaching English as a foreign language, library assistant,
PA, and working in an art shop.
5. Intercepted Signs
Clare: The next thing to do, since we are using the Placidus house
system here, is to check for intercepted signs and repeated house
cusps to see whether any planets are ‘floating’ because they are
not house rulers, and whether any planets are particularly strongly
anchored in the chart because they rule more than one house. You
can see that the signs of Aries and Libra are intercepted in the first
and seventh houses. With a chart that seems so far to be primarily
relationship based, that is particularly interesting. However, since
Venus and Mars also rule Taurus and Scorpio, they are still house
rulers in their own right, ruling the ninth and third houses
respectively. Otherwise, we might start wondering if Mars and
Venus would have difficulty expressing themselves.
Whenever you have intercepted signs in a quadrant based
house system, you are also going to have planets ruling more than
one house, so in this chart the Moon rules both the fifth and sixth
houses, which have Cancer on the cusp, and Saturn rules both the
eleventh and twelfth houses, which have Capricorn on the cusp.
We would therefore expect the Moon and Saturn to be particularly
strongly emphasised in this chart, and in fact they are in opposition,
so we need to spend some time teasing that out.
Audience: I have just noticed something rather curious about that,
because the Moon and Saturn are also intercepted in the signs of
Leo and Aquarius in the sixth and twelfth houses. How can we
make sense of that?
Clare: Yes, that is a rather unusual phenomenon. I think the way to
approach this is to pay special attention to the Moon-Saturn
opposition in the chart. We know it is going to be particularly
significant and we also know that it will be rather hard to get at and
possibly rather hard for Kate herself to understand clearly. As we have seen, the Moon rules both the fifth house of creative
self expression and the sixth house of useful and skilful activity,
and yet it is buried in the intercepted sign of Leo. Saturn rules both
the eleventh house of groups and the twelfth house of seclusion
and retreat, and yet it is buried in the intercepted sign of Aquarius.
So the questions which emerge here hinge around Kate’s ability to
discover and fulfil the needs of her Moon, and her ability to learn to
face her own inner fears and take responsibility for herself. These
two questions may well indicate significant life themes for Kate, and
it is worth mentioning here that it is not our task to try and make
sense of this or to try and find solutions or to make suggestions.
Our task is simply to record and to communicate as faithfully as we
can the themes which are revealed by the chart. But we can leave
this for now, since the Moon-Saturn opposition is part of a Tsquare, so we will look at it more closely when we get to aspect
patterns.
6. Ruling Planet
Now we can move on to the ruling planet, and because the
Ascendant is in Pisces there are two chart rulers, with Jupiter being
the personal ruler and Neptune being the transpersonal ruler.
Jupiter is in the first house in Aries. This placement is subjective,
determined and goal oriented, indicating a great deal of personal
faith, courage and focus. The transpersonal ruler of the chart links
Kate directly and personally to the dreams and ideals of the
Neptune in Scorpio generation to which she belongs. And Neptune
is in the eighth house, so she is no doubt something of an
emotional sponge, a theme which is supported by the fact that her
Ascendant is in Pisces. In the water houses we are going to be
sensitive to hidden emotional issues, so this is doubly sensitive to
others. As I am sure you can see, there is another self-other theme
here, with the personal ruler, Jupiter in Aries, wanting to stand
alone and do its own thing, and yet the transpersonal ruler,
Neptune in the eighth house, indicating that she can easily give
herself away in close relationships.
Audience: But Mars rules both Aries and Scorpio, so presumably
there is some kind of relationship between these two chart rulers? Clare: Yes, that’s a very good point. And Mars, which is the ruler of
Aries, is also conjunct Neptune. So we are beginning to get a story
here which concerns Kate’s faith in herself and her sensitivity to the
needs of others or to collective emotional issues. It looks as if she
is something of a crusader, and these rulers can come together
nicely if Kate dedicates her own personal will and strength and
vision to a collective cause.
7. Angular Planets
Let’s move on to the angular planets to see what else we can find.
Audience: There are two angular planets on the Descendant. One
is Moon and the other is Uranus. They are linked together by the
Descendant.
Audience: This looks like early disruption and separations.
Clare: We know that the Descendant is the point of contact with
significant others, and we know that relationships are important in
this chart, so what do you think these angular planets are about?
Audience: Sudden changes, sudden meetings and separations.
There is something very unpredictable about a Moon-Uranus
connection.
Audience: Is this about a detached and distant mother?
Clare: Perhaps. And that might link us back to the Moon-Saturn
opposition and the theme of early self sufficiency – having to rely
on herself.
Audience: But Saturn is in dignity and, in traditional astrology, it is
in the house of its joy, so it must be a strong Saturn.
Clare: Yes, these points support what we have already discovered,
that both the Moon and Saturn are extremely important in this
chart. I think it is likely that Kate needs to spend quite a bit of time
on her own, and that this is a way of nurturing herself.
Nevertheless, on some level she is bound to feel rather alone and isolated, although this doesn’t have to be a bad thing at all. The
lunar phase also indicates that this is a mature moon, so Kate is
perfectly capable of providing for herself and standing on her own
feet, and no doubt this is something which makes her feel secure
and safe.
After all, with Uranus conjunct Pluto in the seventh house,
relationships are unlikely to be simple or straightforward. Rather,
they are likely to bring unpredictability into her life (Uranus), along
with issues of power and control (Pluto). She may well need to
retreat from relationships from time to time, in order to nurture and
heal herself.
Audience: That is very interesting, because Kate has a Libra Sun,
and in the seventh house too. So it looks as if there is a really
strong theme around wanting to find herself through another and
needing to be alone.
Clare: That’s absolutely spot on.
8. Aspects and Aspect Patterns
Before we look at the aspect patterns, it is worth looking through
the aspect grid to see if there are any planets which make
significant aspects to the angles or which are unaspected or
otherwise rather alone and unsupported by the rest of the chart.
Can you identify any?
Audience: Mercury only has one aspect – a sesqui-quadrate to
Saturn. That’s all it does.
Audience: Venus is completely unaspected, apart from a trine to
the Ascendant.
Audience: The Moon is trine the MC.
Audience: Uranus is only conjunct Pluto and opposite Chiron. It
doesn’t make any personal aspects, apart from being on the
Descendant and opposite the Ascendant. Audience: The same is true of Pluto, although it does square the
MC.
Clare: Let’s get some general themes from these observations.
Mercury is fairly isolated, so that makes it very important for Kate to
find her voice. The sesqui-quadrate to Saturn indicates that she
has a structured and disciplined mind, and may not feel particularly
confident about speaking up, until she has considered her ideas
carefully.
The only outlet for Venus in Scorpio is through the Ascendant in
Pisces, so there is a quiet, sensitive and rather magnetic and
attractive quality about the way Kate engages with the world.
Audience: Yes, I think that is certainly true from what we can see.
Clare: The Moon in Leo trine MC in Sagittarius indicates that she
finds it easy to project her personality in the public arena and in her
work. Public attention is food for her, and this might explain why
she has offered her chart for us to discuss?
Kate: You may be right. I am really enjoying this opportunity to
focus on me!
Clare: There are no personal planets associated with Uranus,
which means that Uranus cannot really be incorporated or brought
under ego control, or taken down in voltage. She is likely to
experience Uranus as a particularly autonomous and possibly
disruptive force, appearing to come from nowhere, without warning.
This can feel quite shocking.
Pluto squaring the MC-IC axis indicates that Kate is likely to find
herself confronted by several radical changes of direction in both
her public and private life.
Now we need to see if we can find some aspect patterns
because they will contain important stories. What can you find?
Audience: Jupiter makes two quincunxes to Neptune and Pluto, so
that is a yod. Audience: There is a fixed T-square with the Moon opposite Saturn
both square Neptune=Mars. There is also a cardinal grand cross
with the Sun-Jupiter opposition square the nodal axis.
Audience: There is a grand trine in water between Chiron, north
node and the Mars-Neptune conjunction.
Audience: Actually there is a kite, because there are sextiles from
this grand trine to Uranus and Pluto in Virgo.
Clare: So there are lots of really nice aspect patterns here, with
four major shapes emerging. Let’s have a look at these separately
to see what they might mean.
Yod
With this yod, our attention is drawn once again to Jupiter, which I
have just noticed is not only the chart ruler but that it also rules the
MC. This indicates that significant events are likely to occur in
Kate’s life which will focus on, and revolve around, her strong
sense of self belief and self agency. In fact, it is not so unusual to
have a yod which involves the Neptune-Pluto sextile, since this is a
collective aspect which almost all of us will have in our charts,
given that Neptune and Pluto move so slowly. But with Jupiter as
the focus of this yod, we could imaging that Kate will give some
kind of individual expression to the collective background into
which she has been born. On a personal level, with Pluto in the
seventh house and Neptune in the eighth, Jupiter will give her the
strength and determination to survive the intense and possibly
overwhelming issues which arise for her in relationships. The
theme once again is the self and the other. Audience: We can also bring in the Mars and Uranus as well, can’t
we? Because Mars is conjunct Neptune and Uranus is conjunct
Pluto.
Clare: Yes, that’s right, and there is an element of the freedom
fighter around Mars and Uranus. This makes the Neptune-Pluto
sextile rather more dynamic and active, and supports the self belief
of Jupiter.
Kite You can see that both the grand trine in water and the kite are
collective in their nature, and will be found in the charts of everyone
born around this time in 1963, because there are no personal
planets involved. However, we can explore how this generational
pattern functions in Kate’s own life by concentrating on the houses
which are involved. Let’s tease out the trine first, before adding the
Uranus Pluto conjunction. What kind of story does a Node, Chiron,
Neptune trine suggest? Audience: Is this about healing?
Audience: I would imagine that this is extremely sensitive and
rather vulnerable too. Neptune-Chiron is about giving yourself to
others and with the node there it could indicate that this is your
function and destiny.
Clare: What do you think Chiron in Pisces in the first house is
about?
Audience: Perhaps a wounded sense of self? Some kind of
identification with the wound or with healing? Longing to merge and
to belong, but always feeling like an outsider.
Clare: The Pisces Ascendant is very exposed because it has no
personal boundaries. It is extremely sensitive and prone to
absorbing the feelings and emotional states of others.
Audience: And the Node in Cancer in the fifth house, ruled by the
Moon, indicates that Katie needs to care for herself – to learn to put
herself first. Although, with the Mars-Neptune conjunction in the
eighth house, she will always be very sensitive to the needs of
others.
Kate: I am certainly interested in the expression of subtle energies,
including dowsing, energy healing and shamanism. After a lifetime
of being what others have labelled ‘over sensitive’ , I am now
comfortable with the idea that I just pick up energetic and emotional
stuff from other people when I’m with them and need to find a way
to work positively with this. One option is training to become an
energy healer or shiatsu practitioner but I’m held back by my fear of
being overwhelmed by other people’s energies. Energy-wise I like
to keep myself to myself. I’m interested in the Buddhist world view
and philosophy.
It matters a lot to me to be able to fit work into my natural
rhythms as my energy level varies a lot – I can be buzzing one day
and completely lethargic the next. And there are times when I just need to escape from all pressure and I need to go with my own
internal flow at those times.
Clare: This is a perfect expression of the Pisces Ascendant and
Chiron in Pisces in the first house. Now let’s put the Uranus-Pluto
onto that and make it into a kite. What effect does this have on the
grand trine? The emotional reservoir of the grand trine in water is
channelled into earth, into Virgo. In this particular case, the
connection to the earth function is quite disruptive and will be
constellated through Kate’s relationships which, however difficult
and personally painful, may well provide the kinds of experiences
which eventually compel her to undergo a powerful transformation
of her relationship to herself and to her body (Chiron in Pisces in
the first house). Working with subtle energies in healing work
sounds very appropriate and could certainly describe your Chiron
path.
Fixed T-square
Turning to the fixed T-square, what are the themes around a MoonSaturn connection?
Audience: A lonely childhood, and perhaps a lack of nurturing?
Audience: A feeling of being denied what we need?
Audience: A strict family background?
Clare: So we are beginning to think along certain lines, which have
to do with the Moon and Saturn. This opposition is on the axis of
service, because it is across the sixth and twelfth houses, so it is
about the development of personal will and the surrender of
personal will. Let’s see if we can think of a story which might make
this T-square easier to understand. T-squares often lend
themselves to stories in which there are three characters, each of
which has a part to play. The Moon in Leo, for example, might describe a princess or a
queen. There is a need to be special, a sense of deserving praise
and recognition for her talents and skills (sixth house). With Saturn
in the twelfth house we might imagine that this specialness is
somehow hidden away, out of sight. This is almost like the fairy
story image of the princess in the tower – of being particularly
special and deserving of love and praise, but being trapped,
imprisoned and locked away in isolation. And Mars-Neptune might
describe the masculine as rescuer and redeemer – so we might have a fantasy image around the masculine which might take the
shape of a knight in shining armour.
Audience: This sounds like the fairy story about Rapunzel, who
was trapped in a tower, waiting to be rescued.
Clare: Yes, that is a beautiful image, and probably very telling, too,
since the Mars-Neptune conjunction is in the eighth house.
Audience: But Kate is also quite self sufficient, so she could be the
rescuer as well.
Clare: That’s right, and it is likely that she will play all the
characters in this fairy story at different times. There seems to be
quite a bit of trapped or frozen anger caught up in this T-square,
since it includes a Mars-Saturn square, which makes it difficult to
act, as well as a Mars-Moon square, which can be very sensitive
and defensive. In addition, the Moon-Neptune involvement is
appropriate to the theme of romantic longing, sacrifice and dreams
of being rescued. So this is a powerful configuration. It is also
potentially gifted and talented, and the T-square will provide Kate
with both the resistance and the determination to give shape and
form to her talents.
Cardinal Grand Cross
Let’s have a look at the cardinal grand cross composed of the
Jupiter-Sun opposition square to the nodal axis. We know that this
is a dynamic, determined and self-contained aspect pattern.
The Jupiter-Sun opposition emphasises the major relationship
theme of self-other in this chart, being across the first and seventh
houses and in the self-other signs of Aries and Libra. With the Sun
in Libra in the seventh house, Kate will seek to find peace,
harmony, balance and personal fulfilment through her partner.
Jupiter in Aries will give Kate the energy and determination to stand
up for herself if she finds that her relationship is out of balance in
any way, or unjust, or if the balance of power is unequal. However,
Mars and Venus, which rule Jupiter and the Sun, are both in
Scorpio, so it is not quite as simple as that, and deep emotional struggles are likely to emerge in relationships which will take her
into her the emotional depths, and bring any hidden issues to the
surface. This is particularly uncomfortable for a Libran Sun, and
Kate has Mercury in Libra as well, which is very rational and fair
minded. So she finds it particularly distasteful to find herself having
to do battle with the dark and archaic and irrational forces of
Scorpio which emerge in her relationships, although these are
likely to be the agents of her own personal transformation and
eventual empowerment. Kate: I was twelve or thirteen when my parents separated and
divorced and, over time, I have come to realise that this had a huge
effect on me. When I eventually separated from my husband in
1988 many powerful feelings emerged which had been deeply
buried until then.
Clare: In Cancer-Capricorn, the message of the nodal axis
concerns the collective challenge to find a conscious relationship
between neediness and dependency, versus self sufficiency and
personal responsibility, between the child and the parent. And once
again this takes us to the Moon-Saturn opposition, since the Moon
and Saturn are the rulers of the nodes. For Kate, this axis falls
across her fifth and eleventh houses, so we could say that it is
Kate’s destiny to discover and believe in her unique creative talents
and to offer them to the world in some way. With the Sun square
the nodal axis, her unique purpose is to learn to believe in herself
and to develop her particular artistic talents, a theme which is
supported by the Moon in Leo in the sixth house. With Jupiter
square the nodal axis we could say that, in spite of all the
difficulties indicated in other parts of this chart, Kate may have a
sense of being protected by the gods, since Jupiter often functions
as a kind of personal guardian angel when it picks up the nodal
axis. There is a strong sense of purpose and destiny in this cardinal
grand cross.
We have now completed the general overview of the chart, and
several important major themes have emerged. If we are preparing
an interpretation for a client, the next stage would be to move on to
an analysis of the specific details, which I have outlined in the Guide
to Interpretation. We might, for example, start focusing on the
parental story, by examining the tenth and fourth houses and their
rulers, Jupiter and Mercury, and at the detailed interpretation of the
Sun and Moon, the parental significators. And a major focus when we
are preparing a chart will be on the current transits, progressions and
so on, which tell us which parts of the chart are being activated at the
moment, and therefore why the client is coming to see us. That is
what we will be looking at next term. Do you get the sense that we
have understood you? Kate: You have certainly pulled together all the major themes in the
chart in an insightful way, and yes, it has all be helpful – on all sorts of
different levels.
Clare: Do you feel accurately reflected and mirrored?
Kate: I feel that you have reflected and mirrored my potential, but I
feel that the actual reality is not like that yet. I am still in my mid-life
crisis and feeling very restless and unsettled. Three years ago I let
my house in London and went to live in Cambridge. Since then I have
moved house nine times.
Clare: That must have been very difficult for you because you are
quite fixed by nature and, because of the lack of earth you need to
feel safe and secure. It seems as if your mutable angles have been
particularly active during the last three years, and this is in fact
supported by major transits to your angles.
Kate: I don’t do so much on the creative side. I see myself more as a
crusader because I am a charity fundraiser at the moment and I
actually go door to door to raise money. That is something I love.
Clare: So you use your courage and crusading energy in the service
of and for the benefit of others?
Kate. That’s right, and it is important for me that the training and
ethos of the company I work for is very ethical and that everything is
done with the right attitude.
Clare: Presumably it is important for you to do something you believe
in, with Jupiter ruling both your chart and the MC?
Kate: I certainly think I am moving in that direction now. I used to
work in very safe, structured jobs, but I am now finding I can only
work in more fluid jobs. So there has been a gradual progression
from trying and failing to fit myself into structured jobs, to freer work
where I can be myself more and follow my spontaneous inclinations. Clare: Do you feel that you are beginning to develop more self
confidence?
Kate: That’s a really big one – the fixed T-square is quite a difficult
pattern, so it is a rather slow process.
Clare: What about the theme of self and other – do you feel that
dichotomy?
Kate: Absolutely. Basically, I seem to have a pattern of being taken
over by the feelings and moods of others, and by their drive and
energy, and then I have to fight to become myself again and I
sometimes think I am too strong.
Clare: So you have had to get quite tough and learn how to fight for
yourself?
Kate: Yes. I really feel that.
Clare: And now you know that you have the courage and
determination to stand up for yourself when necessary.
Kate: Yes, but it feels like there are two very separate parts of me –
the Saturn Moon T-square part and the Jupiter part, and they can
each come out at different times.
Clare: What sort of charities do you fundraise for?
Kate: Overseas development charities.
Clare: That’s perfect, with your Jupiter ruler and Sagittarius on the
MC. Is that something you are passionate about?
Kate: Yes, particularly the one I am working for at the moment, which
is raising money for community projects abroad.
Clare: This is an absolutely beautiful expression of your cardinal
grand cross and of the nodal axis which is concerned both with your personal contribution to community work. Do you feel you have a
special gift for this?
Kate: No, but it is something I just think I can do naturally. There is a
kind of conflict– my personal interests are more creative – I sing in a
harmony group and we do concerts and that kind of thing, so I’m not
too sure. Sometimes I think I should be developing that more, but my
work always seems to be about communities and groups.
Audience: The nodal axis is also about doing creative stuff for
yourself as an individual versus the work you do for others.
Audience: Neptune is also about music and Mars-Neptune can be
the expression of music.
Clare: And the Moon in Leo wants to perform, to sing and to play
music – to express itself joyfully. So the themes of individual self
expression and service to the community or to the collective do seem
to be strong in your chart. And it feels as if these two things are
separate at the moment.
Kate: Yes they feel separate. My creative outlet at the moment is my
singing. I don’t play an instrument but I study music theory because I
am interested in composition. During my twenties I did some creative
writing and article writing and I would like to pick this up again at
some point, because all this has disappeared since the beginning of
my midlife crisis, and I am lacking a direction.
Clare: These are particularly appropriate expressions of the Moon in
Leo and the Sun in Libra. But I definitely get the sense that you are
not feeling as optimistic as your chart indicates.
Kate: In a way, I do, but I am still struggling and I feel very vulnerable
at the moment. It is a hard journey without any earth in the chart!
Audience: What about the strong emphasis on the seventh house
and on relationships? Kate: It doesn’t mean that I have had wonderful intimate
relationships. I have been on my own for the last three years, and
have found it difficult to enter into any significant new relationships
since my marriage.
Clare: That could be appropriate for now. Because that is an
indication that you are looking after yourself at the moment.
Kate: Yes, but I am sorry about it really. It’s just that I can’t deal with
another relationship at the moment!
Clare: I think this is very understandable, since it is clear from your
birth chart that Pluto and Uranus are going to get evoked whenever
you are in a relationship, because they are in your seventh house.
And that means that your very sensitive grand trine in water will also
come to life in relationships.
For the time being there is nothing wrong with taking the emotional
pressure off yourself and to give yourself a rest. Perhaps you need to
retreat back into your Saturn in the twelfth house tower and give
yourself some time and space. The Moon-Saturn opposition is also
about learning to care for yourself and to protect yourself when
necessary.
Kate: Thank you, you’ve been really positive.
Clare: Well, I have been trying to reflect the astrology of your chart as
accurately as I can and although I can understand why you are not
feeling particularly positive or optimistic at the moment, no doubt you
will look back at this period in your life and see that it represented an
important and positive transition. Thanks to everyone for their
contributions. That brings us to the end of our class and to the end of
our term. Have a good break and I look forward to seeing you again
next term. The Full Guide to Chart Interpretation follows on the next few pages. CHART DATA
Unless otherwise stated the data for the charts below is taken
from Astrodatabank, Version 3.0 – Ratings A or AA, or from the
Astrotheme website at http://astrotheme.fr
Winston
Churchill 30 November 1874, 1.30 am, Woodstock,
England (Astrotheme) Kurt Cobain 20 February 1967, 19.20 PST, Aberdeen, WA
(Astrodatabank) Sean Connery 25 August 1930, 6.05 pm BST, Edinburgh,
Scotland (Astrodatabank) Albert Einstein 14 March 1879, 11.30 am LMT, Ulm, Germany
(Astrodatabank) Charles Darwin 12 February 1809, 3.00 am, Shrewsbury,
England (Astrotheme) Claude Debussy 22 August 1862, Júpiter .30 am LMT, St. Germain,
France (Astrodatabank)
Rene Descartes 31 March 1596, 2.00 am, Le Harvre, France
(Astrotheme)
Diana, Princess
of Wales 1 July 1961, 7.45 pm BST, Sandringham,
England (Astrodatabank) Jacqueline du
Pré 26 January 1945, 11.30 am BST, Oxford, England
(Astrodatabank) Sigmund Freud 6 May 1856, 6.30 pm, Frieberg, Germany
(Astrodatabank) Bill Gates 28 October 1955, 10.00 pm PST, Seattle, WA
(Astrodatabank) Bob Geldof 5 October 1951, 2.20 pm BST, Dublin, Ireland
(Astrodatabank) Johann von
Goethe 28 August 1749, 12.00 pm, Frankfurt-sur-Main,
Germany (Astrotheme) Thomas Hardy 2 June 1840, 8.00 am, Upper Buckhampton,
England (Astrotheme) Carl Gustav
Jung 26 July 1875, 7.32 pm LMT, Kesswil, Switzerland
(Astrodatabank) Johannes
Kepler 27 December 1571, 2.37 pm, Weil Der Stadt,
Germany (Astrotheme) John Lennon Mercúrio October 1940, 6.30 pm BST, Liverpool, England
(Astrodatabank) Martin Luther 19 November 1483, 10.46 pm LMT, Eiselben,
Germany (Astrodatabank) Nelson Mandela 18 July 1918, 2.54 pm, Umtata, South Africa
(Astrotheme)
Rollo May 21 April 1909, 2.20 am CST, Ada, OH
(Astrodatabank) Wolfgang A.
Mozart 27 January 1756, 8.00 am, Salzburg, Austria
(Astrotheme) Dennis Nilsen 23 November 1945, Júpiter .00 am GMT, Fraserburgh,
Scotland Michel de
Nostradamus 14 December 1503, 12.00 pm, St. Remy, France
(Astrotheme) Aristotle
Onassis 20 January 1906, 10.00 am, Smyrne, Izmir,
Turkey (Astrotheme) Elvis Presley 8 January 1935, Júpiter .35 am CST, Tupelo, MS
(Astrodatabank) Auguste Rodin 12 November 1840, 12.00 pm, Paris, France
(Astrotheme) Dante Gabriel
Rossetti 12 May 1828, 04:30 am LMT, London, England
(Astrodatabak) Bertrand Russell 18 May 1872, 5.45 pm, Trellek, England
(Astrotheme)
Sir Walter Scott 15 August 1771, 10.00 am, Edinburgh, Scotland
(Astrotheme) Percy Bysshe
Shelley Júpiter August 1792, 10.00 pm LMT, Horsham,
England (Astrodatabank) Mark Spitz 10 February 1950, 5.45 pm PST, Modesto, CA
(Astrodatabank) Leo Tolstoy Mercúrio September 1828, 10.52 pm LMT, Tula, Russia
www.khaldea.com/charts Tina Turner 26 November 1939, 10.10 pm CST, Nutbush, TN
(Astrodatabank) Vincent Van
Gogh 30 March 1853, 11.00 am LMT, Zundert,
Netherlands (Astrodatabank) Bruce Willis 19 March 1955, 6.32 pm MET, Idar-Oberstein,
Germany (Astrodatabank) Virginia Woolf 25 January 1882, 12.15 pm GMT, London,
England (Astrodatabank) William Butler
Yeats 13 June 1865, 10.40 pm LMT, Sandymount,
Ireland (Astrodatabank) Bibliography and Recommended Reading
Bibliography
Baring, A. &
Cashford, J. (1991) The Myth of the Goddess, Arkana,
Penguin Books Bruyere, R. L. (1989) Wheels of Light. A Study of the Chakras,
Volume 1, Bon Productions, California Burckhardt, T. (1986) Alchemy, tr. William Stoddart, Element
Books Ltd. Campbell, J. (1986) The Inner Reaches of Outer Space:
Metaphor as Myth and as Religion, New
World Library, Novato, California Dethlefsen, T. (1984) The Challenge of Fate, Coventure Ltd.,
Boston, Massachusetts Edinger, E. F. (1985) Anatomy of the Psyche. Alchemical
Symbolism in Psychotherapy, Open Court
Publishing Company, La Salle, Illinois GuggenbuhlCraig, A. (1995) From the Wrong Side: a paradoxical
approach to psychology, Spring
Publications Harpur, Plutão . (1994) Daimonic Reality. A Field Guide to the
Otherworld, Pine Winds Press, Idyll
Arbor, Inc.
(2002) The Philosophers’ Secret Fire. A History
of the Imagination, Ivan R. Dee, Chicago Hillman, J. (1996) The Soul’s Code: In Search of Character and Calling, Bantam Books
Carl G. Jung (1946) The Psychology of the Transference,
Volume 16, Collected Works, tr. R.F.C.
Hull, Routledge & Kegan Paul, London Lawlor, R. (1982) Sacred Geometry, Thames and Hudson
Ltd., London Moore, T. (1996) The Re-Enchantment of Everyday Life,
HarperPerennial Narby, J. (1998) The Cosmic Serpent: DNA and the
Origins of Knowledge, Phoenix, Orion
Publishing Group Paracelsus (1951) Selected Writings, ed. Jolande Jacobi,
trans. Norbert Guterman. Bollingen
Series XXVIII, Princeton University Press,
quoted in Parabola: Myth and the Quest
for Meaning, Volume III, No. 3: Inner
Alchemy, August 1978, p.2, The
Tamarack Press, Inc. New York. Plato (1955) The Republic, trans. H.D. Plutão . Lee, London von Franz, M-L. (1980) Projection and Re-Collection in Jungian
Psychology: Reflections of the Soul,
Open Court Publishing Company, La
Salle
West, J. A. (1987) Serpent in the Sky: The High Wisdom of
Ancient Egypt, Julian Press, Crown
Publishing Group, New York Recommended Reading Arroyo, S. (1978) Astrology, Karma & Transformation: The
Inner Dimensions of the Birth Chart,
CRCS Publications Camilleri, S. (1999) The House Book. The Influence of the
Planets in the Houses, Llewellyn
Publications, St. Paul, MN Ebertin, R. (1988) The Combination of Stellar Influences,
American Federation of Astrologers, Inc. Greene, L. (2002) Barriers and Boundaries. The Horoscope
and the Defences of the Personality, CPA
Press Volume 1
(2001) The Horoscope in Manifestation, CPA
Press, Volume Mercúrio (2003) The Dark of the Soul. Psychopathology in
the Horoscope, CPA Press, Volume 20 HamakerZondag, K. (1990) Aspects & Personality, Samuel Weiser,
Inc.
(2000) The Yod Book, Samuel Weiser, Inc.
(1992) The Twelfth House: The Hidden Power in
the Horoscope, Samuel Weiser, Inc. Houlding, D. (2006) The Houses: Temples of the Sky, The
Wessex Astrologer Ltd., Bournemouth. Idemon, R. (2010) The Magic Thread: Astrological Chart
Interpretation Using Depth Psychology,
The Wessex Astrologer Ltd,
Bournemouth
(2010) Through the Looking Glass: A Search for Self in the Mirror of Relationships, The
Wessex Astrologer Ltd, Bournemouth
Pelletier, R. (1974) Planets in Aspect, Para Research Inc.
Gloucester, Massachusetts
(1978) Planets in Houses, Para Research Inc.
Gloucester, Massachusetts Reinhart, M. (2001) Incarnation. The Four Angles and the
Moon’s Nodes, CPA Press, Volume 8 Rael, L. &
Rudhyar, D. (1980) Astrological Aspects: A Process-Oriented
Approach, Aurora Press, Santa Fe, NM Rudhyar, D. (1972) The Astrological Houses. The Spectrum
of Individual Experience, CRCS
Publications
(1978) New Mansions for New Men, El Camino
Press, La Verne, California Sasportas, H. (2007) The Twelve Houses. An Introduction to
the Houses in Astrological Interpretation,
Flare Publishing, London
(2002) Direction and Destiny in the Birth Chart,
CPA Press, Volume 10 Tierney, B. (1983) Dynamics of Aspect Analysis: New
Perceptions in Astrology, CRCS
Publications, Reno, Nevada Tompkins, S. (1989) Aspects in Astrology, Element Books Graf von
Schlieffen, A. (2004) When Chimpanzees Dream Astrology. An
Introduction to the Quadrants of the
Horoscope, CPA Press, Volume 21 About the Centre for Psychological Astrology
The Centre for Psychological Astrology was founded in 1983 by Dr
Liz Greene and Howard Sasportas. Since its inception, the CPA has
become world renowned for its unique and inspiring application of a
variety of psychological approaches to astrology.
The Centre continues to foster the cross-fertilisation of the fields of
astrology and depth, humanistic and transpersonal psychology. It
hosts a unique seminar and webinar programme providing an
original, informal and inspiring framework for both beginners and
experienced astrologers. Past seminars are available as books and
e-books through the CPA Press.
For further information about the current programme of seminars and
webinars, to receive mailings and browse the CPA Press astrology
books, contact the Administrator, Juliet Sharman-Burke at:
juliet@cpalondon.com
The Online Introductory Certificate Course with John Green
provides a foundation in the basics of psychological astrology. Run
as real time online tutorials, students can interact with the tutor and
other students, ask questions and watch recorded sessions.
For further information, contact John at: webmaster@cpalondon.com
About the Mercury Internet School of Psychological Astrology
The Mercury Internet School of Psychological Astrology (MISPA)
offers a Diploma Course, and students who have completed the
CPA’s Foundation Course are eligible to enrol.
For further information visit: www.mercuryinternetschool.com or write
to info@mercuryinternetschool.com
About the Faculty of Astrological Studies The Faculty of Astrological Studies was founded in London to raise
the standard of astrological education. The Faculty remains at the
forefront of the serious teaching of astrology, preserving the links to
this ancient craft, embracing new developments and passing on this
knowledge to students all over the world.
Since its foundation in 1948, the Faculty has become known
worldwide as a first class astrological school, and more than 10,000
students from over 90 countries have enrolled on its courses. Its
Diploma is among the most highly valued and recognised
international qualifications for the professional astrologer. Many of
the world’s leading astrologers are or were Faculty Diploma holders,
such as Dr Liz Greene, Charles Harvey, Julia Parker, Melanie
Reinhart and Howard Sasportas.
The Faculty’s team of dedicated tutors, all of whom are themselves
Faculty Diploma holders, are devoted to teaching astrology to
students all over the world, guiding them carefully from the very
beginning of their astrological studies right through to professional
qualification at Diploma level. The Faculty’s courses are
comprehensive and flexible, available online and at classes and
seminars in London. Full and part Diploma modules can also be
studied at the Faculty’s annual Oxford Summer School. Students
can choose whichever method of learning suits them best, and
alternate freely between them to suit their individual circumstances.
The Faculty’s course material is unique, with a philosophical but
practical approach to the art and craft of astrology, preserving its rich
traditions and at the same time embracing and including modern
psychological and post-psychological thinking. Course material is
constantly updated, providing students with thorough, in-depth and
comprehensive guidance, supported by their own personal tutor.
For further information visit: www.astrology.org.uk or write to:
info@astrology.org.uk Other Titles from The Wessex Astrologer
Martin Davis www.wessexastrologer.com
Astrolocality Astrology From Here to There Wanda Sellar The Consultation Chart An Introduction to
Medical Astrology Decumbiture Geoffrey
Cornelius The Moment of Astrology Darrelyn
Gunzburg Life After Grief AstroGraphology: The Hidden
Link between your Horoscope and your
Handwriting Paul F. Newman Declination: The Steps of the Sun Luna: The
Book of the Moon
Jamie Macphail Astrology and the Causes of War Deborah
Houlding The Houses: Temples of the Sky Dorian Geiseler
Greenbaum Temperament: Astrology’s Forgotten Key Howard
Sasportas The Gods of Change Patricia L.
Walsh Understanding Karmic Complexes M. Kelly Hunter Living Lilith Barbara Dunn Horary Astrology Re-Examined Deva Green Evolutionary Astrology Jeff Green Pluto 1 Pluto 2
Essays on Evolutionary
Astrology (ed. by Deva Green)
Dolores
The Door Unlocked: An Astrological Insight
Ashcroft-Nowicki into Initiation
and Stephanie
V. Norris
Martha Betz The Betz Placidus Table of Houses Greg Bogart Astrology and Meditation Kim Farnell Flirting with the Zodiac Henry Seltzer The Tenth Planet Ray Grasse Under a Sacred Sky Chris McRae Geodetic Astrology Martin Gansten Primary Directions Joseph Crane Astrological Roots: The Hellenistic Legacy
Between Fortune and Providence John Gadbury The Nativity of the Late King Charles Komilla Sutton The Essentials of Vedic Astrology
The Lunar Nodes
Personal Panchanga
The Nakshatras Anthony Louis The Art of Forecasting using Solar Returns Reina James All the Sun Goes Round Oscar Hofman Classical Medical Astrology Bernadette
Brady Astrology, A Place in Chaos Star and Planet
Combinations Richard Idemon The Magic Thread
Through the Looking Glass Nick Campion The Book of World Horoscopes Judy Hall Patterns of the Past
Karmic Connections
Good Vibrations
The Soulmate Myth
The Book of Why
Book of Psychic Development Neil D. Paris Surfing your Solar Cycles Michele Finey The Sacred Dance of Venus and Mars David Hamblin The Spirit of Numbers Dennis Elwell Cosmic Loom Gillian Helfgott The Insightful Turtle Christina Rose The Tapestry of Planetary Phases Bob Makransky Planetary Strength
Planetary Hours
Planetary Combination Clare Martin Mapping the Psyche Vol 1
Mapping the Psyche Vol 2
Mapping the Psyche Vol 3