Thank you for downloading this Simon & Schuster
ebook.
Get a FREE ebook when you join our mailing list. Plus, get updates on new releases,
deals, recommended reads, and more from Simon & Schuster. Click below to sign up
and see terms and conditions. CLICK HERE TO SIGN UP
Already a subscriber? Provide your email again so we can register this ebook and
send you more of what you like to read. You will continue to receive exclusive offers in
your inbox. CONTENTS
Introduction
PART 1
Signs, Elements, and Self-Care
What Is Self-Care?
Self-Care and Astrology
Essential Elements: Water
Self-Care for Pisces
PART 2
Self-Care Rituals for Pisces
Acknowledgments
About the Author Dedication
To my intuitive, creative Pisces sister, Patti, with love. Introduction
It’s time for you to have a little “me” time—powered by the zodiac. By tapping into your Sun
sign’s astrological and elemental energies, The Little Book of Self-Care for Pisces brings
star-powered strength and cosmic relief to your life with self-care guidance tailored
specifically for you.
While you may have a deep sense of community, Pisces, this book focuses on your true
self. This book provides information on how to incorporate self-care into your life while
teaching you just how important astrology is to your overall self-care routine. You’ll learn
more about yourself as you learn about your sign and its governing element, water. Then
you can relax, rejuvenate, and stay balanced with more than one hundred self-care ideas
and activities perfect for your Pisces personality.
From savoring a home-cooked meal to creating a personal altar, you will find plenty of
ways to heal your mind, body, and active spirit. Now, let the stars be your self-care guide! PART 1 SIGNS, ELEMENTS,
______ AND ______
SELF-CARE CHAPTER 1 WHAT IS SELF-CARE?
Astrology gives insights into whom to love, when to charge forward into new beginnings, and how to succeed in whatever you put your
mind to. When paired with self-care, astrology can also help you
relax and reclaim that part of yourself that tends to get lost in the
bustle of the day. In this chapter you’ll learn what self-care is—for
you. (No matter your sign, self-care is more than just lit candles and
quiet reflection, though these activities may certainly help you find
the renewal that you seek.) You’ll also learn how making a priority of
personalized self-care activities can benefit you in ways you may not
even have thought of. Whether you’re a Leo, a Pisces, or a Taurus,
you deserve rejuvenation and renewal that’s customized to your sign
—this chapter reveals where to begin. What Self-Care Is
Self-care is any activity that you do to take care of yourself. It rejuvenates your body,
refreshes your mind, or realigns your spirit. It relaxes and refuels you. It gets you ready for a
new day or a fresh start. It’s the practices, rituals, and meaningful activities that you do, just
for you, that help you feel safe, grounded, happy, and fulfilled.
The activities that qualify as self-care are amazingly unique and personalized to who you
are, what you like, and, in large part, what your astrological sign is. If you’re asking
questions about what self-care practices are best for those ruled by water and born under
the sensitive eye of Pisces, you’ll find answers—and restoration—in Part 2. But, no matter
which of those self-care activities speak to you and your unique place in the universe on
any given day, it will fall into one of the following self-care categories—each of which
pertains to a different aspect of your life:
Physical self-care
Emotional self-care
Social self-care
Mental self-care
Spiritual self-care Practical self-care
When you practice all of these unique types of self-care—and prioritize your practice to
ensure you are choosing the best options for your unique sign and governing element—
know that you are actively working to create the version of yourself that the universe intends
you to be. Physical Self-Care
When you practice physical self-care, you make the decision to look after and restore the
one physical body that has been bestowed upon you. Care for it. Use it in the best way you
can imagine, for that is what the universe wishes you to do. You can’t light the world on fire
or move mountains if you’re not doing everything you can to take care of your physical
health. Emotional Self-Care
Emotional self-care is when you take the time to acknowledge and care for your inner
self, your emotional well-being. Whether you’re angry or frustrated, happy or joyful, or
somewhere in between, emotional self-care happens when you choose to sit with your
emotions: when you step away from the noise of daily life that often drowns out or tamps
down your authentic self. Emotional self-care lets you see your inner you as the cosmos
intend. Once you identify your true emotions, you can either accept them and continue to
move forward on your journey or you can try to change any negative emotions for the better.
The more you acknowledge your feelings and practice emotional self-care, the more you’ll
feel the positivity that the universe and your life holds for you. Social Self-Care
You practice social self-care when you nurture your relationships with others, be they
friends, coworkers, or family members. In today’s hectic world it’s easy to let relationships
fall to the wayside, but it’s so important to share your life with others—and let others share
their lives with you. Social self-care is reciprocal and often karmic. The support and love
that you put out into the universe through social self-care is given back to you by those you
socialize with—often tenfold. Mental Self-Care
Mental self-care is anything that keeps your mind working quickly and critically. It helps
you cut through the fog of the day, week, or year and ensures that your quick wit and sharp
mind are intact and working the way the cosmos intended. Making sure your mind is fit
helps you problem-solve, decreases stress since you’re not feeling overwhelmed, and
keeps you feeling on top of your mental game—no matter your sign or your situation. Spiritual Self-Care
Spiritual self-care is self-care that allows you to tap into your soul and the soul of the
universe and uncover its secrets. Rather than focusing on a particular religion or set of religious beliefs, these types of self-care activities reconnect you with a higher power: the
sense that something out there is bigger than you. When you meditate, you connect. When
you pray, you connect. Whenever you do something that allows you to experience and
marry yourself to the vastness that is the cosmos, you practice spiritual self-care. Practical Self-Care
Self-care is what you do to take care of yourself, and practical self-care, while not as
expansive as the other types, is made up of the seemingly small day-to-day tasks that bring
you peace and accomplishment. These practical self-care rituals are important, but are
often overlooked. Scheduling a doctor’s appointment that you’ve been putting off is practical
self-care. Getting your hair cut is practical self-care. Anything you can check off your list of
things to be accomplished gives you a sacred space to breathe and allows the universe
more room to bring a beautiful sense of cosmic fulfillment your way. What Self-Care Isn’t
Self-care is restorative. Self-care is clarifying. Self-care is whatever you need to do to make
yourself feel secure in the universe.
Now that you know what self-care is, it’s also important that you’re able to see what selfcare isn’t. Self-care is not something that you force yourself to do because you think it will
be good for you. Some signs are energy in motion and sitting still goes against their place in
the universe. Those signs won’t feel refreshed by lying in a hammock or sitting down to
meditate. Other signs aren’t able to ground themselves unless they’ve found a self-care
practice that protects their cosmic need for peace and quiet. Those signs won’t find parties,
concerts, and loud venues soothing or satisfying. If a certain ritual doesn’t bring you peace,
clarity, or satisfaction, then it’s not right for your sign and you should find something that
speaks to you more clearly.
There’s a difference though between not finding satisfaction in a ritual that you’ve tried
and not wanting to try a self-care activity because you’re tired or stuck in a comfort zone.
Sometimes going to the gym or meeting up with friends is the self-care practice that you
need to experience—whether engaging in it feels like a downer or not. So consider how you
feel when you’re actually doing the activity. If it feels invigorating to get on the treadmill or
you feel delight when you actually catch up with your friend, the ritual is doing what it should
be doing and clearing space for you—among other benefits… The Benefits of Self-Care
The benefits of self-care are boundless and there’s none that’s superior to helping you put
rituals in place to feel more at home in your body, in your spirit, and in your unique home in
the cosmos. There are, however, other benefits to engaging in the practice of self-care that
you should know. Rejuvenates Your Immune System No matter which rituals are designated for you by the stars, your sign, and its governing
element, self-care helps both your body and mind rest, relax, and recuperate. The practice
of self-care activates the parasympathetic nervous system (often called the rest and digest
system), which slows your heart rate, calms the body, and overall helps your body relax and
release tension. This act of decompression gives your body the space it needs to build up
and strengthen your immune system, which protects you from illness. Helps You Reconnect—with Yourself
When you practice the ritual of self-care—especially when you customize this practice
based on your personal sign and governing element—you learn what you like to do and
what you need to do to replenish yourself. Knowing yourself better, and allowing yourself
the time and space that you need to focus on your personal needs and desires, gives you
the gifts of self-confidence and self-knowledge. Setting time aside to focus on your needs
also helps you put busy, must-do things aside, which gives you time to reconnect with
yourself and who you are deep inside. Increases Compassion
Perhaps one of the most important benefits of creating a self-care ritual is that, by
focusing on yourself, you become more compassionate to others as well. When you truly
take the time to care for yourself and make yourself and your importance in the universe a
priority in your own life, you’re then able to care for others and see their needs and desires
in a new way. You can’t pour from an empty dipper, and self-care allows you the space and
clarity to do what you can to send compassion out into the world. Starting a Self-Care Routine
Self-care should be treated as a ritual in your life, something you make the time to pause
for, no matter what. You are important. You deserve rejuvenation and a sense of relaxation.
You need to open your soul to the gifts that the universe is giving you, and self-care
provides you with a way to ensure you’re ready to receive those gifts. To begin a self-care
routine, start by making yourself the priority. Do the customized rituals in Part 2 with
intention, knowing the universe has already given them to you, by virtue of your sign and
your governing element.
Now that you understand the role that self-care will hold in your life, let’s take a closer
look at the connection between self-care and astrology. CHAPTER 2 SELF-CARE AND ASTROLOGY
Astrology is the study of the connection between the objects in the heavens (the planets, the stars) and what happens here on earth.
Just as the movements of the planets and other heavenly bodies
influence the ebb and flow of the tides, so do they influence you—
your body, your mind, your spirit. This relationship is ever present
and is never more important—or personal—than when viewed
through the lens of self-care.
In this chapter you’ll learn how the locations of these celestial bodies at the time of your
birth affect you and define the self-care activities that will speak directly to you as a Leo, an
Aries, a Capricorn, or any of the other zodiac signs. You’ll see how the zodiac influences
every part of your being and why ignoring its lessons can leave you feeling frustrated and
unfulfilled. You’ll also realize that, when you perform the rituals of self-care based on your
sign, the wisdom of the cosmos will lead you down a path of fulfillment and restoration—to
the return of who you really are, deep inside. Zodiac Polarities
In astrology, all signs are mirrored by other signs that are on the opposite side of the zodiac.
This polarity ensures that the zodiac is balanced and continues to flow with an unbreakable,
even stream of energy. There are two different polarities in the zodiac and each is called by
a number of different names:
Yang/masculine/positive polarity
Yin/feminine/negative polarity
Each polar opposite embodies a number of opposing traits, qualities, and attributes that
will influence which self-care practices will work for or against your sign and your own
personal sense of cosmic balance. Yang
Whether male or female, those who fall under yang, or masculine, signs are extroverted
and radiate their energy outward. They are spontaneous, active, bold, and fearless. They
move forward in life with the desire to enjoy everything the world has to offer to them, and they work hard to transfer their inspiration and positivity to others so that those individuals
may experience the same gifts that the universe offers them. All signs governed by the fire
and air elements are yang and hold the potential for these dominant qualities. We will refer
to them with masculine pronouns. These signs are:
Aries
Leo
Sagittarius
Gemini
Libra
Aquarius
There are people who hold yang energy who are introverted and retiring. However, by
practicing self-care that is customized for your sign and understanding the potential ways to
use your energy, you can find a way—perhaps one that’s unique to you—to claim your
native buoyancy and dominance and engage with the path that the universe opens for you. Yin
Whether male or female, those who fall under yin, or feminine, signs are introverted and
radiate inwardly. They draw people and experiences to them rather than seeking people
and experiences in an extroverted way. They move forward in life with an energy that is
reflective, receptive, and focused on communication and achieving shared goals. All signs
governed by the earth and water elements are yin and hold the potential for these reflective
qualities. We will refer to them with feminine pronouns. These signs are:
Taurus
Virgo
Capricorn
Cancer
Scorpio
Pisces
As there are people with yang energy who are introverted and retiring, there are also
people with yin energy who are outgoing and extroverted. And by practicing self-care rituals
that speak to your particular sign, energy, and governing body, you will reveal your true self
and the balance of energy will be maintained. Governing Elements
Each astrological sign has a governing element that defines their energy orientation and
influences both the way the sign moves through the universe and relates to self-care. The
elements are fire, earth, air, and water. All the signs in each element share certain
characteristics, along with having their own sign-specific qualities:
Fire: Fire signs are adventurous, bold, and energetic. They enjoy the heat and warm
environments and look to the sun and fire as a means to recharge their depleted
batteries. They’re competitive, outgoing, and passionate. The fire signs are Aries,
Leo, and Sagittarius. Earth: Earth signs all share a common love and tendency toward a practical,
material, sensual, and economic orientation. The earth signs are Taurus, Virgo, and
Capricorn.
Air: Air is the most ephemeral element and those born under this element are
thinkers, innovators, and communicators. The air signs are Gemini, Libra, and
Aquarius.
Water: Water signs are instinctual, compassionate, sensitive, and emotional. The
water signs are Cancer, Scorpio, and Pisces.
Chapter 3 teaches you all about the ways your specific governing element influences and
drives your connection to your cosmically harmonious self-care rituals, but it’s important that
you realize how important these elemental traits are to your self-care practice and to the
activities that will help restore and reveal your true self. Sign Qualities
Each of the astrological elements governs three signs. Each of these three signs is also
given its own quality or mode, which corresponds to a different part of each season: the
beginning, the middle, or the end.
Cardinal signs: The cardinal signs initiate and lead in each season. Like something
that is just starting out, they are actionable, enterprising, and assertive, and are born
leaders. The cardinal signs are Aries, Cancer, Libra, and Capricorn.
Fixed signs: The fixed signs come into play when the season is well established.
They are definite, consistent, reliable, motivated by principles, and powerfully
stubborn. The fixed signs are Taurus, Leo, Scorpio, and Aquarius.
Mutable signs: The mutable signs come to the forefront when the seasons are
changing. They are part of one season, but also part of the next. They are
adaptable, versatile, and flexible. The mutable signs are Gemini, Virgo, Sagittarius,
and Pisces.
Each of these qualities tells you a lot about yourself and who you are. They also give you
invaluable information about the types of self-care rituals that your sign will find the most
intuitive and helpful. Ruling Planets
In addition to qualities and elements, each specific sign is ruled by a particular planet that
lends its personality to those born under that sign. Again, these sign-specific traits give you
valuable insight into the personality of the signs and the self-care rituals that may best
rejuvenate them. The signs that correspond to each planet—and the ways that those
planetary influences determine your self-care options—are as follows:
Aries: Ruled by Mars, Aries is passionate, energetic, and determined.
Taurus: Ruled by Venus, Taurus is sensual, romantic, and fertile.
Gemini: Ruled by Mercury, Gemini is intellectual, changeable, and talkative.
Cancer: Ruled by the Moon, Cancer is nostalgic, emotional, and home loving.
Leo: Ruled by the Sun, Leo is fiery, dramatic, and confident. Virgo: Ruled by Mercury, Virgo is intellectual, analytical, and responsive.
Libra: Ruled by Venus, Libra is beautiful, romantic, and graceful.
Scorpio: Ruled by Mars and Pluto, Scorpio is intense, powerful, and magnetic.
Sagittarius: Ruled by Jupiter, Sagittarius is optimistic, boundless, and larger than
life.
Capricorn: Ruled by Saturn, Capricorn is wise, patient, and disciplined.
Aquarius: Ruled by Uranus, Aquarius is independent, unique, and eccentric.
Pisces: Ruled by Neptune and Jupiter, Pisces is dreamy, sympathetic, and idealistic. A Word on Sun Signs
When someone is a Leo, Aries, Sagittarius, or any of the other zodiac signs, it means that
the sun was positioned in this constellation in the heavens when they were born. Your Sun
sign is a dominant factor in defining your personality, your best self-care practices, and your
soul nature. Every person also has the position of the Moon, Mercury, Venus, Mars, Jupiter,
Saturn, Uranus, Neptune, and Pluto. These planets can be in any of the elements: fire
signs, earth signs, air signs, or water signs. If you have your entire chart calculated by an
astrologer or on an Internet site, you can see the whole picture and learn about all your
elements. Someone born under Leo with many signs in another element will not be as
concentrated in the fire element as someone with five or six planets in Leo. Someone born
in Pisces with many signs in another element will not be as concentrated in the water
element as someone with five or six planets in Pisces. And so on. Astrology is a complex
system and has many shades of meaning. For our purposes looking at the self-care
practices designated by your Sun sign, or what most people consider their sign, will give
you the information you need to move forward and find fulfillment and restoration. CHAPTER 3 ESSENTIAL ELEMENTS: WATER
Water is the fourth and final element of creation. It is essential for the planet and for our physical existence. It is amorphous, meaning it
assumes the shape of its container or geographical location and
solidifies only when frozen. Those who have water as their governing
element—Cancer, Scorpio, and Pisces—all have a special energy
signature and connection with water that guides all aspects of their
lives. Water signs are intuitive and tend to live on waves of feeling.
They are reflective, responsive, and fertile, and are often more
sensitive than other signs. Their path in life is to quell their
overwhelming emotions and use their instincts for love and
compassion toward themselves and others.
Their approach to self-care must include these goals. Let’s take a look at the
mythological importance of water and its fluid counterparts, the basic characteristics of the
three water signs, and what they all have in common when it comes to self-care. The Mythology of Water
In Greek mythology water is linked to the god of the sea, Poseidon. Poseidon was brother
to Zeus and Hades, and one of the six children conceived by Rhea and Cronos. His father,
Cronos, ruled the universe, but was eventually overthrown by Zeus. After their father’s
collapse of power, Zeus, Hades, and Poseidon decided to divide the earth between the
three of them. Poseidon became the lord of the sea, while Zeus became lord of Mount
Olympus and sky, and Hades became the lord of the underworld.
The sea god was especially important in the ancient world as sea travel and navigation
formed the principal trade and travel routes. Throughout mythology, going to sea was seen
as a precarious adventure, and sailors often prayed to Poseidon for safe return and calm
waters. Many myths feature Poseidon saving a ship at the last moment. In other myths he is
not so merciful.
Like Poseidon, water signs make their decisions based off emotion. Their gut feelings
guide them. This makes water signs highly compassionate and understanding, but it can
also make them moody at times. Water signs may try to keep their emotions balanced in the
hope of staying in control of their feelings, rather than allowing their feelings to control them.
This desire drives their likes and dislikes, personality traits, and approaches to self-care. The Element of Water
In terms of astrology, the water signs are called the feeling signs. They feel first, and think
and speak later. They are very familiar with the emotional expression of tears, laughter,
anger, joy, and grief. They often wear their heart on their sleeve and are extremely
sentimental. Scorpio is somewhat of an exception to this characterization, but, nevertheless,
she has a sensitive feeling mechanism. A water sign’s energy moves inward, and they draw
people and experiences to them rather than overtly seeking out people and experiences.
For example, Scorpio’s bravery means she is always open to new adventures. Cancer’s
loyalty encourages her to stick close to family and friends. And Pisces’s creative intuition
makes her a wonderful problem-solver when faced with a difficult conundrum. Astrological Symbols
The astrological symbols (also called the zodiacal symbols) of the water signs also give
you hints as to how the water signs move through the world. The symbols of all the water
signs are creatures connected with the sea, the cradle of life:
Scorpio is the Scorpion (and the Eagle and the Phoenix)
Cancer is the Crab
Pisces is the two Fish tied together
Scorpio has a complex set of symbols because there are varieties of scorpions, both in
the sea and on land, but the sea is home to all these sensitive water signs. Scorpio uses
her stinger to sting first rather than take the time to ask questions. Cancer the Crab holds on
to her home tenaciously and never approaches anything directly. Instead, she moves from
side to side to go forward in zigzag motions. And Pisces’s two Fish tied together symbolize
duality—one of the fish staying above the water, paying attention to the earth, and the other
living in the sea, where dreams and the imagination rule. Signs and Seasonal Modes
Each of the elements in astrology also has a sign that corresponds to a different part of
each season.
Cardinal: Cancer, as the first water sign, comes at the summer solstice, when
summer begins. She is a cardinal sign and the leader of the water signs. She may
lead indirectly, but has a powerful desire to be in control.
Fixed: Scorpio, the next water sign, is a fixed water sign, and she rules when
autumn is well established. The fixed signs are definite, motivated by principles, and
powerfully stubborn.
Mutable: And Pisces, the last water sign and the last sign of the zodiac, is a mutable
sign. She moves us from winter to the spring equinox in Aries. The major
characteristic of mutable, or changeable, signs is flexibility.
If you know your element and whether you are a cardinal, fixed, or mutable sign, you
know a lot about yourself. This is invaluable for self-care and is reflected in the customized
water sign self-care rituals found in Part 2. Water Signs and Self-Care
Self-care comes naturally to water signs. Oftentimes, they find it is essential to take care of
themselves because they feel acutely when something is askew inside them. They may
complain bitterly about not feeling well, or about their sensitivities or the weather, but they
generally know what to do to get back on course. Physical self-care is the hardest area for
the water signs to master, because they do not like to do things unless they feel like doing
them. Once they have a routine that has proven will make them feel better, they will stick to
it, but before they adopt that routine, they are often hit-or-miss when it comes to diet,
exercise, and medical checkups. Water signs are also very in tune with alternative cures
and what their ancestors did for self-care.
Another essential factor in water sign self-care is the atmosphere of the gym or exercise
location. Generally, water signs do not like crowds. If it is 5 p.m. and people are pounding
out their aggressions from work on the treadmill, most water signs will choose to wait for the
crowds to thin, or go earlier in the day. However, one of the great encouragements for water
signs is the use of a shower or pool—a water source that they can include in their routine is
a great enticement for water signs. Water signs may choose to attend classes at the gym,
but most of the time they prefer to make sure that they are not overly influenced by other
people’s vibes.
Water signs are especially drawn to natural surroundings when it comes to self-care.
Walking by a pond or lake is perhaps the best exercise for them, as it combines physical,
mental, and spiritual practice. In a low-pressure environment, water signs feel that all their
activities are worthwhile, both in terms of money and time. They are very aware of the
money they spend and tend to be prudent and almost stingy with funds. And there is a
direct relationship between their feeling of well-being and how much money they have in the
bank.
Water signs are nurturers and make it a priority to take care of family and friends. It is
always best for water signs to frame their self-care in terms of their familial feelings about
something. For example, the statement “If you quit eating all this junk, you will help your
family by setting a good example and you will feel better” is a winning one for water signs,
marrying their love for their family with their own self-care. Once the water sign gets the
feeling that they can extend the love and care of their family to themselves through selfcare, they feel more comfortable designating attention to wellness practices.
In terms of emotional self-care, the most important factor for water signs is to avoid
exaggerating their reactions to events or people. The more water signs can stay in the here
and now, the less they will feel there are imaginary scenarios of people working against
them. They are so sensitive that it is very easy for them to lapse into being self-conscious. A
very good technique for water signs is to play a game asking themselves the question,
“How would I feel if I were that person?” This thinking pattern encourages compassion
rather than self-centeredness in water signs.
Water signs have a gift for feeling. In today’s society we tend to diminish the importance
of being emotional. Water signs may feel they have to do all the heavy lifting in the
emotional department, which may make them feel lonely. Water signs are naturally
empathetic, so the trick for them is to balance how they feel about other people and extend
those good feelings to themselves. Feelings are different from intellectual, inspirational, and
practical concerns. The water signs symbolize the potential of members of the human family
to share their individual feelings.
So, now that you know what water signs need to practice self-care, let’s look at each of
the characteristics of Pisces and how she can maintain her gifts. CHAPTER Júpiter SELF-CARE FOR PISCES
Dates: February 19–March 20
Element: Water
Polarity: Yin
Quality: Mutable
Symbol: Fish
Ruler: Neptune, Jupiter Pisces is the last water sign and the twelfth and final sign of the
zodiac. She is a mutable sign, ushering in the spring season. In
astrology it is said that Pisces marks the end of the individual
personality and the beginning of the return to spirit. The intangible,
feeling world is Pisces’s home, rather than the everyday material
world. She is sensitive and psychically tuned in, seesawing between
compassionate care for others and the tendency to always have her
head in the clouds. Pisces is one of the most spiritual signs. Her symbol is the two Fish tied together, and in
many depictions one fish is above the water and in the light of day, while the other is under
the sea and in darkness. Pisces’s imagination and artistic abilities come from these
underwater depths. Emotional sensitivity is the hallmark of all water signs, but in Pisces it is
especially acute. Pisces needs more rest and downtime than other signs do. Reality is often
too abrasive, and she needs to recoup her energies often to stay happy and balanced.
In ancient times when astrologers first began observing the stars, there were only seven
planets visible but twelve zodiac constellations. At that time Pisces was ruled by Jupiter,
who is also Sagittarius’s ruler. Jupiter is called the Greater Benefic, and both Pisces and
Sagittarius are blessed by his protection. The bountiful generosity of Jupiter and the desire
to help humanity is part of the Piscean nature. In 1846 the planet Neptune was discovered,
and after observation, astrologers assigned this misty planet as Pisces’s second ruler. Mist
is a good metaphor for Pisces, who enjoys an inner world where there is a constant pink
haze of emotion and creativity.
Neptune is also a planet that symbolizes spiritual hopes and dreams. In ancient
mythology Neptune (known as Poseidon in Greek) was the god of the sea. The symbol for
the planet Neptune in astrology is similar to the trident Neptune carried. Navigation in
ancient times was precarious, and the changeable nature of Neptune held the fate of sailors
in his hands. Would they reach dry land or be cast adrift into the depths? Such uncertainty
could also be applied to Pisces. There is something elusive and a bit absentminded about Pisces that can be very endearing, yet some may feel they don’t quite understand her. If
Pisces is in touch with her soul’s purpose and evolvement, she understands compassion
more than any other sign does. If Pisces is adrift, however, then she tends to languish in her
sensitivities and desires. These tendencies are also symbolized by the two Fish: one
reaching upward toward the outside world, and the other downward, toward dreams and the
inner self.
As a mutable sign, Pisces is flexible and goes with the flow. Instead of making a decision,
Pisces may say “whatever.” Decisions will creep up on her before she realizes what she is
going to do. This passive approach has some drawbacks for her self-care: it may be too
easy for her to float along, rather than guide the ship. Typically, Pisces also has trouble with
time schedules. She rarely wears a watch and has to be in the rhythm of something before
she can get to appointments on time. Self-Care and Pisces
The first action in self-care for Pisces is to create comfort, order, color, and cleanliness in
her home. Pisces is a natural at organization; this may be her way of creating a world on dry
land that feels secure and controllable. Pisces can easily become overwhelmed by oceans
of feelings, so knowing exactly where everything is soothes her.
A facet of the Pisces character that may be counterproductive to good self-care is that
she can be easily swayed by the opinions of others. Unless she was raised with good
nutrition and health habits, she takes a while to understand that taking care of herself
requires effort and planning. She is particularly lax about eating regularly and though she is
a water sign (and many water signs tend to prefer salty over sugary flavors), she can
develop quite a sweet tooth. Additionally, Neptune, Pisces’s ruler, also rules all drugs and
alcohol. Any of the signs can have a tendency toward overindulgence, but Pisces’s
sensitivity and desire to retreat from the world can lead her to seek solutions or comfort in
alcohol or other vices.
A far better way for Pisces to handle life’s stresses is through a commitment to natural
and alternative health practices. The first step is to straighten out her diet and fill in any
holes in her vitamin or nutrient needs with supplements. Self-care regarding diet is
necessary for everyone, but due to Pisces’s especially sensitive system, she needs to take
special care in good nutritional habits.
Another essential self-care practice for Pisces is to set aside “space out” time. This can
be with music, meditation, or a walk in the country, or by coloring abstract designs in a
coloring book. Pisces needs a controllable place to go for relaxation. While some signs
flourish when spending a lot of their time socializing, Pisces quickly runs out of steam. To
recoup her energies, she needs to be alone and in an unchallenging environment.
Pisces usually enjoys exercise as long as the surroundings are pleasant. She does well
in sports because she has a natural sense of rhythm. Water sports are a great activity for
her. She also enjoys horseback riding and aerobic dance, which also involve rhythm. In fact
some of the greatest ballet dancers throughout history have been Pisces. Tai chi and gentle
martial arts also appeal to her. Exercise such as this is where Pisces can effortlessly go with
the flow.
Psychological self-care is also crucial for Pisces. Learning to articulate her feelings, such
as through visits with a therapist, helps her move those feelings from silent worry to a
definitive problem she can then solve. A sympathetic therapist who is in tune with Pisces’s
sensitivity will ensure counseling has a good effect. Pisces Rules the Feet
Pisces rules over the feet. As the sign most connected to spirituality, Pisces needs her
feet to be healthy in order to stay grounded on the earth. Comfortable shoes are a number
one self-care item. For a Pisces woman, high heels are the enemy; eventually her feet will
suffer long-term effects. Choose comfort over glamour, and consider orthotics if your feet
are especially prone to soreness.
A weekly foot rub is a very good self-care practice for Pisces. She should also consider
trying reflexology. Targeting specific organs in the body through different pressure points on
the feet, reflexology is a simple practice that can ease many aches, pains, and negative
emotions. Pisces should also pamper her feet with regular pedicures. The goal here is for
Pisces to feel as comfortable on the ground as she does in the imagination. Pisces and Self-Care Success
A potential pitfall to Pisces’s continuing self-care is her forgetfulness. Pisces just might
forget what her program is, or become lost in a poem until hours have passed and she has
missed dinner. A beeper clock or watch, or a special alarm on a smartphone, is a great
solution. Pisces can also get a lot of use out of a smart watch that can be programmed to
send out reminders. Besides keeping Pisces on schedule, a smart watch can keep track of
how much of her time was spent doing certain things that day. This will help orient Pisces
and give her an idea of how her daily schedule is working out.
A second pitfall to good self-care is dependence on drugs or alcohol. Ruled by Neptune,
Pisces is prone to indulgence that can turn into dependence. She should be very mindful of
how much she drinks, et cetera. By keeping track of this, she will be able to understand how
often she turns to these substances and why. Working with a doctor can also be helpful if
Pisces feels she is unable to determine whether she is using drugs or alcohol responsibly.
The tendency to overuse drugs or alcohol is not due to a weakness in Pisces’s character. In
fact it is the strength of her sensitivities in a world that does not always value feelings that
can push Pisces toward these substances. By using her own sensitive feeling mechanism,
Pisces can discover better ways to manage and express her individuality.
Lastly, for Pisces who are actively involved in caretaking professions such as nursing,
social work, or counseling, it is easy to become overinvolved with other people’s problems.
Not only is Pisces an effective caregiver, but she also absorbs the energies of the person
she is working with, which depletes her own energies over time. Learning to release the
lingering thoughts and feelings after work ensures that Pisces practices the self-care that
she preaches to others.
Pisces offers the final gift of the zodiac with her compassion and service to others. When
Pisces learns that serving herself can magnify her ability to both help others and feel good
all around, she provides a perfect model of self-care for friends and family. So let’s take a
look at some restorative self-care activities designed especially for you, Pisces. PART 2 SELF-CARE RITUALS
______ FOR ______
PISCES Treat Your Feet
Pisces rules the feet, so it is especially important for her to practice personal wellness routines that include foot care. Healthy, happy feet
will keep Pisces well grounded. A frequent pedicure is a must; you
can invest in trips to a spa, or get your own foot spa for easy home
use.
Give your feet plenty of time to soak in the warm water and expel
dirt and oils. Then use a pumice stone and natural lotions to remove
dead skin cells and hydrate your skin. If you wish, go one step
further and apply an aqua blue nail polish. This shade will look
elegant, while also displaying your special connection to the ocean. Get Motivated
If you find that you are feeling unmotivated to work out, start by listening to your favorite music to get amped up. Sometimes just
feeling the beat can jump-start your energy level and get your blood
flowing. If you are working out at home, you may even want to try
dancing around as your entire workout. Dancing for 30 minutes is
great cardio. Just blast your favorite tunes and let your body move
naturally. Mix up the playlist tempo to keep things interesting. No
slow songs allowed! Savor Seafood Chowder
Pisces is quite the daydreamer. Constantly moving between creative
ideas and deep emotions, she easily becomes lost in her own inner
world. While this sets the stage for many of the things that make her
so special, Pisces should also practice living in the moment. Root
yourself in the present once in a while with a delicious experience.
If you like fish, a warm seafood chowder is the perfect meal for
you, Pisces. Hearty and bursting with different flavors, this chowder
is a tasty blend of comfort food and Pisces’s astrological home, the
ocean. Focus completely on the different ingredients of the meal as
you eat, feeling the dish ease both mind and body into a peaceful,
centered state. Savoring your food will also benefit your digestive
system, which can get upset by fast eating. A healthy gut is a happy
you. Choose Flowing Exercises
As a water sign, you are drawn to fluid movements. When it comes
to exercise, look for things that give your body freedom to move in
the way it wants to. The last thing you want is to be restrained. Try
tai chi or an aerobic dance class. Even Pilates can be soothing for
water signs, as it helps build muscle and keeps you moving in a
natural way. Open Your Third Eye with Aquamarine
Pisces has a unique insight into the metaphysical realm; in fact, many people call her psychic. The perfect crystal for her to have on
hand is aquamarine. This eye-catching blue stone promotes a higher
level of consciousness by opening your third eye chakra.
Located on the forehead, the third eye chakra is an energy source
that connects you to insight and subconscious knowledge. By
opening this chakra, you can tap into a higher awareness of what
drives you, your loved ones, and your community. Keeping an
aquamarine crystal with you will help you turn creative ideas into
actionable plans for the future.
Aquamarine can also be used to balance your emotions. As you
release negative feelings, the powers of aquamarine will draw a
sense of happiness and optimism to you. You can keep aquamarine
in your pocket, display it in a central part of your home, or even wear
it on a necklace or other piece of jewelry so it is always on hand. Stick to a Routine
Routine can be boring for a water sign, but it is key to a solid self- care regimen. It may take discipline to stick to a routine, but without
a well-constructed plan, apathy will take over and you’ll find yourself
doing nothing to improve your overall wellness. Make sure you vary
your activities to keep things fresh and new. It may help to buy a
large desk calendar and mark off when you are doing what activity.
This will help keep you on track and will take any indecisiveness off
the table. Read Poetry
Poetry is one of the simplest yet deepest forms of self-expression. As an emotional and creative sign, Pisces will delight in exploring the
passionate words of a poem. In fact she may even be inspired to
write some poetry of her own!
Try reading poems by a kindred Pisces spirit. Ruled by misty
Neptune, Pisces is a puzzle that few fully understand. So who better
to tap into your unique experience than a fellow Pisces? Famous
Pisces poets include W.H. Auden, Elizabeth Barrett Browning, and
Dr. Seuss. Make Water a Part of Your Life
You may think that all water signs are naturally drawn to water in every capacity, but this isn’t necessarily true. Every water sign is
different and has different preferences. While most water signs take
comfort in water-based activities, such as swimming, diving, and
water aerobics, others prefer to simply be near water, but not in it.
Wherever you fall on this spectrum, water is an important grounding
mechanism for you. It calms you, makes you feel safe, and helps
orient you when you are feeling lost. Make water a part of your life in
whatever way you feel most comfortable. Put Those Feet Up!
Because Pisces rules the feet, a footstool would be a great addition to your décor or gift for a fellow Pisces. Pisces is often susceptible to
problems with her feet, so having a soft spot where she can put them
up, take some of the pressure off, and relax is right in line with her
needs. For perfect Pisces style, look for fabrics in oceanic blues and
greens, and the cozier and plusher the fabric, the better. Pisces
loves the cozy factor! Cuddle Up in Chenille
Pisces is known for being sensitive, and so is drawn to soft textures that soothe her soul and comfy surroundings that make her feel safe.
Because of this desire to feel comfortable and cozy, Pisces tends to
decorate her home in fabrics that elicit that feeling. Chenille fits this
bill perfectly for Pisces. The feathery fabric is soft and silky with an
almost velvety touch, perfect for wrapping around yourself and
cuddling in. Invest in some chenille blankets for your home and your
Pisces nature will thank you! Stretch
The type of exercise you do as a water sign is very important. Many water signs have smooth muscles that do not usually bulk up, so
doing exercises that are designed to add heft to your muscle won’t
be particularly beneficial. Instead, you should look for exercises that
stretch your muscles, such as yoga. You don’t even have to go to a
yoga class to try it out. There are plenty of online videos for beginner
yogis to try—just stick to the basics.
If yoga isn’t your favorite, you can still make stretching an
essential part of your wellness routine by stretching before and after
every workout. It may even help to do some gentle stretches before
bed to keep your muscles limber and flexible. Play with Bubbles
Pisces is playful, without a doubt. She loves fantasizing about imaginary realms and sees the world with the same delight as a
child. So why not indulge your childlike side and play with some
bubbles? Buy a bubble gun and amuse yourself and any nearby kids
with a flood of beautiful bubbles. Enjoy the soapy watery texture,
watch the calming peaceful orbs float up to the sky, and create
fantastical stories of where they might be going and who they might
meet. Immerse yourself in the pure, simple joy of bubbles. Watch Your Salt (and Water)
You’ve probably heard that our bodies are made up of more than 50 percent water. Water signs tend to hold on to water more than other
signs do, which means they often have a softness to their faces and
bodies. It may seem counterproductive, but drinking the right amount
of water daily may, in certain circumstances, help reduce water
retention, as well as flush toxins. Sometimes our bodies retain water
in response to dehydration. Try to meet the recommended guidelines
for how much water you should drink every day (depending on sex,
lifestyle, climate, and health).
You can also watch how much salt you consume. Too much
sodium (either in table salt or processed foods and soft drinks)
increases your risk of water retention. If you do experience water
retention symptoms, visit your doctor for advice. Enjoy a Cup of Cocoa
Sometimes Pisces just needs to have a little alone time. What better way to spend a chilly evening than under your favorite blanket with a
nice cup of hot chocolate? Add a spoonful of hazelnut spread, some
vanilla extract, or top your mug off with some mini-marshmallows;
you can personalize your mini-hibernation treat however you like! It’s
really about enjoying some relaxing time inside when it’s too cold to
be outside. This chilly night in will be the perfect chance to unwind.
Put on your favorite playlist and just sit back and sip that chocolaty
goodness. Watch Your Favorite Tearjerker
It’s okay to be emotional, Pisces. Every now and then, you just need
a good, cathartic cry. You can achieve such a release in a private
setting by setting up your very own movie night or Sunday afternoon
matinee. This gives you the chance to relax on your couch and have
a good cry—with plenty of Kleenex and snacks within reach.
Whether your melancholy mood has you queueing up a classic or a
recent release, it’s time to turn off the lights and turn on the
waterworks. Allowing yourself the opportunity to express your
emotions is important for your overall well-being. Being able to do it
while enjoying your favorite movie stars act is a win-win for
everyone. Turn to Nature
Stress happens to everyone; it’s how you handle it that makes a difference. For water signs the best way to beat stress is to retreat to
a safe space: nature. If you have the opportunity to spend time by a
body of water, like a creek, river, or, ideally, the beach, do so as often
as possible. Just listen to the sound the water makes as it moves,
lapping against rocks or sand, and let the stress melt away from your
muscles. If you don’t have easy access to a body of water, download
and listen to some water sounds outside. It’s not quite the same, but
it will mimic the calming experience of being by the water. Collect Sea Glass
Sea glass at a literal level is just pieces of glass that have been washed back onto the shore, but symbolically it is so much more
than that. Sea glass begins as something discarded and broken,
deemed useless. But then it is weathered, its sharp edges are worn
away and smoothed out, and it is reborn again on the shore as
something different. This rebirth from the sea resonates deeply with
Pisces and her affinity to the water. It also sparks her empathetic
personality and reminds her of how interactions with others can
shape her in ways that she may never have thought possible.
Collect some sea glass next time you are by the shore, and
display it in a clear glass bowl in your home. Place it somewhere the
light can shine through it and illuminate the myriad colors, a reminder
of how you, too, can weather a storm and emerge as something
beautiful. Laugh As Much As Possible
Laughter can soothe the soul, especially the soul of a weary water sign. You tend to feel deeply, and need a healthy release to let go of
those heavy emotions. Laughter can be that release. If you don’t
laugh, you may start to get bogged down with too many negative
feelings. The only way to survive in life is to see the comedy in
things. Water signs are especially good at this, but, sometimes, they
need a little push. When you are feeling down, go to a funny movie
or seek out a stand-up comedian putting on a show. Decorate with Mermaids
Pisces likes to have her love of the sea reflected in her home décor. It wouldn’t be uncommon to see images of seashells, starfish, corals,
the ocean, or other aquatic themes in her home. So, when
decorating your bathroom, bring a bit of the sea into the room with
some mermaids. Mermaids are particularly good for decorating a
bathroom where you get ready in the morning, because they
represent independence, confidence, and the power to look deeper
into a situation. These powerful sea guardians represent not only the
beauty of the ocean but also its fierce strength, a fitting motivation for
Pisces as she gets ready to tackle her day. Avoid Crowds
You are a sensitive soul, water sign, one who tends to absorb the vibrations and energy coming from other people. Because of this, it’s
best for you to avoid large crowds, especially if you are feeling
vulnerable or sad. Being in a large group of strangers will just
exacerbate those negative feelings you are struggling with, and may
even make you feel more alone than you already do. Instead, stay
home and allow yourself some quality relaxation time. Give yourself
permission to lounge around and be lazy. Enjoy your own company! Illuminate Your Home with Stained Glass
Pisces loves stained-glass windows, and this is fitting considering this sign rules faith and churches. Bring this element of your sign into
your home by buying a panel of stained glass. A form of stained
glass that can hang in a window—or some other place that can catch
the natural light and filter it into your home—would be the best, as
opposed to a stained-glass lamp or other ornamentation. When the
sun hits the glass, beams of color will burst into your home, filling it
with a magical glow. Look for glass panels with aquatic themes to
bring your water nature into your décor. Wash It Off
As a water sign, you are used to being affected by other people’s energy and the energy of the atmosphere around you. It is essential
for your emotional health that you wash away any feelings you may
have absorbed from others throughout the day. Make a point to take
a shower or bath every night to cleanse your emotional aura. You
may even find dry brushing before you bathe to be beneficial. Not
only does dry brushing help loosen and remove dead skin from your
body, it can be a wonderfully cathartic experience for water signs,
especially if you envision the ritual as also sloughing away any
emotional burdens you have picked up over the past few hours. Embrace Your Duality in Your Décor
One of the symbols of Pisces depicts the two Fish tied together but swimming in opposite directions, signifying the duality of this sign.
Pisces is very adaptive and can make herself at home in almost any
situation and with any group of people. She can often be a mediator
between two different sides, and her dual nature allows her to see
both sides of a situation. Embrace this dual nature of your sign by
decorating with things that represent both your affinity to the sea and
your life on land. Try images of mermaids on land, the shore where
the ocean meets the sand, or waterfalls cascading down
mountainsides. Set Good Bathroom Vibes
Make your bathroom into the oasis you deserve! Having the perfect
vessel to indulge your watery tendencies is essential for a water
sign’s self-care. Invest in a deep tub for your bathroom that you can
soak in when you are feeling stressed—the deeper and roomier the
better. Buy luxurious bubble baths and bath bombs to use when you
draw a bath. Additionally, make sure that you have good water
pressure for your shower. Lastly, choose bathroom tile that reflects
water themes and colors, such as light blue, white, and green. Enjoy a Bit of Chocolate
Like the sea, there are many layers to complicated Pisces. She loves to look beneath the surface and discover that not everything is
as it seems. That’s why when looking for the perfect chocolate
confection for your sign, you should try a liqueur-filled chocolate.
Though many water signs may prefer less sweet flavors, Pisces can
often get a hankering for sugary treats (just another layer to her
complicated personality). Sweet on the outside with a little kick
within, liqueur-filled chocolates perfectly suit your Pisces nature. Plus
they are delicious and indulgent, and what Pisces wouldn’t love that? Keep It Simple
When it comes to fashion, water signs like to keep things simple and classic. Their favorite colors for clothing are muted tones, like
navy blue, black, gray, and white, along with pops of color, like
turquoise. Once a water sign finds a style that they are comfortable
with, they’ll stick to it. Changing their style requires a lot of energy, so
it’s easier for them to stay with what works.
Don’t be surprised if it takes you a little while to get acclimated to
a new fashion accessory or style of dressing. If you get the urge,
though, do try out something new. You can always go back to your
favorite staple items if you are uncomfortable. Add a Scarf
Pisces is known for her flowy, soft, and comfortable style. She is not
up for the ordinary in terms of fashion and is usually on the lookout
for unique and artsy accessories that are still on the simple,
sophisticated side. A fabulous scarf would be an ideal piece for
Pisces as it perfectly suits her romantic and dreamy taste. In spring
go for a bright scarf draped casually around your neck, and in the
wintertime go for a comfy cowl scarf, which also appeals to Pisces’s
love of warmth and coziness. Do Nighttime Activities
Some water signs are morning people, but most thrive in the nighttime hours. That’s because the night calls to water signs. It is
dark and peaceful, and they often feel that they are protected when
the sun is down. If you are feeling vulnerable, plan a nighttime
activity, such as stargazing, watching fireworks, or going for a simple
drive or walk around your neighborhood with a friend. The key is to
take some time to appreciate the quiet and calm that come with the
evening hours, allowing the shift from chaotic day to tranquil night to
ease your mind. Try Some Poppy Seeds
Not only does the poppy flower symbolize imagination, a concept near and dear to Pisces, but the seeds of the flower may have
tremendous health benefits for Pisces (providing she is not allergic to
poppy seeds). Poppy seeds contain a unique combination of calcium
and manganese that may prove beneficial for muscle function and
bone health.
In addition, poppy seeds may help improve mental health by
regulating neurotransmitters that can improve cognition. So get more
poppy seeds into your diet. Try them on bagels, in muffins, in salad
dressings, or added to dishes such as chicken salad or oatmeal. Be
aware, though, that consumption of poppy seeds before a toxicology
screening can result in a false positive test. Sail Off to Sleep
Fortunately, water signs tend to fall asleep relatively easily, but they
can sometimes become distracted if their environment isn’t
conducive to sleep. At night it’s beneficial to use room-darkening
curtains to keep any light from creeping in. Water signs like to sleep
in complete darkness, and may even find it difficult to sleep if their
room isn’t pitch black. Using blackout shades and dark heavy
curtains will help make your bedroom cozy and dark, just the way
water signs like it. Alternatively, you may consider using a sleeping
mask to prevent any light from bothering you while you sleep. Get Cozy
There’s nothing quite like taking a long bath or shower and then snuggling up in a thick bath towel. For water signs self-care means
pampering yourself with luxury whenever you can. A simple way to
do this is to invest in high-quality towels or a robe that you can wear
after you’ve washed away any negative emotions from the day. The
soft, fluffy material will help you feel safe and protected. If you have
the opportunity, consider buying a towel warmer as well. Try a Taste of Caviar
Pisces loves the wildly romantic and often indulges her cravings. Champagne and caviar? Yes, please! But caviar is more than just a
decadent treat for Pisces. It also resonates with her love of all things
related to the salty sea, and is a food that can help her mental state
as well. Pisces, because of her empathy and compassion, is often
susceptible to depression. Historically, caviar was once prescribed to
alleviate depression. In fact recent studies show that caviar has high
doses of omega-3 fatty acids, which may improve mood. So find
your happy, quite literally, with caviar. Go It Alone
When it comes to sports and leisure, water signs tend to do best with activities that take place outside and don’t involve a lot of
people. This means that team sports aren’t always the best option
for you. Water signs should avoid recreational leagues that attract a
lot of people. Instead, they do better with low-pressure activities that
focus on nature, such as walking, hiking, and climbing. You may find
that you, as a water sign, don’t really like competition, and there’s
absolutely nothing wrong with that.
Find an activity out in nature that suits you best. If you feel like
you want some company, invite a few trusted friends along to join
you. Feel the Luxurious Softness of Velvet
Pisces loves the feeling of coziness, and in wintertime would rather stay in her cavern of soft warm blankets than venture out into the
cold air. But as she can’t remain a hermit all winter long (although
wouldn’t that be nice!), Pisces should indulge in a velvet jacket when
she does venture out into the brisk weather. The plush and luxe
fabric of velvet matches perfectly with Pisces’s love of opulence, and
its softness and warmth resonate with her love of the cozy and
comforting. So, if you must go out into the cold of winter, wrap
yourself in velvet and feel the luxury of this distinctively soft fabric. Get Cooking
Cooking and baking are wonderful outlets for water signs, though when given the choice, they tend to stick to the basics they’ve
already mastered rather than experiment with new recipes. After all,
if you have a handful of staple dishes that you know you can create
easily and well, why would you want to try something new and risk it
tasting terrible? Comfort food in particular appeals to a hungry water
sign. Everything from macaroni and cheese to mashed potatoes and
pancakes are usually big hits. So, why not keep your
experimentation to your preferences, and buy a comfort food
cookbook that can help expand your repertoire of recipes? Take a Beach Vacation
Indulge the innate connection you have to water by taking a vacation to an island or near a beach. Being by the water will help
recharge your batteries when you are feeling depleted. The warm
weather in most tropical locations is perfect for a water sign who is
hoping to lounge by the beach or pool and let their worries fade
away.
Look for vacation destinations that also include water activities,
such as lessons in paddle boarding or snorkeling, to help you
connect with your element. If you can swing an all-inclusive resort,
you’ll get even more bang for your buck, with food, lodging,
entertainment, and drinks included. Spice Up a Meal with Star Anise
Many Pisces enjoy the flavor of star anise. Though many water signs tend to avoid spicier foods, Pisces can take a bit of heat, and a
small amount of a spice like star anise is just the thing to inspire her
creativity without knocking her watery nature out of balance.
Not to be confused with anise seed (and not Japanese star anise,
which is actually poisonous), Chinese star anise is often used in
Asian cooking and provides a warm, licorice flavor to dishes. Star
anise appeals to Pisces’s love of the exotic, and it is also filled with
antioxidants and antibacterial properties that benefit her health as
well. Include some in your favorite muffins or soup recipe. Find Some Privacy
You may have noticed that, as a water sign, you need quiet and privacy to get your work done. When it comes to your job, you will be
more productive working in a cubicle or by yourself than in an openplan office or large group. You tend to get overwhelmed when you
have too many people around you, so when you really need to
concentrate, try retreating to your own secluded space. This will help
keep you away from all the hustle and bustle, and limit your
distractions.
When you feel the need to talk to others, a communal kitchen or
break room is your ideal space. This is where you can comfortably
mingle with coworkers before going back to your cubbyhole to get
some work done. If you have a job where a group environment is
highly valued, try speaking to your supervisor and letting them know
how you work best. You might be surprised by how understanding
they will be! Get Out on a Boat
It’s no surprise that Pisces loves the water and that the ideal spot for
her to unwind would be on a boat. Got a special occasion coming up
that you want to celebrate with family and friends? Hire a yacht for a
night of luxury and fun on the seas. Yacht not in your budget? How
about renting a canoe from a livery for a trip with friends? No matter
how you do it, getting out on the water in a boat is an ideal activity
for this water sign and one that will make you feel relaxed and in
your zone. Seek Out a Sauna or Steam Room
The benefits of a sauna or steam room go far beyond simple stress relief. Sitting in a sauna or steam room can improve your circulation,
ease muscle pain, and help with some skin problems. For water
signs, taking a sauna is a great way to cleanse the soul and calm the
mind. Look to see if a local gym or spa has one you can use. Sit and
let the dry heat of the sauna or the hot steam of the steam room
surround you and loosen the stress in your body.
If you don’t have access to a stream room, you can create your
own budget version by turning your shower on hot for a few minutes,
shutting the door and windows, and letting the room fill with steam.
Sit in a towel and enjoy the sensation of moisture floating all around
you! Take Ice-Skating Lessons
Even frozen water has a special place in a water sign’s heart. Just because you can’t see the water moving and hear it lapping doesn’t
mean it is any less soothing or refreshing! In fact, ice can be
invigorating for a water sign. Try embracing your cold side by taking
beginners’ ice-skating lessons. A number of world-class ice-skaters
have been water signs. If you already have had some practice and
aren’t in the mood for a full lesson, try going to a local skating rink
and just skate on your own for a little while. You may find that the
smooth cut of the blade over ice soothes you. Take a Houseboat Vacation
Contact with the water is essential for Pisces. Not only does she find
it peaceful and relaxing, but it helps ground her and gives her an
inner feeling of contentment. So next time you are planning a
vacation, why not consider renting a houseboat? From a houseboat
you can better enjoy the serenity of the water you are on, and you
get to experience the lake, river, or sea firsthand. In addition the
rocking sensation of the water under the boat is soothing for Pisces,
and can be just what she needs if she is having sleeping problems.
A houseboat also perfectly suits Pisces’s escapist personality. If
she gets bored of her current location or the people in it, she can
start the engine and venture off to another destination. Unleash Your Inner Ballet Dancer
Neptune, Pisces’s ruling planet, is also the planet that governs dance, so it’s only natural that Pisces would love ballet. Not only
does Pisces love going to watch the ballet, but she has a natural
talent for it as well. A workout with fluid motion is ideal for Pisces,
and one that enables her to show and release emotion is right up her
alley. Look into your local health club or even online videos for balletfocused workouts. You will get a great dose of exercise, but you’ll
also feel the cathartic release of expressing your feelings through
motion. Find Luck with Seahorses
The seahorse is a sacred symbol to Neptune in Roman mythology, and with just cause. The seahorse has long been considered a
symbol of good luck, and stories from ancient times told of how
seahorses would safely guide drowned sailors to their places in the
afterlife. In fact sailors would often use images of seahorses as good
luck charms. Known as a calm and patient creature, the seahorse
reminds you to enjoy who you are and be patient with yourself. Try
adding seahorse motifs to your home for beauty and luck, and if you
ever find an actual seahorse, that is especially lucky! Learn Something New
Mentally, water signs can understand a whole concept quickly because they intuitively feel it, rather than logically piece it together.
The details are not important to them; all they need is to trust their
gut and the emotions they are feeling inside. Their empathy is what
helps them understand.
Use this superpower by learning something new—topics like
philosophy and religion are a great place for water signs to start.
These categories often require your ability to grasp a larger concept
and understand things at a holistic level, rather than memorize
detailed facts and figures. You may even find it beneficial to watch
documentaries or listen to lectures in addition to reading a book—
whatever sparks your passion! Buy Fashion for Your Legs
Pisces rules the feet, so it is no surprise that fashion for the feet and legs is a delight for her. Not only are comfortable shoes in an array of
colors and styles a must for Pisces, but so are colorful socks, tights,
leggings, and other kinds of stockings. The more unique and
whimsical the better, as Pisces loves fun and flirty accents that give
her classic wardrobe a touch of excitement without going over the
top. Try finding clothing in your signature colors of sea-green, blues,
and other pastels to make the look truly Pisces-worthy. Try a Boxing Workout
While water signs don’t usually respond well to exercises that require a lot of repetition, a boxing workout is definitely an exception.
In fact, a few world champion boxers over the years have been water
signs. Boxing workouts are a great emotional and physical release if
you’ve been feeling stressed or angry. The power and strength you’ll
feel when you learn with an expert to kick, punch, and duck properly
will keep you coming back to the gym for more. Initially, you may find
it difficult to get used to the new motions, but once your body adapts,
boxing training is actually a very fluid activity, perfect for water signs!
Look into beginners’ classes in your local area. Pick Up a Good Book
As an emotional and reflective sign, Pisces needs plenty of time alone to relax and recharge her batteries. One of the best ways to
unwind is by reading a book. Pisces will delight in getting lost in a
great story, setting her many thoughts aside for a few hours and
refocusing them on an intriguing plot. But what books will Pisces
enjoy?
Pisces is a romantic and nurturing sign, so she loves tales of love
—from passionate affairs to the bond between a parent and child.
With her special gift of insight, she is also unafraid to explore themes
that will make her think. The masterful works of Pisces authors such
as Victor Hugo and Amy Tan may top her list. Indulge in Rainy Days
Some water signs prefer moody, cool, gray weather to bright sunshine. If you have the opportunity, indulge in a rainy day by
staying inside, snuggling up on the couch, and listening to the rain
beating down outside. You may choose to read a book or listen to
music, whatever feels right. If you are feeling adventurous, you may
even want to go for a walk in the rain. Make sure you have the right
equipment—every water sign should have a decent raincoat and pair
of rain boots. Check the weather forecast often to stay ahead of any
potential rainy days. Express Your Feelings
You feel so deeply, water sign, it’s only natural that sometimes your emotions spill over and become overwhelming. Water signs are often
receptive and inwardly focused. While you are very good at
recognizing your feelings, you find it difficult to express them to
others. You have trouble articulating what’s inside. Instead, you
would prefer that your loved ones just understand what you are
feeling rather than having to explain it to them.
Practice expressing your emotions by keeping a journal. At least
once a day, preferably at night after you’ve spent the day processing
emotions, write down how you feel. If you are struggling with where
to begin, start with the words I feel and go from there. Remember
that no one will ever read this journal unless you want them to, so
don’t feel self-conscious. Just write what feels natural. Keep Photo Memories
Scrapbooks, photo albums, and iPhone picture galleries are all treasures to water signs. They love to flip through their favorite
memories and reminisce about old times or relive their happiest
moments.
Spend time putting together collections of photos that chronicle
each part of your life. You can organize them in whatever way feels
right to you. The goal is to make sure you are surrounded by your
most cherished memories at all times. You may even consider
putting together a photo collage that you can frame and hang on the
wall. You can indulge your love of photos even further by creating a
scrapbook or online photo book for your loved ones on their
birthdays. The personal touch will bring tears and smiles. Ground Yourself with Bach’s Clematis
Dreamy Pisces always has her head in the clouds. While this is great for sparking new ideas and creating moving works of art,
sometimes a little extra focus is in order. Clematis essence is the
perfect nature aid for gently bringing you back to reality so you can
concentrate on the here and now.
The essence of this simple white flower can be found diluted in
the original Bach Flower Remedies. Try adding a couple of drops of
Bach’s clematis remedy to a glass of water (follow the directions on
the bottle) and drinking slowly. (The Bach Flower Remedies are
available online.) Embrace Your Sentimental Side
Whether they are celebrating birthdays, Christmas, or Valentine’s Day, water signs love the holidays and any happy occasion. You
especially love the sentimentality of tradition. Think about all the
ways you can participate in holiday or birthday customs with the
people you love. This may mean cooking a special meal for
everyone, setting up decorations, or just spending time catching up
with family and friends. Use your creative side to start new traditions,
and encourage your loved ones to get involved. These rituals will
help you feel closer to the people you cherish most. Try Hypnotherapy
Pisces is connected to the subconscious. A great way to tap further into your subconscious is through hypnotherapy. Hypnotherapy
facilitates access to this part of the brain by quieting your
consciousness so that those deeper thoughts and feelings can be
heard. A trained hypnotherapist will use calming techniques to move
you into a completely relaxed state, where you can dive into your
subconscious. By discovering your deepest drives and fears, you
can then move toward managing them in ways that aid your overall
growth.
In fact hypnotherapy may help relieve many ailments, from anxiety
and insomnia, to chronic pain and addictive habits. If you are
considering hypnotherapy, ask your doctor for local
recommendations. Make Water a Part of Your Sleep Routine
While many water signs don’t have trouble falling asleep, you may find that turning on a sound machine that features the sounds of rain,
waves, or running water will make you feel more relaxed when you
are drifting off to dreamland. Some water signs find that they are
distracted by their emotions when they are trying to go to sleep.
They replay things that happened throughout the day and relive how
those things made them feel instead of quieting their minds. Sound
machines can help focus your mind and ward off any distractions.
Simply breathe deeply and listen to the sounds around you, and
you’ll be asleep in no time. Strike a Fish Pose
The Fish Pose is the perfect yoga position for Pisces, as it connects her to her astrological symbol, the Fish, and also increases flexibility
while opening up the heart chakra. The heart chakra is responsible
for emotions and your connection to others. As a compassionate
sign, Pisces benefits from balancing her feelings and being mindful
of the give and take within her relationships.
To do this pose, lie on your back with your knees bent and feet on
the floor. Lift your pelvis slightly off the floor, sliding your hands,
palms down, under your rear. On an inhale, with slightly bent elbows,
press your forearms and elbows firmly against the floor and begin to
lift your chest, creating an arch in the upper back. Draw your
shoulder blades into your back and lift your upper torso and head
away from the floor. Tilt your head back, resting it lightly on the yoga
mat. Pause for three breaths. Inhale and slightly raise your head off
the floor. Then gently lower your torso and head back onto the floor
as you exhale. Stay Grounded
It is important for water signs to live close to water (or visit it as often
as possible) as a way of staying grounded. A view of some body of
water from your home window will orient you and keep you stable,
especially when you are feeling vulnerable or overwhelmed by your
emotions. Seeing water can bring balance to your life that you would
otherwise miss. The closer you can get to the water, the better.
Watch out for high-rise apartments, though, even if they have a great
view of water in the distance. Being up high can make water signs
feel lost and aimless, as if they have no roots. Keep It Candid
Pisces puts her feet to good work, always being on the move. While you don’t want life to pass you by, you should also take a moment to
capture it. A great way to stay true to your artistic spirit while on the
go is by taking quick candid photos throughout the day. Don’t bother
posing or waiting for the perfect setup—capture the moment in the
moment. You could even start a social media account dedicated to
these photos. While it may seem a little silly, it’s giving you the
opportunity to see everything you do from a different perspective.
These quick snapshots of your daily life will be an artful mosaic for
you to reflect back on. Decorate with Ocean Hues
Your home is a reflection of who you are and what you love. Water signs need a calming and soothing environment to thrive in, and the
first way to accomplish this is to surround yourself with colors that
are reminiscent of water. Look for muted, cool tones like light blue,
gray, and deep green, accented with splashes of vibrant, warm
colors like red and orange. You may even want to try painting a
mural or pattern that makes you think of water on one of your walls.
Above all, your home should be comfortable and familiar to you. Use
color to make it your own. Share Your Signature Cocktail
Pisces loves sharing both her time and favorite treats with her friends and family members. Slip off to an oceanside oasis, and bring
your loved ones along with you, with the sea breeze cocktail. This
tropical refreshment is a delicious companion to any cookout, beach
gathering, or dinner party. It will quickly become watery Pisces’s
signature libation.
To mix up some sea breezes for you and your loved ones, simply
add 8 ounces vodka, 15 ounces cranberry juice, and 6 ounces
grapefruit juice to a cocktail shaker filled with ice. Shake well, and
then pour into a chilled glass and garnish with a frozen lime wedge. Buy an Aquarium
Just because you don’t live right next to a body of water doesn’t mean you can’t make the aquatic a part of your everyday life. One of
the easiest ways to bring the ocean home is to invest in an
aquarium. As a water sign, you’ll find solace in the cool blue ripples
of the water and the fluid movement of the fish swimming by. It’s true
that keeping a healthy aquarium does require research, advice from
experts, money, and time, but the cost is well worth the benefits
you’ll see almost instantly in your mood. Make a To-Do List
As an emotional sign who makes it her personal mission to help everyone around her, Pisces can sometimes become overwhelmed
by the weight of everyone else’s problems, coupled with her own
many feelings. A great way to release some of this stress, and gain
back a feeling of control over your surroundings, is by tackling small
tasks around your home or office. Little chores can pile up fast, and
they weigh on you more than you may realize.
Make a to-do list of easy items and devote your time to crossing
them off one by one. The act of completing things that you may have
set aside in the past alleviates stress, leaving you with a great
feeling of accomplishment. Don’t Go to the Desert
Dry climates don’t suit water signs well. You need to feel moisture in
the air in order to breathe easy. While it’s not advisable for water
signs to live in a dry climate like the desert, if you do, there are
certain things you can try to keep the air around you moist. The
easiest is to research and purchase a humidifier for your home and
run it as needed. This will significantly improve the quality of the air.
You can also look for an essential oil diffuser that uses water,
which not only adds moisture to the air, but also diffuses essential
oils to impact your mood. Experiment with different scents to find the
one that is right for you. Create a Personal Altar
Often described as psychic, Pisces is a sign that lives beyond the borders of the material world. Tap into your higher conscious with a
small personal altar. An altar can be used to connect you to your
spirituality, ward off negative energy, and celebrate the metaphysical.
Create your own altar in your home by decorating a shelf or small
table with candles, healing crystals, and other objects that you feel
deeply linked to. You can also burn sage when meditating at your
altar, as it is a traditional herb in many spiritual practices. Skip the Spicy Foods
Water signs can be picky when it comes to their diet and nutrition. For example, they usually don’t like spicy food and tend to stick to
more muted cuisines, with the exception of salami and cured meats.
The salty taste of these treats appeals to them. In fact, you may find
you have more cravings for salty foods than sweet foods. That’s not
to say you don’t like something sweet every now and again. A small
piece of candy or baked good is all you need. Water signs also love
carbs and will never pass up a piece of pizza when offered, though
they are partial to pizza with meat toppings instead of vegetable
toppings. So listen to your body, skip the spicy, and choose the foods
that most appeal to your taste buds and your nutritional needs. Bon
appétit! Find a Muse
As an artistic sign of the zodiac, Pisces often uses mediums such as painting, drawing, and poetry to express her many intense
emotions. It’s important that you have things that feed your
inspiration. To avoid creative dry spells, seek out a muse that
encourages your artistic side. To find your muse, consider what
speaks to your creative soul. This can be a person, a place, or even
an activity that sparks expression. What ignites your passion? Is
there a place you have visited that made you feel inspired? Is there
someone you look to for motivation? Stay Away from Strong Scents
Have you ever noticed that you are very sensitive to scents and often get headaches or feel nauseated when you are around heavy
perfumes or colognes? Water signs have a very keen sense of smell,
which can be a superpower, but also a hindrance at times. To avoid
being overloaded with an offending smell, it’s best for you to avoid
sharing elevators or enclosed spaces with anyone wearing a heavy
scent. It will stick to your clothes and linger around you all day. You
should especially stay away from the perfume section in any
department stores! Invest in Comfortable Shoes
Pisces rules the feet, so good shoes are an essential part of her wardrobe. The feet are where your being connects to the physical
world. And as a sign who is often lost in daydreams, Pisces should
try to be firmly grounded to reality to avoid forgetting her earthly
commitments and responsibilities. Invest in comfortable footwear,
and consider extra support such as shoe inserts if you find your feet
are easily irritated. You can also learn dozens of foot massage
techniques online to ease pain. Cherish Family Heirlooms
Family is very important to you as a water sign. You take comfort in the familial connections you have, and take pride in your loyalty to
family no matter what. Because of this, your bond to your family only
grows stronger day by day.
Every family is unique and has their own collection of heirlooms
that are passed down from generation to generation. Display your
own family heirlooms proudly. They are a special link to your
ancestors and show off who you truly are. Magnetize Love with a Special Potion
Pisces is a sign of love in every form. From romance to friendship, she is a role model for passion and care. If you find yourself losing a
bit of that loving feeling, whether it is in the wake of a bad experience
or due to stress, draw affection to you with a potpourri love potion. A
love potion uses both natural elements and your inner energy to
evoke love, typically of a romantic nature.
You can make your own by mixing simmering fresh water with
spices, such as cinnamon and clove, and dried petals from flowers
that symbolize love, such as roses, lilacs, or lavender. As you mix
the potion, focus on your goal, envisioning it becoming a reality. Your
home will be filled with the fragrance of love, drawing affection back
into your life! Surround Yourself with Succulents
Succulents are some of the easiest plants to care for—some can grow well in indoor environments and require less frequent watering.
These are the perfect plants for a busy water sign. Jade is a
particularly popular choice—it is known as the lucky tree, or the
money tree, and needs very little care to thrive. The color of the
flowers that bloom from the plant can be either pink or white. Not
only are succulents beautiful to look at, but surrounding yourself with
green is a great way to reduce stress and create a calming, nurturing
environment. Succulents can also increase productivity and
concentration, so consider placing one near your workstation as well. Enjoy a Glass of Red Wine
Red wine is a Pisces favorite. As a romantic sign, Pisces appreciates the seductive scent and taste of a great glass of red
wine. It is also a classic touch in an intimate dinner for two, pairing
perfectly with a pair of glowing candlesticks and a delicious meal.
Set the mood, or romance yourself a little, by sipping your favorite
red wine.
Be sure to savor it through all five senses—maybe even pretend
you are leading a sophisticated wine tasting (from the comfort of
your own home). Delight in the satisfying pop of the wine cork, and
then take in the different scents and appearance of the wine once it
is poured into your glass. Next, slowly sample the flavors and note
the feel of the wine as it warms your throat. For an extra-romantic
twist, try a sparkling wine with fresh fruit garnishes. Meditate Alone
Spiritual practices such as meditation are best done alone for water signs. That’s because meditation is a time of emotional vulnerability,
and water signs are highly sensitive to other people’s energies. If you
are meditating with a group, you may inadvertently absorb other
people’s feelings rather than focus on your own. Instead, find a
comfortable, private area where you can let your guard down and
feel safe. Make sure your meditation spot is relaxing and inviting,
with a soft seat and soothing ambiance. It may help to listen to quiet
music or put on a sound machine to keep you focused. Keep Electronics Out of the Bedroom
Falling asleep can sometimes be difficult for Pisces. As an emotional
sign, she is often filled with many feelings and thoughts throughout
the day, which are hard to quiet when it is time for bed. Keeping your
electronics out of the bedroom at night will remove those tempting
stimulants that keep your mind and body up past bedtime. Also,
avoid using your phone for the last half hour to one hour before bed.
Ensure you get that precious beauty sleep you need. Chase Your Wanderlust
Sticking close to home is a comfort for many water signs. It’s okay to
prefer staying in to going out, but you should try to challenge your
homebody habit by booking a trip somewhere far away every now
and again. You may initially feel anxious about being away from
home, but the excitement of seeing far-off, different lands may
outweigh the discomfort. The good news is, as long as the room you
stay in while traveling is comfortable, you’ll be able to feel safe.
Water signs just need a secure place to rest their heads, and they’ll
be able to enjoy new places without too much worry. Accent Your Spaces with African Violets
African violets are the perfect natural accent for the Pisces home and work space. These beautiful purple flowers symbolize deep,
everlasting love. As a romantic water sign, Pisces is fueled by the
strong relationships she has with partners, friends, and family
members alike. Just like Pisces, the African violet is also linked to
water and feminine energy, including passion and creativity. Keeping
an African violet plant in spaces where you work or create will inspire
your special gift for artistic expression. Adopt a Dog or Cat
The world is broken up into dog people and cat people. While there
are many people who enjoy both types of domesticated animals,
they usually have a preference for one over the other. Water signs
are definitely more cat people, but have been known to fall in love
with small dogs as well.
Cats are independent and curious, traits that water signs
appreciate. Small dogs can be outgoing and rambunctious
(depending on their breed), also characteristics that appeal to a
sometimes moody water sign. The key for water signs is finding a
small animal to share your space with, one that fits well into the
home you’ve already created for yourself. Just make sure to get
expert advice on adopting (and properly caring for) your chosen pet
from a local animal shelter before you commit. Listen to Lute Music
Lute music is very soothing, and Pisces loves calming sounds. The soft, often playful notes of the lute can balance Pisces’s many
emotions. This instrument is also rooted in history as a source of
entertainment for nobility, beginning in ancient Egypt—a touch of
artistic sophistication that Pisces will enjoy. Bring lute music into your
home, specifically to spaces where you relax and recharge. A playlist
of lute music on a low volume provides the perfect backdrop for your
home oasis, helping you feel fully at peace and ready to dive into
your many creative hobbies. Spend Time with Loved Ones
Even though water signs are homebodies, they do like to socialize when the environment is just right. This usually means hanging out
with a small group of close family members or friends. Water signs
need to be surrounded by people they trust to feel comfortable
enough to kick back and relax.
If you aren’t in the mood to venture out beyond your front door,
consider inviting your friends or family over for a small dinner party
where you can all enjoy one another’s company and speak candidly
about your thoughts and emotions. This is a water sign’s dream gettogether! Visit a Reflexologist
As you know, Pisces rules the feet. What you might not know is how
much your feet rule the rest of your body. According to reflexology,
the different areas of your feet correspond to different areas of your
body—from your nose and sinuses to your knees and intestines. If
there is something that is ailing you or you feel unbalanced, book
yourself an appointment with a reflexologist. The reflexologist will
realign your chi, or life force, by working the pressure points on your
feet. The eyes may be the windows to the soul, but your feet could
be the key to soothing that sore throat, relieving your back pain, and
more. Take In a Concert
Live music is invigorating for many water signs. While being in crowds can sometimes be overwhelming for them, the positive
energy of the music can help them overcome that discomfort.
There’s nothing quite like singing along to one of your favorite songs
live. Surrender to the spirit of the music and let it permeate your
being.
If you have the opportunity, look for an outdoor concert where you
can combine your love of nature with the power of live music. During
the summer months you’ll find outdoor music festivals popping up all
over the world that attract a variety of artists and fans. Find one that
speaks to your unique musical taste! Wrap Up in Silk
Silk offers a smooth, watery feel that can calm the mind and help you feel relaxed. As an emotional and compassionate sign, Pisces
can often absorb the feelings of those around her, leaving her feeling
overwhelmed or scrambling to solve everyone’s problems. Wearing a
silk robe is a simple way to ease stress through the powers of touch.
This timeless addition to your lounging wardrobe will be your ticket to
some luxurious alone time. Choose colors that promote peace and a
happy mood, such as light blue or yellow. Attend the Ballet or Opera
As a water sign, you are driven by emotion and feeling. This is why you may feel such an inherent draw toward the performing arts, like
dance and theater. Indulge this love by attending a ballet or opera
performance in your area. Ballet is a beautiful example of the fluidity
of motion, which speaks to water signs on a visceral level, and opera
presents a vivid story through the power of song and language.
Attending the opera can be a very emotional experience for the
audience, so bring your tissues, water sign! Peer Into a Crystal Ball
Pisces is a sign of deep insight—not just into her own subconscious, but into the subconscious of the entire world around her. A crystal
ball isn’t just a fabulous addition to the Pisces home or work space. It
also promotes strong Pisces insight, and delights her love for magic.
Sometimes even psychic Pisces has difficulty seeing through the fog.
Struggling with a decision? Unsure of the answer to a current
dilemma? Simply peer into your crystal ball when your intuitive
powers are in need of a little boost. Create Your Own Water Feature
Running water is soothing to water signs at work and at home. Purchase a small water fountain that you can keep near your desk at
work to help you through stressful moments. When you are feeling
overwhelmed, take a few moments to focus on the sound of the
water and nothing else. You can leave the fountain running all day to
help keep you feeling balanced and calm. If you have space at
home, purchase another water fountain for your living room, or
wherever you spend the most time. The trickling water will keep you
company whenever you need it.
Spending time outdoors is also beneficial for water signs, so look
for a water fountain that can be set up on a deck or in your backyard. Feel Connected with Ylang-Ylang
Pisces is a sign of reflection and daydreams—but it is just as important that she have an open flow of communication with people
in the physical world. As a compassionate water sign, she feels
balanced when her relationships are strong and well cared for. An
ingredient found in many perfumes, ylang-ylang promotes social
connections and a feeling of intimacy in your relationships. You can
very sparingly dab the essential oil (diluted according to instructions;
use with caution if you have sensitive skin) on your neck, or diffuse it
in a communal space such as your living room. It also boosts overall
mood and energy levels (which is helpful when there are things to
do, but your bed is calling your name). Embrace Your Love of History
Water signs love to travel to different times in their imaginations— that’s why historical fiction is the perfect genre for this literary sign.
Why not turn that love of different time periods into an excuse to
actually visit those historical sites?
Make a list of sites that you have always wanted to see, and start
visiting. Studying history requires that you imagine yourself in the
same situations as the people of that time. As a water sign, you are
incredibly empathetic and understanding, so this skill probably
comes easily to you. Use it to your advantage and relive some of the
most important moments in history with your own eyes. Promote Calm with Lotus Flowers
The lotus flower is the perfect image for Pisces to include in her home or office. As a sign filled with emotions and ideas, Pisces can
become overwhelmed by everything racing through her head. Simple
yet eye-catching, the white Japanese lotus encourages calm, and
can be useful in refocusing your mind and quieting all of the thoughts
and feelings that you are experiencing. Frame a photograph of a
lotus to place on your desk or hang in your home, or purchase other
lotus accents to decorate spaces you frequent each day. Trust Your Intuition
Do you sometimes find that you intuitively know what time it is without even checking your watch or phone? That’s because water
signs have a great internal sense of time. You’re probably always
early to your appointments, and don’t even need to set an alarm to
wake up in the morning.
Learn to trust your intuition more in all parts of your life, not just
when it comes to being on time. As a water sign, you can usually
trust your gut instinct. You have a talent for reading situations and
people through how you feel. This is a strength that you can rely on.
Don’t second-guess yourself so much—learn to listen to that voice in
your mind. It’s usually right! Sip Black Tea
Black tea is the perfect daytime beverage for Pisces! Black tea contains caffeine, as well as an amino acid that can help you stay
focused. Daydreamer Pisces can sometimes use this extra boost of
concentration to get things done. Black tea is also full of antioxidants
and may promote a healthy gut, reduce blood pressure, and boost
heart health!
Take a little time to mull things over as you sip the tea before that
energy boost kicks in. You can find many different types of black
teas, from Earl Grey to Darjeeling, so do a little experimenting to find
your favorite. Go to Therapy
While water signs have a lot of emotions swirling around inside, classic therapy might not work for them. They don’t like to get stuck
living in the past, mulling over things that have already happened. To
them, the past is a bottomless well of memory. When it comes to
talking about their feelings, they prefer to focus on targeted
problems. However, they can certainly benefit from the journey.
If you are considering therapy, ask your doctor for
recommendations, and then look around for a therapist who
understands exactly what you are looking to get out of your
sessions. It may take some trial and error, but eventually you’ll find
the right professional and right approach for you. Learn about Edgar Cayce
Ruled by misty Neptune, Pisces is a sign of special insight that some would call psychic. Reconnect with your metaphysical talents
by reading about fellow Pisces, Edgar Cayce. Born in 1877, Cayce
was a clairvoyant and became America’s most well-known trance
medium healer.
During his trances, Cayce would provide readings for people,
including cures for numerous ailments, insight into an individual’s
past lives, and predictions of the future. Over 14,000 of his readings
can be found on record at the Association for Research and
Enlightenment in Virginia Beach, Virginia. His connection to the
metaphysical will both resonate with and fascinate Pisces. Depend on Your Water Friends
Sometimes, in order to really work through a problem, you need to turn to someone who just intuitively understands you. For water
signs this means seeking out other water signs. They are usually just
as good at listening as you are, and can help you work through
whatever is going on in your life at the time. Since water signs are so
sympathetic, they will always be around to lend an ear when you
need it. It is important for water signs to support one another,
especially when it comes to their emotional health and balance. Spritz Rosewater
Romantic Pisces adores roses. From the vibrant color of the petals to the sweet scent, roses are the perfect symbol of Pisces’s favorite
thing: love. And the benefits of the rose extend far beyond a
romantic gesture or pretty centerpiece. In fact many know rosewater
to be an essential beauty potion that works wonders on your skin. A
bit of the water dabbed on the skin helps tighten your pores and
remove excess oils. Combined rosewater and glycerin products are
also available to double the skin benefits.
Additionally, rosewater is also a great natural aid for balancing
emotions. The scent boosts your mood and calms anxious thoughts.
It also helps you feel relaxed, so consider spritzing your pillow before
bed for a restful sleep. No matter your intended use, always have an
atomizer of rosewater handy. Chant Your Way to Calm
As a water sign, you may become easily overwhelmed by a lot of noise, but chanting may have the reverse effect on you if you are
looking to relax and zen out. For centuries Buddhist monks have
used chanting as a way to prepare the mind for meditation. You, too,
can use this ritual to find peace. Repetitive chanting often mimics the
ebb and flow of water, something that innately pleases water signs.
Try researching a few chants that you can use in the comfort of your
own home. When you are ready to meditate, start chanting, and
repeat the words over and over again until a sense of calm sweeps
over you. Give Someone You Love an Orchid
Orchids are Pisces-ruled. With their vibrant colors and exotic appearance, orchids have a long-standing association with love.
Share them with a special someone! It will brighten both of your
days. Compassionate Pisces places great importance in deep,
strong bonds, so she will delight in this simple way of showing
someone how much she cares.
The color of your orchid will also say a lot about your feelings. Go
for yellow when gifting an orchid to a friend, pink for a romantic
partner, orange for that office crush, and purple for someone you
greatly admire. Meditate with Crystals
Employing the help of the right crystal at the right time can do wonders for balancing your energy and emotions. Look for crystals
that are reminiscent of the ocean, such as blue lace agate,
aquamarine, and lapis lazuli. Blue lace agate can calm anxiety and
worry, aquamarine promotes courage and communication, and lapis
lazuli can help you discover the truth about yourself and your life.
When you are meditating, hold the crystal of your choosing in your
hand or close to your heart. Use its energy and power to achieve
your goals, no matter what they are. Share the Wonder of Animals
As an emotional and intuitive sign, Pisces often has a gift when it comes to animals. In fact, some people believe you can
communicate with animals on a deeper level. Pisces’s
compassionate soul also finds sharing with others very rewarding.
As a Pisces, your gentle spirit works especially well with children, so
impart your bond with animals on a child! Whether you take them to
a petting zoo or nearby farm or spend time with animals in a shelter,
it will be an invaluable experience for both of you. Explore Your Artistic Side
Water signs are instinctively very artistic. Tap into your creative side by trying a new craft, such as watercolor painting. Watercolors are a
more forgiving medium for novice painters than oil paints. Try
painting ocean scenes, waterfalls, or lakes. The act of painting can
be very soothing for the artist. If you are struggling at first, you may
find it helps to look at an image to replicate as you paint, or purchase
an acrylic paint-by-numbers kit. Once you’ve gotten the hang of
brushstrokes and color blending, you can create an original piece. Use a Mantra
Caring Pisces values deep relationships with those around her. When she feels disconnected from a loved one, it creates an
imbalance that leaves her unsure. This feeling of instability can
cause Pisces to flee to the metaphysical world and avoid
communication with others altogether. Fortunately, you can ground
yourself and gain back confidence in your relationships by reciting a
special mantra.
A mantra is a unique phrase that you repeat out loud in order to
center yourself and tune out unhelpful thoughts. A great mantra for
Pisces is “Love and compassion will help us all.” Use this mantra to
steady yourself and prevent that urge to flee when you feel uncertain
of a current relationship. Show Off Another Time Period
If you love a particular historical period, consider decorating part of your home with objects from that era. Because of their empathetic
abilities, water signs are able to build worlds in their minds that they
can visit every now and again. Bridge the gap between your reality
and imagination by surrounding yourself with objects that remind you
of another time and place. You could create an American Civil War
room, an ancient Egyptian room, or a Viking room.
If you are more in love with a certain place than a time period,
apply the same principle. Collect objects from that area and put them
on display. Affirm Your Instincts
Pisces has a special gift of insight that those around her admire. But
sometimes unexpected things happen, regardless of how vigilant
she is in reading situations. These bumps in the road can cause
Pisces to doubt her intuition. If you feel that self-doubt creeping in,
you can give yourself a much-needed confidence boost through the
use of an affirmation. An affirmation, written down and revisited as
needed, will serve as a reminder of your abilities.
The perfect affirmation for Pisces is “I trust in my intuition, and
incorporate it in my daily life.” There is a reason people often say
Pisces has a sixth sense. But even the most insightful are not
responsible for predicting every turn life takes you through. This
doesn’t mean your intuition is wrong and you should stop listening to
it, so use your affirmation as a reminder of that fact. Hone Your Photography Skills
As a water sign, you have incredible observation skills and an eye for beauty. This makes you the ideal photographer. You are able to
identify poignancy in any scene, and isolate it with the perfect shot.
You also love to keep copies of all the photographs you take so you
can revisit these moments whenever you want.
To enhance your photography skills, consider investing in a highquality camera with digital capabilities. This way you can have a
digital record of your work, in addition to prints. Before you purchase,
do some research to find out which camera will be best for you and
your skill level. Pin a Guardian Angel to Your Collar
As a sign connected to the psyche, Pisces is tuned in to the powers that be. This includes the intangible forces and past people who may
be watching over you throughout your life, offering guidance and aid.
Pin an angel to your coat collar or carry it with you in your bag or car
as a reminder that you are not alone in your journey. There is
protection, guidance, and support waiting for you whenever you may
need it. Pamper Yourself
Pampering yourself is essential for any self-care routine. For water signs this means spending time focusing on their outer appearance
as well as their inner wellness. Dedicate time to indulging yourself
with a spa facial. Facials are great for increasing circulation in your
facial muscles and hydrating the skin. They can also decrease
puffiness and slow the formation of wrinkles.
If you don’t have the budget to pay for a spa-level facial, you can
always try at-home masks. Many of these masks are made from
ingredients that are already in your pantry or refrigerator, such as
cucumber. Research which kind of mask will work best for your skin
type. Grow a Bonsai Tree
Creative and nurturing Pisces loves helping things grow and flourish
in beautiful ways. Grow a bonsai tree! This miniature, eye-catching
plant is the perfect hobby for exercising both your artistic and caring
sides. Bonsai trees are also a part of feng shui, which uses nature
and placement to bring balance and positive chi to your home. You
can find bonsai kits online, as well as in many garden centers. Be
sure to follow instructions on care, and invest in a small pair of
scissors for shaping your tree as it grows. Flavor Your Water
You already know that drinking enough water is one key to good health, but this is especially true for water signs. You need to ingest
enough water every day to keep your body strong. Staying hydrated
doesn’t have to be boring, though. Hydrating with water is by far the
best option, but you can spice things up by adding a few ingredients
to make your own flavored water. Try stirring in a few strawberries or
raspberries, or just add a splash of lemon juice or cucumbers to your
water pitcher. Not only do these ingredients brighten the flavor of
your water, but many of them have antioxidant properties that can
boost your immune system. See The Little Mermaid
The mermaid is Pisces’s finny sister. And not just because they are both linked to the element of water. In fact, though Pisces lives in the
physical world, she is often compared to this mythical being, due to
her misty planetary ruler, Neptune. Pisces, like a mermaid, has a
similarly misty allure, deep intuition, and connection to the
metaphysical realm.
Visit Copenhagen, Denmark, where you can find The Little
Mermaid statue. Made of bronze and posed on a rock along the
Langelinie Pier, this special statue was created in honor of the Hans
Christian Andersen fairytale. Unable to travel for a while? You can
also pop in the animated movie for a burst of mystical inspiration
(and childhood nostalgia). Protect Yourself from Energy Vampires
Water signs feel deeply and can easily be drained by emotionally manipulative people. Trust your gut when it comes to whom you
spend your time with. If you find that someone is particularly toxic to
you or you feel that your energy is depleted after seeing them,
consider removing them from your life. As a water sign, you need to
care for your emotional wellness and protect yourself against energy
vampires. If you are feeling particularly vulnerable, try carrying
around a piece of rose quartz to buffer against negativity. Wearing
the crystal as a necklace near your heart is even better. Visit a Monastery
Ruled by Neptune, Pisces is deeply connected to the metaphysical world. Nourish your spirituality by visiting a monastery. One of the
oldest types of spiritual centers in the world, a monastery is the living
quarters and place of worship for a group of monks or nuns.
Monasteries are part of many spiritual traditions, including
Buddhism, Christianity, and Hinduism. You can visit one of
thousands of beautiful monasteries across the globe, or take a quick
trip to one closer to home to meditate or pray where countless
individuals have before you. In Europe, some monasteries also offer
inexpensive accommodation for travelers so check out the
possibilities! Write a Story
Your imagination is expansive as a water sign. You have the gift of creation, seamlessly moving between reality and the made-up
worlds in your mind. Some of the best writers working today are
water signs, so try putting your visions down on paper and sharing
them with the world. Start small by writing a short story, or even just
the beginning paragraphs of a larger project. Live inside your own
imagination for a while and see what comes forth. Remember that
not every sentence you write needs to be perfect. Just focus on
expressing your ideas, and you can go back and revise what you’ve
already written later on. Take Dance Lessons
As an expressive water sign, Pisces delights in fluid movements that allow her to release her many emotions. Sign up for a dance
lesson to find your own watery rhythm, and maybe work up a healthy
sweat in the process.
Great dances for Pisces involve passionate movements that
encourage emotional expression, and often a dance partner to share
the rhythm with. Try the intimate waltz or the fast-paced tango with a
partner, or move to your own inner tempo with a freestyle routine. Volunteer
In nature inactive water becomes stagnant and attracts bacteria. Water needs to run, gurgle, babble, and sway. Water signs are the
same way. Doing nothing can make a water sign feel useless and
bored. To quench your desire to be active and helpful, volunteer at
an organization that you care about deeply. Play with dogs at a
shelter, read to children at the library, or make lunches for the
homeless. For you, being active doesn’t just mean moving your
body; it also means spending your time meaningfully. These small
acts can change the world! Create a Home Retreat
For Pisces, the home is where she can truly be herself. As an emotional and reflective sign, she requires a lot of alone time to
recharge her batteries and enjoy fun solitary hobbies such as
reading and drawing. Create a special space in your home that will
serve as the perfect oasis for relaxation and solitary enjoyment. This
space should incorporate calming blue accents. Also be sure to add
plenty of cozy seating options and blankets. Join a Club
Water signs love to be included in groups, even though they can sometimes get overwhelmed by too many people. The sense of
belonging is important for them to feel appreciated and loved. The
key for you as a water sign is to find a small group that focuses on
something you really love. This could be a book club that meets
once a month, a cooking class, or a wildlife club that goes on
adventures in nature. There will be no shortage of interesting
conversation; you’ll find loads to talk about with people who share
your loves. Keep a Dream Diary
Water signs have notoriously vivid dreams that stick with them after waking. You may even dream of future events, or have trouble
deciphering if what happened was a dream or reality.
Try keeping a dream diary to chronicle all of the dreams you
remember. When you wake up and the dream is fresh in your mind,
take a few minutes to write down key words that describe the dream.
Ask yourself some questions: How did you feel? Who was there?
What was happening? The more detail you can put on paper, the
better able you’ll be to interpret the dreams later on. Adorn Your Bed with Pillows
Pisces is a sign of relaxation and comfort. Nestle into soft surroundings by purchasing pillows of all sizes for your bed. Your
comfy nest won’t just be for sleeping, it will also be your hub for
creativity and relaxing solitary hobbies.
Try to include both soft pillows for resting and firmer pillows for
leaning against when enjoying some alone time. This mix of support
will avoid backaches and slouched postures. Be sure to also provide
a variety of enjoyable textures to your oasis, such as velvet, silk, and
fleece. People-Watch
Pisces spends a great deal of her time within her thoughts. She loves to reflect, in memories or daydreams, and it is often from these
inner thoughts that she gains insights into both herself and the
outside world. Feed that natural urge for thought by people-watching.
People-watching is a simple pastime that involves sitting back to
observe the activity of those around you, often in a bustling public
space. You can take a trip to the local coffee shop for an afternoon,
or spend the day at a popular park taking in all of the sights and
sounds (and some nice fresh air as well). Take a Fishing Trip
Symbolized by the element of water and the Fish, Pisces shares a bond with this natural substance and its scaly inhabitants. Nourish
this connection with a fishing trip! An adventure on either salt or
freshwater is just the thing to rejuvenate Pisces. The waves will feel
like a second home as she seeks out her astrological symbol. Make
it a full-day affair by packing a delicious lunch and bringing along a
book or other relaxing activity to pass the time as you fish. How
many types of fish can you spot? Buy a Witch’s Hat
Mystical Pisces has an affinity for all things supernatural, including witchcraft. In fact, it is often believed that Pisces exists in two realms
at once: the material and the metaphysical. This is represented by
her astrological symbol of two fish tied together, swimming in
opposite directions.
Tap into your magical side by buying a witch’s hat (or full
costume!). In need of some inspiration, or perhaps a reminder of
your abilities? Put on your hat and feel the divine powers of the witch
course through you. You may even be compelled to cast a spell or
two. Start a Collection
Since water signs feel at home near bodies of water, it makes sense for them to pick up pieces of those water sources with them
wherever they go. Start collecting stones, rocks, or shells from every
body of water you visit. The energy of the water will stay within these
objects and help keep you balanced when you are on dry land.
When you are feeling lost, sit quietly and hold each object in your
hands. Feel the positive vibrations radiating from them. If you’d like,
you can create an altar of your water objects in your bedroom to help
attract calm thoughts while you drift off to dreamland. Or, when you
are in need of an energy boost, put one in your purse or pocket so
you can hold it whenever you want as you go about your day. Sing While You Work
As a daydreamer, Pisces can sometimes be tempted to delay boring
chores for a far more exciting trip through her imagination. Due to
her sensitive nature, she may also become stressed if there are a lot
of things on her to-do list. But who doesn’t struggle through chores
from time to time? Everyone has a least favorite task or two that
feels unpleasant and sometimes difficult to finish, whether it’s sorting
through bills or deep-cleaning your home for guests.
Use your love of music to stay motivated. Humming, whistling, or
even belting out a tune while completing your everyday tasks will
keep you relaxed and help you tackle even the least pleasant chores
with ease. Acknowledgments
I would like to thank Karen Cooper and everyone at Adams Media who helped with this
book. To Brendan O’Neill, Katie Corcoran Lytle, Sarah Doughty, Eileen Mullan, Brett
Palana-Shanahan, Casey Ebert, Sylvia Davis, and everyone else who worked on the
manuscripts. To Frank Rivera, Colleen Cunningham, and Katrina Machado for their work on
the book’s cover and interior design. I appreciated your team spirit and eagerness to dive
into the riches of astrology. About the Author
Constance Stellas is an astrologer of Greek heritage with more than twenty-five years of
experience. She primarily practices in New York City and counsels a variety of clients,
including business CEOs, artists, and scholars. She has been interviewed by The New York
Times, Marie Claire, and Working Woman, and has appeared on several New York TV
morning shows, featuring regularly on Sirius XM and other national radio programs as well.
Constance is the astrologer for HuffPost and a regular contributor to Thrive Global. She is
also the author of several titles, including The Astrology Gift Guide, Advanced Astrology for
Life, The Everything® Sex Signs Book, and the graphic novel series Tree of Keys, as well
as coauthor of The Hidden Power of Everyday Things. Learn more about Constance at her
website, ConstanceStellas.com, or on Twitter (@Stellastarguide). MEET THE AUTHORS, WATCH VIDEOS AND MORE AT SimonandSchuster.com
Authors.SimonandSchuster.com/Constance-Stellas We hope you enjoyed reading this Simon & Schuster
ebook.
Get a FREE ebook when you join our mailing list. Plus, get updates on new releases,
deals, recommended reads, and more from Simon & Schuster. Click below to sign up
and see terms and conditions. CLICK HERE TO SIGN UP
Already a subscriber? Provide your email again so we can register this ebook and
send you more of what you like to read. You will continue to receive exclusive offers in
your inbox. Adams Media
An Imprint of Simon & Schuster, Inc.
57 Littlefield Street
Avon, Massachusetts 02322
www.SimonandSchuster.com
Copyright © 2019 by Simon & Schuster, Inc.
All rights reserved, including the right to reproduce this book or portions thereof in any form
whatsoever. For information address Adams Media Subsidiary Rights Department, 1230
Avenue of the Americas, New York, NY 10020.
First Adams Media hardcover edition January 2019
ADAMS MEDIA and colophon are trademarks of Simon & Schuster.
For information about special discounts for bulk purchases, please contact Simon &
Schuster Special Sales at 1-866-506-1949 or business@simonandschuster.com.
The Simon & Schuster Speakers Bureau can bring authors to your live event. For more
information or to book an event contact the Simon & Schuster Speakers Bureau at 1-866248-3049 or visit our website at www.simonspeakers.com.
Interior design by Colleen Cunningham
Interior images © Getty Images; Clipart.com
Cover design by Sylvia Mcardle
Cover images © Getty Images; Clipart.Com
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data has been applied for.
ISBN 978-1-5072-0986-8
ISBN 978-1-5072-0987-5 (ebook)
Many of the designations used by manufacturers and sellers to distinguish their products
are claimed as trademarks. Where those designations appear in this book and Simon &
Schuster, Inc., was aware of a trademark claim, the designations have been printed with
initial capital letters.
This book is intended as general information only, and should not be used to diagnose or
treat any health condition. In light of the complex, individual, and specific nature of health
problems, this book is not intended to replace professional medical advice. The ideas,
procedures, and suggestions in this book are intended to supplement, not replace, the
advice of a trained medical professional. Consult your physician before adopting any of the
suggestions in this book, as well as about any condition that may require diagnosis or
medical attention. The author and publisher disclaim any liability arising directly or indirectly
from the use of this book. from Your gateway to knowledge and culture. Accessible for everyone. z-library.se singlelogin.re go-to-zlibrary.se O cial Telegram channel Z-Access ffi https://wikipedia.org/wiki/Z-Library single-login.ru