Contents List of Text Figures
List of Tables
Author's Preface
Editors Fomvord Vll Vll
1X
X1 PART ONE Lines around the World
I. Space and Time in the Horoscope: The Dimension of Astro*Carto*Graphy
2. Lines and Crossings
3. Shadowed Planets: Stages of Psychological Growth Júpiter · Grace's SaturnianJoumey
5. Winds of Neptune, Fires of Mars
6. War Lines across the World
7· Prisoners of the Horoscope No More 3
z4 34
45 59
78 91 PART TWO Your Planets and Their Lines: ~ Natal Astro*Carto*Graphy l.ll).troduction: Zen and the Art of (Not) Cookbooking
8. The Sun: Can Anyone Really Be a Star? Mercúrio · The Moon: Why Is Everyone So Emotional?
IO. Mercury: Taming Power of the Small
I I. Venus:·Is There Mote to Life Than Happiness?
r 2.. Mars: Mary Poppins, Watch Out!
r 3. Jupiter: Does Mote Really Mean Better?
14. Saturn: Tough to Know When You Need Discipline
I 5· Uranus: Can Anyone Change the World?
r6. Neptune: Materialists, Beware!
17. Pluto: The Intensity Addict
v 103
I05
I z3 I4I 157
r 73
r 88
zoi
2.13 224 234 ' CONTENTS PART THREE Transits and Progressions: Cyclo*Carto*Graphy
Introduction: Location is the Key
r8. The Sun: Let Your Big LightShine
19. The Moon: An Emotional Interlude
20. Mercury: .Link to the Network
21. Venus: A Time,ofLove and Pleasure
22. Mars: Stress, Competition~ Energy
23. Jupiter: Full Speed Ahead
24. Saturn: Responsibility Is the Keynote
25. Uranus: Excitemen,t, Change, Nonconformity
26. Neptune: Go with the Flow
27. Pluto: The Beginning ofthe Rest o.fYour Life Appendix: Historical and Technical Notes on
Astro*Carto*Grapf? Netuno Notes and Sources
D_eftnitions ofSome Useful Terms
Index • Vl 24j
247
254
26 r
268 276
283 291 299
3·08
3r 5 3z. 3
3 3r
.131
337 LIST OF TEXT FIGURES
1. An example of birth for New York, Júpiter February r Mercúrio 5o 2.. Example birth relocated to San Francisco 6
7 3. Sun for example chart, showing rising and setting lines across the
~~ Mercúrio Júpiter · Paramahansa Yogananda: teacher Sun ver.s us student Moon
5· John F. Kennedy: an appointment with Pluto in D allas
6. Grace: a Saturnian journey
7· Grace's journey in space and time
8. Jim Jones ofJones town, Guyana Mercúrio · Jim Jones: burned by Sun and Mars in Guyana
1o. Harvey Milk, at,his birth place in Woodmere, New York
1 1. Harvey Milk, relocated to San Francisco
1 2. Dan White, at his birth place in Bellflower, California
1 3. Dan White, relocated to San Francisco
14. Harry S T ruman, whose Pluto line struck Hiroshima
1 5. Harry S Truman, natal, progressions and transits for Hiroshima
16. Natal map for the United States of America (Boyd)
17. USA (Boyd chart): the mise-en-scene for a Martian progression 16
2.0 48 50
6r
62. 70 71 72
73
82 89
94
99 LI ST OF TABLES
1. Possible indicators of a shadowed planet
2.. Transiting Mars and the Gulf War 39
86 3· Harry S Truman's natal, progressions, transits for Hiroshima, 16 August 1945 88 V11 Author's Preface ,Ls th~re ever really enough time· to get to know a friend? Perhaps, when
we're very young and everyone we know lives on the same block or goes
to the same school. But as we grow older, those we know seem ever more
distant, especia:lly in a mobile society like the United States. The person
you met yesterday may be a thousand miles away today, and the warm
human face and voice become sounds on a long-distance line or scribbles
in a mail box. So it was with myself (and many others) and Jim Lewis,
which is why it seemed entirely natural for Jim to come up with Astro*
Carto*Graphy, which unshackled us from the birthplace-bolil.nd horoseope
for ever.
In these days when ever-faster, ever-cheaper and ever-smaller computers
cnn produce reams of astrological maps and charts at the touch of a button,
it is difficult to believe (though it's true) that when Jim started out he was
actually drawing these maps by hand. This is just a small measure of the
energy he brought not only to his intellectual child, but to life (and the
lives of his friends) as well. Past examples of maps similar to the ones Jim
began producing in the I 97os can be found from time to time in old
magazines and books, but all those I have seen were for mundane use, so
while others may have thought of applying such maps to natal work, Jim
seems to have been the first actually to do so, and he probably developed
the information outlined in these pages within a few short years of the
latrtnching of Astro*Carto*Graphy.
Why did we have to wait so long for a book on the subj ect? Jim was
a good writer, but was impatient with writing at length. We would not
even have had a book now if it had not been for Erin Sullivan, who leaned
on Jim until he consented to get down to it, sold Penguin on the idea,
and then worK:ed very hard to make sure the project would go through
when Jim's health failed. To her I owe my first thanks, and so do we all.
Ronnie Gale Dreyer also gets a special vote of thanks. It was she who
1X sug,gested tliat Jim .ask ·me to do this, conMinced him that I wasn't tqo
busy; and th:en copi'ed reams of material from 11ils files {bt Eri:a. And
cert(!ioly I atn more phan .gt:ateful to Gra;c~ ~nd: 11he many: othe~s whp
provi~ed_ eiiher Jim Qt me with their data and stories, as these w:pnderful
_ testimonies .have been the li£eblqod of Astto*Cart€t;t;Grap.hy th'rou~hout
the years. I would .also like to thank Ken :Bowser fot 'letting me go through
Jim:s library and 'files whiie they were still in a ·State gf elisarray,, rrot at all
like ·the·· neat order he ancd Colleen ·Mauro have put ·them into tr0w. Anne
Black, Madalyn Hillis and several ot:¥er.s·. I f'l;;l.ay Saturno ~:V:e forgQtten to mention
alsp get map: Netuno lli.anks for amsw,erlflg qJ!tes·ri:~&s at~d Rt<1>"¥.ii<ling jieference&
and otl:ter information' about Jim or As.troll<Cartij>*Gra:p-ho/ that I haddt
heen able to tmd. Thanks ;also' go to DeflRoro'Juqp-e~ '¥i!d American ;A:sttology,,
ln whl€ Saturno publicatio't'1s some.material in Chapters~ 5:~and 6,otig#1ally appeared
in· Clitferent Form. Finally., .eternal gtatimde to Lee and Jesska fe-t tol'erati. Sol . Vênus that wild-eyed guy·ifl the bathr0be .who inha:bited my attic. <D'ffice while. tJ;tis
b0ok was ~beif).gJ~pishecl, and for patting tilf> :with me as well (lae;ver was
sw;e who be W:as).
Certrunly,.fuat)ks .to Jim f0r . Saturno ¢ing -· Saturno im . . ,. and Jim, it should ha~re been Netuno ,ou hent over the keyboard, not me. These. are yow:: ideas, ahd' mostly.
your OW!<l' words,.and ll'@W we have them where we ·can .read:thefirwllenever
we wa.at. B'ut we will mis·s ym.i just the same.
' Staten. Island
February 1996 Ken Irving X Editor's Foreword
IN MEMORIAM
Jim Lewis. Bom 5 June 1941, Mercúrio :30A.M., New York City
Died 21 February 1995, 3:33 Plutão .M., San Frandsco, California
Porewords are always written afterwards - as are introductions, acknowledgements and, normally, tables of contents. As an afterword, I want to
M~ Áries a bit ab0ut the stof¥ of this book.
Jim Lewis was my friend. And, by some stroke 0f fate, he was also a
colleague, but n:ot within the conventi0n in which many other of his
business relationships existed. Astro*Carto*Graphy was never 'mine', I
don't identify with it as- a personal achiev.e ment, nor have I ever needed
it to augment my self and my own career. In this way, I differ from many
of Jim's colleagues. Ken Irving, the executor of Jim's manuscript, also had
11 lcmg friendship with Jim and was his editor for SOJ:I.le twenty years,
lnlt he, too, existed outside Astto*Carto*Graphy, with his own magazine,
tcllcnr6h, work aad life. Tme beauty of this cellaboration lies in this fact:
no one associated with this book needs it t0 augment his or herself's own
work and creativity.
~rhis book has- a history, and though the beginnings of things are arbitrary, we might begin with UAC 1986, where, for his birthday, I gave Jim
n leather-bound edition of his own little explanatory booklet Astro*Carto*
(,'rapi.?J, that goes out with each map ordered. I felt that he needed to be
('I >ntained b.etiWeeH substantial covers and tlilat his work and self desewed
a lovely, gold-leaf~ leather-bound volume of his work. From that day on,
rhe rh reads for his publishing became increasingly woven together, hut it
would be ten years later before my vision of his work achieving a sense
of permanent status in the written form - for he was primarily an orator
would in fact become a reality.
As I write this, we are at the anniversary of his death, and I have before
me the manuscript of Jim's work as wrought by the capable and talented
Ken Irving. He~wever, let's continae the rett.ospective.
11llrough 1990 to 1993, the years. after Jim began to divest himself of
Home of the pressures of running Astro*Carto*Graphy single-handedly, he
Xl EDITOR'S FOREWORD felt he owed a debt to the c;olleccive. He had translated that debt ~o a
collective other than astrology. He wrote a book entitled Peter Pan in Midlift,
and tried in vain to hav:e it published. I, t00, tried to publish it. We had
many talks about this book and the problems associated with its publication.
He was wild about that book It was his secom:l baby, ACG being his
first, and ~fh that out on its own, he wanted to show people how
ilie mid-1ife crisis would briflg them to the threshold of the second half
of life - a feat whic; Saturno he believed the publication of Peter Pan would achieve
for him.
It was not to be. I advised him on various levels, frQm the sublime to
the ridiculous. He once rang up and said he had diseovered that the asteroid
Apollo was conjunct his MC, and was ~onvincem that Apollo, being the
ulti.m9:te puer, was cursing his publication of the ultimate puer~s 'crash-andburn' story, and did I know th~ ar~haic rituals for propitiating Apollo?
Certain that local ordinance laws in San Francisco-likely ctid-not condone
high-altar blood-sacrifice of white lambs, and the burning of thigh bones
on rooftops ln the Haight, I suggested he take Fidno's ·advice and wear a
lot of white, eat gold and spend a lot of time at the gym perfecting his
body, thus achieving arete - perfection - in mind, body and spirit. But he
was always at the gym anyway.
Franldy, I believed that Jim had misunderstood his inner, mid-life command to 'pay his debt to the collective', that the collective to w.hom he
owed this debt was in fact the astrology community. If' a debt existed at
all. From 1991 onward, periodically I would w:rite to him formally, on
•
Arkana letterhead, and ask for a submission for a book entitled, The Plutão !)chology ofAstro*Carto*Grcp.lqy. It became a kind of jokey l?itual after a while.
But he never had the time, he never had the money, he never sat still, and
besides:, Peter Pan w:as still not published. There were endless excuses for
not writing a book on the very thing that he bad created, like Zeus' Athena,
from his own mind. I .o ften felt it was Athena he needed to propitiate
rather than Apollo. For Jim was a minion of justice in the community and
a zealous idealist for the under-privilegeel. He worked tirelessly for the·
homeless, the Aids victims in the corrupt prison system, and the disaffected
in society. It seemed he was paying his debt to the greater collective over
and over. In Peter Pan (to be privately published by his long-time companion
and executor, Ron Mabka) Jim talks about a dteam he had wherein he
tries to publish a book - in the dream his name is Mr Wright. He is X11 •
ED.I '1;'0 R' S F OR£W 0 R:b unsuccessful in .his quest in the_dream and, upon awa,kening, he complains
rhat he is already Mr Wright, but not Mr Publish!
It wasn't until late May 1994 that Saturno ~ r.ang up to say, that he was, taking
n year off; time out, and that he would consider taking me up on my open
offer to publishhis ACG wo,rk. I was jubilant. I said to send me ~ -proposal
Immediately, wanting to get it while he was still out of his mind. B ecause
he neede~ to publish so badly, I was always in hope. And now .the time
had finally come for me to be able to bring his material into a form which
was accessible to all of us. The proposal arrived. The summer came, I
went out to New Mexico and we met up in Albuquerque and went up the
funicula! to the Sangria de Christo :Peaks (we were always going up funkulurs in various countries) and there was something very wrong, but I did
not kn0w MThat it was as it was te.t'i!'ibly, terribly subtle .. But wrong it was.
We did not discuss the book on -that visit, it was a foregone conclusion
th,M ~ Saturno .e eontract would go tlu:ough, it would be written, and Jim would
Ilccome Mr Publish. I was so happy to be able to give this to him, after
nil like years of talking, friendship and sharing.
I got the approval for the publication and off the contract went at the
end of August. In September, he was diagnosed with brain tumours. I
rould not believe the irony. And, I knew, he had a book in his apartment.
I lmcw ibis ways - that he would have notes, materials, cases, tapes - a
honk. But would he be able to write it? D evastation. But, determined even
l1\ the fac;;e of the ultimate equalizer, and his worst fear, I banged on,
mnnipulating, coercing, insisting, ,and ev.en when he could hardly see to
w11ite or think straight, had him sign the final contract for this book. But
not bcfo.re making him find someone he trusted to be his scribe. And that
111 where Ken Irving entered the picture.
Jim was a magician - sorcerers are not comfortable people to be around
!'lometimes, and Jim was no different from any other magus. In some
inexplicable way - 0ther than the astrology of it - it all came together.
K~n and Jim tnade an agreement between them, and I took the contract
and went with it. Jim was indeed incapable of collating his work or ideas
11t all by the time of the contractual agreement. I knew this in full measure,
nnc.l I did not care. It was to be published. On I 3 December the contract
was signed, and on 21 F ebruary, two short months later, Jim died, knowing
I Saturno ~t he w:ould never see his incarnation as Mr Plutão ublish.
Strangely, throughout this process of making the book, Ken Irving's X111 EDIT0R'S FOREWORD fate, my fate and Jim's fate all wove in - by I 5 September I 99 5, my
progressed horoscope became Ken Irving's natal horoscope. And my
Cyclo*Carto*Graphy put the transiting Pluto Ascendant line running exact!J
through the dot of San Francisco. And Jim had Pluto on his Ascendant
in his natal chart; when he died, his progressed Sun was upon his natal
Ascendant at 5° Leo, and, stunningly, the Ascendant, at ·the moment of
his death, was at the same degree - 5° 18' Leo. Jim walked out by the
same door through which he entered.
The debt to the collective has been paid, Apollo notwithstanding, and
Mr Wright is now Mr Publish. With tbe help of several people who all
volunteered to assist in any way they could, we now have the definitive
work on Astro*Carto*Graphy a'Vailable to all. There will now never be any
mistake about who created the elegant maps, the lovely packaging, and
who Astro*Carto*Graphy is. Though there have been many variations of
locational as.trology, and many offspring from that 0riginal source since
the early 198os, the traditional ACG map and its acetate overlays of
Cyclo*Carto*Graphy are the m0st elegant feature, and the most accurate
tool of them all Oxford
21 February 1996 Erin Sullivan EDITOR'S ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS First and foremost to. the three Fates, Anne Slayden, Ron Mahka and Gent
Sturgeon - you all three took such good care of him in those last months,
days, hours and final minutes of his life. Without your supp0rt this book
could not have been published, for you were always there when I came
over from England, or phoned, and in that way enabled us to continue
our friendship in those dire days when it was all so terrifying and difficult.
Your continued presence at Frederick Street gave me the courage to
become the midwife of his book against all rational reason. Thank you for
continuing the. warm friendship.
To Ken Irving, for being my progressed horoscope this year, and for
taking on the incredible task of collating Jim's notes, tapes and work, and
writing the book .for him. He has done a stupendoliS job, and I loved XlV EDITOR'S FOREWORD .I • t.-very minute of reading the final manuscript and working on the fine
tuning. Brilliant job, well done.
To Madalyn Hillis of Astrolabe for providing help with Solar Fire and
a beta copy of Solar Maps with which we did the·horoscopes and checked
our facts. Thanks also go to Barry Street and Robert Curry of the Astrology
Shop for providing the master for the cover-art- which is Jim's ACG
map - and for their undying support of Jim and his work over many,
many years.
Behind the scenes, to the editors at Penguin - Miranda McAllister in
particular -who offered support and genuine concern for Jim upon hearing
the bad news, and made the contractual side simple, straightforward and
never questioned my integrity when I shifted the proposal from Jim Slayden
Lewis to both Ken Irving and Jim Lewis. Such kindness is never forgotten.
And may this book bring the returns I promised them! XV ~----- .X:: PART ONE Lines around the World LINES AROUND THE WORLD unrav.elling of a racial 'iron curtain' around this time, is nQt far east of the
same longitude in the. southern hemi~phe.te.
Thus at the time of 'the conjunction of Uranus, Neptune and Satuin
the wall separating two disparate halves of the Western psyche, the conscious and the unconscious, suddenly was broken. If this analogy is appropriate, an amazingly creative and positive period of t:ime is going to ensue
as the conscious mind is opened to the many exciting p.o~sibilities available
to us in ways hitherto suJ?pressed. In a similar way, the potential both for
good and ill inherent in the psyche of individuals and the collective psyche
of nations can be unlocked by astrological patterns specific to certain areas
of the world. Though we may not be certain about the precise link between
firmament and terra firma that bmught about the startling events in Eastern
Europe and South Africa, where we have a known date and time of birth
we can in fact plot lines of planetary influence on a map, showing which
places on earth might -relate to the energies ot which planets in a given case.
Before considering m0re specifically the individual, national and cultural
reactions to pl~ce, and the way tbe birth moment demonstrates them, we
ShEmld first understand something about how these planetary lines ate
plotted.
A horoscope is simply a map of the sky at the moment and the place
of birth, but if the individual whose birth is being charted had been born
at a place half-way ac.ross the world, though at the S'a me Greenwich or
Universal Time, the planets would lrave fallen into different houses, i.e.
sectors of the sky. Consequently, in the example shown in Figures I and
2, if an individual born on Júpiter February 1950 at Io:x 5 A.M. Eastern Standard
Time (x 5:15 Universal Time) in New York City had ins~ead been born on
the same date in San Francisco at 7. I 5 A.M. Pacific Standard Time (also
I 5: I ·5 Unive.trsal Till\e), a trelatively weak .Il th-house Sun would instead be
strong by virtue of being directly on the Ascendant. In other words, because
the Ascendant is the more powerful position, this individual would be
expected to act out more of a solar personality in San Francisco than in
New York. It is import-ant to reiterate that this kind <1>f relocation chart is
movea!Jfein space but fixed in time. Thu.s, the San Francisco reloeation chart
.
for the person born in New York still shows each planet in the same
sign, degree and minute, even though the house positions have changed
completely. And, houses, especially angles, show how the planet's agency
is enacted or embodied.
In ·the course of' the day at a given place, the Sun rises in the east, Júpiter SPACE AND TIME IN THE HOROSCO-PE moves to its 'noon' position in the south (called upper culmination), sets
in the west, and then moves to its 'midnight' position to the north (called
lower culmination). Astrologically, these four points coriesp9nd to th~
Ascendant, Midheaven, D escendant and Imum Coeli, or the cusps of the
1st, 10th, 7~ and 4th houses, respectively. Similarly, each of the planets,
ns well as the M oon, has a 'day' in which it .rises, sets and culminates at a
particUlar place. A planet placed at any of these four important angles of
the chart expresses itself most clearly and directly. An individual with Mars,
fo.r example, in such an angular zone is more apt to be eminent in athletic.s
or to show other typically Martian traits. 'than will a person with Mars
elsewhere in his or her chart. A planet placed near an angle is expected
by astrological tradition, as confirmed by the scientific work of the Gat;tquellns, to manifest more powerfully in the outward personality.' Although
no scientific research has yet been done about relocated planets as such,
rhe experience of many with Astro*Carto*Graphy indicates that they als.o
express themselves with equal power.
.
In order to gain an understanding of the astronomical principle underlying Astro*Carto*Graphy, first consider the fact that there is no single
place where the Sun rises or sets~ and that we can always find many places
on the Earth where it is either daylight or dark, sunrise or sunset. In fact,
nr any given moment the Sun will be either rising or setting along a curve
l'hat stretches from one side of the International Date Line to the other,
peaking at those extreme northerly or southerly latitudes where at certnin times of the year the 'midnight sun' is visible twenty-four hours . a
da. Netuno , and where at other times the Sun will not be seen at all for extended
periods. (Figure 3 shows this Solar 'world line' at the time of our exnmple birth.) At the same time, the Sun can be found at upper or lower
Cli.tl'mination (i.e. noon :or midnight) all along a straight line that stretches
from pole to pole. The same is true of the other planets, and an AC G
map simply diagrams these rising, setting and culmination lines for all
planets as th~ Netuno appeared across the world at the time of birth for a person,
n nation o.r anything else for which an astrologer might draw up a
l\oroscope.
Like planets in a regular horoscope, the lines 0n the ACG map a~;e
:mbject to alterations over time: transits can activate them; they progress
eastwards across the map when direct in motion, westwards when retroArade; you can derive sribs.i.diaty €harts such as solar returns and then plot
the planetary lines for these. The Earth somehow 'remembers' such lines - 5 L INE S AROUND TH E W@RLD 17° \1 33' 20° os·
01° •
20 'l' 38' ij,
1' 35' ~ ~-----------+~
51 ' 51' $
01° 17° $ 33' Figure I - An example of a birth for New York, Júpiter February 1950, ro:q A.M. EST
6 SPACE AND TIME IN THE HO R OSCOP E 02° ~ 37' 14. Mercúrio =0
56. EP 08" 14"
15""
26° =
:=
=
= 11 .
3T ~
15.
23. 14° ll 56. oz· n 3T Figure 2 - Example birth relocated to San Francisco
7 th~ ang}ilar pres~nce of plane~~ at piv:ota:l ~aments of indiyigual or
cQU~ctive history - and when. ~hey are actival!~d atr a 'later date, the potentials
0f the original lirres ar.e releas.ed.
How can we :cuse this type of map? ·The rfios:t:l'·,0b:cio;us way is to app1y
it to' exoteric and G'onctete astrological inteq~retation. I£ ~ou ~~ to a place
graced by a Venus Me, you ate apt t0 become m©te 0ecu~ied tlii;an usual
with rd~,tiortslri; Plutão ,s >and tln~ir place in yoU$. life, pernf}:p>S get;hl:Qg. mar,lieg or
maki'ng some ~-ther im,pedant long:-terrn move of a similar na~e. Les~.
obNiously, Saturno <DweverP, 1:hese bes each r€ipres.e!l:t untappe·d and- ~vet;l s·uppressecl psy<;:hohDgi_Gal p otcmtiah; your degvee of assimilatli'G>:f'i of wk;tn ea0h.
""
line reptesents will lea<il ' )j0ll to: a ·s et d£' ~x;peri:eaces ·fuat . are in· keepirtg
with the desir.e of these archety,pes to seek euter marufes'tatt(on ih your life.
If as i youth Netuno ;ou Vênus ~ t0 ~ place where a planet w1ro.se atchecyj:;>,a1 ~pt:ifloiNle
you have St1ppressed is ~ngutar, you will):>e Cal.il~ht up in ex<j:erna1 realities
t<ilating to that_ pla:net'-s p>ri.t:l,d~lct, incl:ading s~'tffcz -whicvm ..may, be rath~r
distasteful to you. For instance, young p·iwpi~ Saturno ~.N",e a: generall~r diJfi,z!dt
time dealing with Saturn or living on 1fri~it Saturn lihes, unless, folf example~.
'
they have several .plamets in. Cap>ric0rh. In maturity, h0wever, those who
feel a strong need to ·experi:tmce ~hohsrress ~.eim to he dtawn tfuwa;rds plac€s
accenting p~anets .nlila-t reg}nitie outer manifestation. Thus, an indiw<f1,1al may
we,ll be drawn . to. Saturn lines in later life in an ·attempt eonsdeusly. to,
·manifest that archetype more outwardly and 0perily. $,evera!l ·individuals of
our acquaintance -~®ne is discussed in this book) Vênus !a:vitated to theit: Saturn
lines .at the ti.trie of their Saturn· terurns~ a m0ve which shows a definite
geographical outreach towards-Saturn and its arche;type.
To nnderstaJ;Id exactly how a planet is going to manifest, it is. necessary
to und~rstand how you fed about that planet and wh~t it r®pr~sents,
though in ,truth, honesty sufficient to understand st;tch feelings in full is
probably, rather rare. Carl Jung (i'.jnte said, 'every part ti>f the :Wsyche seeks
outer manifestation';1 a concept-which has considerable significance fat
astrology, since it :sugge-sts that each planet equally seeks extetnal .manifestation for its un:ique bJend of enetgy in the individual's life. This is paitieulady true if we thipk of the planets as t4:e key symbols of archetypa,l
fundamentals in a$trology. Some might icl,ent:ify s~gns 0f other :astrological
fac.tors as of primary significance, b1,1t it se.ems more to the~pGint to consider
the planets as the sources of the archetypal energi'es fto.m \vhich all other
elements of as;tr<:>logy derive their meaning and significa·ri.ce. A:fter all, it
was; the pla'ne~s that prehlstoric humans•· first Clistinggishetd as different
~ ' 8 "' I A.,...- ~l.. l
F"'/ Gêmeos V:\
•"»'
:- ..... ' ' o,;; ' ..... '
; (A' ' [ Urano ) '~-; ~ ' Figure J - Sun for example. ·chart, showing rising a:nd setting lines across the world ':\l f! a:. } '' '-, - I V> tr1 '"d 0 () V> 0
::0
0 :X:
ttl
:X: >-:1 z .... ~
ttl .... >-:1 t1 z > tr1 >
() '"d from s-tar-s on account of their varying m0tions on $e ee:l'estial- ~phere. A
ttanslati0n e.£ Jurrg'·s ·words into a:s:tr01ogiG'al lan: Vênus ~aage might thus tead:
'Every planet .ih the horoscope: seek:s outer t:nanif~statibn.' 'l11e process o£
assimilation and ex,9ressi9n p£ these ~s8arate &neJ.igi~s is th:e fundamental
dypamic ~detly.in; Vênus p~yq&0'10gi'e~ gtcowfl!t. }utJg als0 :§:aid, ~~& ·a~ ·W:ner
situation is n~J ma<lfe c.ons·~ioms, i:t: ha~pcms @Utsid~ as, fate;' a p0.in~ of
view equally. si~:
ficant fQ1" .astt01&gers. ExplC1lriag. 3:m:~ ~~~li~ Vênus '
-- ' . tl1:e~im:p1icatio'.l'l.S of these BV0 ·cwnce~fs ean' giv:e us: S'Qme itrsignt 'into the depth.
int€rpret{l;tion ·o:f an: kCB rlii'll:fh
:
, Espeda:LI: Netuno mte:tes-ci.ng is the way·rrr'wllldi difffereflt age jffiotxm,s §'eem to
reaG:t differentLy at a p·§yeh¢10gi:ca;l1twel: to tb:e v;:at-iG>:~;tS }!?,~~n:etii'o/ polati:tles,
·as. suggested abq:ve. An~ther a\Vten'\le ~f approadi tct> tlliriSll s;w~j'€ct ~is the
\l1ldenstancl$ Vênus o€. 'hq,~t:il~ phttil'ets', ~!e. ~thoS"e-,lDlan~.t!S· w..l:tie1v1n:&Yf<!luals: ifor
vari0us reasoms · Leão .nsider t0 he lllieFJ. f® iltremseiv.es or ·}mmical t®"' tilireir
.
innet:rnost feelihgs. ResidiNg in a let~~ wl:tid [ £Mls 'l:maer .s1:1en a 'planet's
·. Vênus ,Ugular influence is o'bviously likely teD ee ·a· V;e:~ p@ti0Uill.ai: cype o£
experience.
Cad Jung als.o was among fuelew psychologists early, ~n 1hl.& G&fl.<~ · to·
des_orib'e §!Ualitativ:e 4i.fferences betwe.en the two ·~~ve.s 0£ lJ: lh:u'f.lilan life.
, The Weste-rn world view, stemmit:lg as it d0e·s from lo~cal positiv.ism 'and
· the m:aterialisti:c: science of Newton -and Descartes, woulct have ;t fs beli:&v;e
·that you grow m~ntaily ahd physidrlly until you~.t€ a:B.out twerttY,:-<Dne-? reaehing a lev~l o£ mat:uhty at ·whkh Netuno ,0u .rebJain until you reach sixw or s0
years of age and begin to f~ apar.t, declining fro.m tl}e pJateap. 0f Netuno ~u~
until you reach death ·i n the botto~lands of ph¥sical ~~d Sol :I~ntal dee.ay.
Tl).is view is in keeping witl;l the caus~.;;and-effeet phllosephy .{3f the n:.ineteent! Saturno century in which ali object was· considered to remain statie ~:m rnertial
if discrete f<i>rces were 'n 0t acting on it. JN·o allowance was made..:for qlial!ities
related t0 experience .o r time., since suGh sab,jectiv:e pe-re~p.tieas ·eo.hld not
be quantified or outwardly 'analysed,;
Oruy in the twentieth cep.t:ury, with Heisenberg ~d Eifl,stei!il,,.d0 such
qualit-ative realities bt'igin to: l;>.e allo:wed som.e .€K4stenGe. ln "hi~ owm. ·ffeJ&
e£ psychology, Jung pio)ile>etted id.eas .o f qulllit~.tiv:el_y; al.itf~.t.ent stages ·of life
·that emerged as; differing t: Netuno {Des 6£ ,czo.rrsei0us.ness at "Va.rio,urs' tim.es ih 0l.'l'lt
lives - and for this the entire· Wes't ern world is in kls debt. Frequent!~
·t hrpugpout his C,ollected Wor-ks, he describes li:(e: as 'mo.r.t<llng' and 'afternoon', tw<;> quali~tively diffe.rent periods of time ,fuat ·ar,e Eerceiv:ed unde.t
different psyehqlogical r.ules by the individual.
~ ' ~ ~ SPACE AND TIME IN TliE ROROSCOPE In adolescence and the first ha:lf of life, the outer world is very teal,
resisting the ego and its desires in order to forge it in the fires of challenge;
1he ego is thus created and strenglj];lened by its interl!-eti.on with what is
porcdved mostly as a hos_cile environment. At this time of life, the polarities
we all deal with_seem to be most starkly contrasted. For example, the sexes
nt·e most opposite in their activities and interests at this time, and thus
there is no doubt when pre-teeflagers dress themselves as just who the
hoys are and who the girls are. Youthful peer groups tend to be mutually
l'x.clusive, with two different groups often adopting an entirely different
manner of dress and speech, something which can actually lead to physical
t•onfrontation if someone from .one group happens to intrude on the
ICtT.itory or interests of another in some way. A strongly 'tribal' and collective ethos prevails.
During youth, more than at other times, things are identified-either as
belonging to the self, or as alien to and opposite to the self - in other
wo.tids, as 'self' or 'not-sdf'. Planets and their archetypes are sensed in
1his way, as well. Evety child, for instance, is probably closely in touch
with his or her Moon, but children are very out of touch with their Saturn,
l ~ncling to see Saturnian modes of thought and action as somehow coming
ft·om an external authoritative force, via parents' restrictions, teachers' rules
111 schools, the curfew and ·other laws enforced by the police, or limitations
•
plnced on them by the , Vênus overnment. Adolescents ita fact seem to form
1hcmselves into subgroups that can be exch~sively associated with certain
J)lnnets astrologically. We can see this in high schools in the United States,
wh~ve we find two social groups tiD.at have been categorized in various
times and climes as the 'rockers' or 'hippies' versus the. 'nerds' or 'jocks'.
The main thing distinguishing the groups on one side of the divide from
till' gJsoups on the other is that th0se who constitute the fitst group tend
to be very rebellious, wear clothes that push the edge of the fashion .
rnvclope (and often viol.ate dress codes), tend to experiment with drugs,
ltnvt:: antistic in~rests and ,gener-ally db things that bring -approval ftrom their
j1rrw; the nerds and jocks, even though themselves somewhat antagonistic to
r11ch other, are both straitlaced compared to the rockers and the hippies,
u•-nd t0 do as they're told •a nd attempt to e*cel in wa¥s likely to gain the
•
Approval of higher-ups, through activities in academics or sports. The two
J'lnnets that might be associated with each end of this polarity are, of
'c Httse, Uranus and Jupiter.
Jung suggested that beginning -at midlife such polarizations tend to
I I .evapotat~ as the "individual seeks to brffig ~ab0at ~a s;yntliresis betw'e·e n ·fuem. ·As w:e.grow oldet, i£becr:>mes less interestlhg t0 adcijev;€'t 111~te experiet:nie.)
to ,t he partiGular ·a&cherype we specialized ifl dev.el~~ Vênus ~wlwn .young, an<il
the thin~ we hay;en't,been hol~ mo11.e .allNEe";l!fld fa~ei:til:atipn;•fG>cus. C$1>.m_s.¢.q~ently, a£te:t 11\lid.life, planets in tl\e 'homsc0pe viliteh me lil:a'V,ie: projected
ounvatds ..on t0 ,etihet peJi)ple e;; ~awards, to ~w:sdv:es as pola:rized rnecl~&<
0f consci0usness b>egin t0 emetge ~s p.al!t:s <!)£ : Sol .l.ltf otllten eonsciousa:ess.
The c.0lle'Gti:v;e or ·tribal .afflliati®ns of adolescence bee'o me s·abotd.inate ~o
indhdduation - to lilecomirtg an !ncliv.idual.
O~tet'l -~e fitst eme~gero.~e <l)t thtse plaB.&~s is.' marke~<il ~¥ a; c~¥-taia ;u:no~t­
o£ hos~ty. The poet' Robert Bly ·§aid, ~EViety pant .ef 0:qr personality ilia!;
'
3
we don't love· will be(;ome· hQs.tile to us:' Art. archetype arn:cl: part ·ef seJ£
that has becm s:upptessed for, many years releases an en0rm0us .amount G>f
p<mhup psyahic .. energy when it Sl!ldcdeRi¥ bursts forth .. Frectuen:t:ty, such
.erncit!gi:n: Vênus planetary an0btety,pes are -a-ssociate:GI wlith clis:ta·mt plaees. Just as
the psyehe is. se~n as the home for tl:te self, dis_tant plaGe~, whetheti tkos~
that We visit 01' those which manifest in 01.1,! lives in S0me imr.ol:q.ntlWY w.-ay;,,
beeqme s.~gpi£ioant md symJ:>o1iG ,Qf <emergiRg p,otentiils that are Beggirt~,
for i'nanifestarion. Bly, describes 1lhis as the .(hh;>tspur iiil Wales e.ro:blerrr.'
Readers fatniiiar with £hakespeare will!temembe:r.that::King Henry·1V was
plague<d by a rebellious young nobieman .m.aniecl Eots.pa:r,: wh0 was fuiaH,yt
defeated at ShrewsbU.I)". 'Ffie irflage of :an urgent and W:gp~t5YillS ,noble, 'plot~
tit;tg .nebellion or o.therwl;se fo,menting ,pr0pl~ms £rom afar, has. m.uch .fa
eommon with·the way the. pla:a:e:ts w,ork in ·oiM: charts, esp.eoia1lty when w:e.
tty· to ignote or ~v.en suppress, cl:tem. tr'his iclea -0f emerging- plaaets fi:trst
.marti'fes.ting in connection. with some-•distant ·place is ohvi0us'ly- one-that
will be .dev€loped ·.in eur exploration of Astre*Cart0·*Gi:aphy.
Wheru:li.ffetent planetS ate assO'Giated either with the self or the np:t-sel:f~.
varying t: Netuno .pe·s of polatizatioa will ma:fl;i.fest. O:bviG"Qsly, th.e ~imf-51¢st of t;hese
to unde!stan<il is.. the ·wrue/(e.rriale ,oppo~ition. The sexes s.eern to' he mos;t
unlike, -in youth - boy.ll · a11d girls, while they eBjo; Netuno ·each -othees e<!>t:npam.¥·
in childhood, begin to,·polat:ize. in the early le.€n years and.thus find eaehl;
'
other bothet:som"'e, ttoublesome an@ alm0.s t impossible to <l:O'e~st with.
The sem1al relatidnsliip· is the.n lindertaken as the 0'nly way to bridge the
polar1z~tion. As time gpes .Oiil, of eourse,. t1u~ sexes. beeom:e Jess cdispanat€'
afld by ·t'J:;le .eighth dec,ade it m~ Netuno actually be rath-er hard to teli them apa:tiR
1n som~ eases.
Differen:t S,oc.iological.planetary p.0latities .ate -also mter.es-ting to observe.
. 12 SPACE AND TIME IN THE HOROSCOPE AH already noted, in high schools in the United States we often find two
~~·m1.ps which might well be symbolized primarily by Uranus versus Jupiter. IiJ a more general fashiori, the conformers and enforcers of majority
opinion are certainly associated with Jupiter and perhaps to some degree
Snturn, as well as, of course, with the athletic Mars. On the other hand, the
mdividualists who dare the group to make them conform are represented by
IJt·anus. or·perhaps Neptune .or Pluto. These groups will polarize in relation
1u each other and will oftem seem to be itretoncilably opposite, especially
In the early years of life. Class differences are also symbolized by such
polarization. Mercury and Jupiter are the two planets that seem to symbolize
1lw working class and the professional class, respectively. Individuals who
llnd themselves attracted strongly to the things in life represented by one
dlese planets will probably be polarized to the other.
The planets and associated archetypes opposite to those with which an
individual has identified in youth begin to emerge at various times throughout the life when activated by astrological factors. The Saturn return at
1he age of twenty-nine is a very well-known and clear-cut period when a
plttnet that has hitherto been projected outwards on to authorities, the
police or academic leadership begins to be internalized in some way; the
individual is forced to accept that Saturn lies within as well as without.
The Saturn return will in fact be painful in proportion to how closely one
hns identified with either Juf>iter or Uranus or Pluto or any of the planets
that seem tc>. be most opposite to Saturn in natilte. Those who do well
with the Saturn return are usually spared because they have a well-placed
Snturn, or perhaps several planets in Capricorn. These people often wait
until the Uranus opposition (or perhaps the Neptune square) at midlife to
rxperience the kind of crisis others go through earlier with Saturn. The
lndividua:l who has mastered a particular planet will find that its aspects
t•ome ~d go without causing much difficulty, while the individual who
hns ignored that planet and projected it outwards will deal more intensely
with external co~fining circumstances or with the emergence of a part of
hirnself that he or she is not particularly happy to see.
A very complex series of ,tJeacti0ns occurs when a new planetary archeI ype emerges from its hitherto unconscious .situation. The first evidence
r this reaction often is total denial, a contention that what this planet or Gêmeos ~ archetype represents simply is not there. Children o ften do this when
1he sexual archetypes of Mars and Venus begin to manifest in their lives,
lot· example. As· the planet c0ntinues to manifest, denial is soon followed or ,r LINES AROUND THE WORLD with a pattern of projection and repression. Projection, despite its bad
r~utation, is not all wrong, as it can often be an important stage on the
way to assimilating an archetype. After all, only denial - insisting there's
no point in the individual even dealing with an urgent issue. - absolutely
ignores a planet's existence, something which can build the repressed energy
to uncomfortable and even dangerous levels. With projection, at least the
planet's existence is acknowledged, albeit in some outward form. Despite
this, in ptojecting the symbolism and enetgies of a particular planetary
archetype outwards, one is giving away power that is properly one's own.
The energy of projecting the planet outwards on to some institution or
person means that the power the individual could normally direct towards
his or her own undertakings is now wasted in trying to create an external
reality.
In addition, it is more likely that the energy of sueh a rejected or
projected planet will manifest itself externally- remember what Jung said
about the inner situation not made conscious happening 'outside, as fate'.
Travelling to a location at which a projected planet is found angular can
often be fateful indeed, as an essentially hostile planet is then brought into
consciousness with little preparation, often in the form of an event or a
person whq s~izes control of the native's life in some way. So the best
relationship to have with any planetary archetype is that 0f assimilating it,
assuming it to be part of self and making an effort to learn it and apply
it. In this way, the individual can best come to utilize its positive aspects.
Such assimilation often occurs through an important personal relationship
in which the attributes of the partner, at first irksome because they are
opposite to self, are soon made part of the conscious personality.
In certain cases, especially for those who have reached the top in some
social, political or personal sense, there's a further stage beyond assimilation,
which might be called exemplification, in which an individual acts out a
particular planetary archetype so well that he or she is called upon to
epitomize it for other people in his or her society. Everyone who projects
a plahet needs a willing (or unwitting) person upon whom to projec_t_it.
An example of this is the Pope or the D alai Lama, each of whom embodies
the principle of Jupiter for hundreds of millions of Roman Catholics or
Buddhists all over the world. Presidents and other national leaders act out
Saturn, and perhaps Jupiter, for people both inside and outside their countries; and there are movie stars who excel at portraying particular archetypes
such as the puer aeternus and the beautiful anima. Projection is, however, - .' .. • '•... ... . ... <. . ._ 14 • .. ,. ••.. : r·~ .• . ., • •• r SPACE AND TIME IN 'I'HE HOROSCOPE ,,!ways a two-way street, as it is only through the assimilation of each
lll'thetype that an individual can reach wholeness.
Our reactions to 'self' and 'not-self' archetypes change, though, and are
tnodified by the stage of life we are in. In youth, the things that resemble
t '"c's own chosen archetypes are seen as good, while those archetypes that
lll't' pola-rized and opposite are seen as bad and as representing something
thnt needs to be resisted, destroyed or somehow suppressed. In maturity;
hy contrast, the archetypes associated with self come to be seen as rather
hming, while those that are not-self often become fascinating and imbued
wil'lt numinosity. In this neutralization of the 'charge' of archetypes lies an
lt11\portant reason for the high number of divorces in midlife- what was
11ccn in the spouse as 'good' la:ter seems just 'boring'.
We have stated that some planet archetypes will be seen as not-self and
l>thers will be seen as self. Those which are associated with not-self in the
htt·cr stages of life usually become far more attractive and far less t;epulsive
to us than they were in the earlier stages. In any case, all planets seek
outward manifestation at all times, so the more we project a particular
plm1et, the more lt will act outside ourselves and beyond our control, as
l;tt<;. I low might we feel about a place where a planet we had always rejected
.md projected outwards was particularly strong? What could we expect to
happen to us ln such a 'denial place'? To begin with, we probably wouldn't
llltc people who come from that region, and yet at the same time we might
tt·ttd to feel a peculiarly strong attraction to them, one that would cause
puople ot ideas from this area to intrude frequently on our lives - a little
ltkc a bad dream that keeps repeating itself until we begin to understand
the message it conveys. On the other hand, if a place is associated astrologic•tdly with a planet whose archetype we have thoroughly assimilated, things
.ttH.I people from those places will in some way make us feel and act most
lil<e ourselves, reinforcing our egos. These places will urge us to continue
hcing ourselves as we a1:e and as we always have been.
Because of this, it should become clear that the techniques associated
with Astro*Carto*Graphy represent a great deal more than a travel itinerary,
more than just a way of determining where to have a pleasant vacation.
l tli prime value lies in its ability to identify those places of the world that are
l'Otrelated with the archetypes which are emerging in one's consciousness as
111tc matures. Let us look at some examples and see how this has worked
In different individuals' reactions to some of the same archetypes. Figure Júpiter LI.NBS ~R0tJN.O TH·E W OIRLD MA PL ·SA
IC DSC MH SA
'OS'C' Stl
Ml'l UNITED 40' STATES , , 20' OCfA·N •• 160' 140' 100' 60' ME MA JU MH A- Mercúrio !; ASC SPACE AND TIME TN THE HOROSCOPE MO MA SA JU UR ASC MH IC MH IC NE PL VE ME
MH MH IC IC OSC IC
120' R U S S MO
MH MA SU
140' 160' I 60' 40' ., 20' \ I ' .:... .. :, . . ..... o· ., OCEAN 'o\ ,. ~·· '·· 20' 40' 20' PL
ASC so· 40' NE VE ME ASC OSCDSC 100' su
osc JU SA UR NE VE ME OSCASCASCOSCASCASC l•{wm Júpiter - Paramahansa Yogananda: teacher Sun versus student Moon su ASC LINES AROUND THE WORLD is the ACG map for the spiritual leader Paramah~nsa Yqgananda, Júpiter wh0
began life in India, where he studied under his own guru. India is east of
his Uranus IC line and on his Moon Ascendant line. This is fitting symbolism for a person who was
going to give up. his '4th-house' identification
.
as a Hindu, an Indian~ a brahmin - everything lie had been :up 1:1ntil them
- in order to seek spiritual enlightenment with his master. The role of a
student is particularly shown by his Moon Ascendant line.
In his maturity, he came to Los Angeles, which is near his Uranus
Midheaven line, reversing the polarity f:rom the ttaa.sformation of hi.mselfil'
on an inner level to one in which he acted as the inst:ru.ment for the
external transformation of society on an outer level. Moreover, Los Angeles
is exactly on his Sun Ascendant line, so that while the Moon rising at his
birth equipped him for studenthood, as an adult he moved to a place
where the Sun on the Ascendant made it possible for Áries ogananda himself
to be a teacher and to transmit to others the very knowledge he had
learned as a youth. Youth and age thus polarized themselves in the life of
Yogananda: from self-transformation at Uranus I C, to a role as aa active
transformer of society under Uranus Midheaven; from a student under hls
Moon Ascendant line to a teacher at his Sun Ascendant line.
Another interesting example is found in the map of John F. Kennecl¥
(Figure 5), 1 in which the Pluto Midheaven line goes dh:ectly thre5ugh Dallas,
the place where the president was murdered. It would be foolish to assert
that going to one's Pluto line means absolutely that one is going to die,
and it is particularly important in assessiti. Vênus the ,potential of a planetary lin~
to look at the chart of the individual in order to understand the context
in which the planet is placed there. Kennedy had Pluto unaspected and
cadent in the 9th house, and its closest aspects are semisquares to Mars
~nd Mercury, suggesting perhaps problems in travel. It is clear from this
that Pluto was not a planet with which John Kennedy was particularly
comfortable, and that it was something he had not inwardly assimilated.
Psychologically, this unassimilated Pluto was demonstrated by the charismatic power and sexual t<tlentlessness he embodied. Also, his unintegr11:te~
Pluto led him to the underworld- as both champion ·and victim. Consequently, when Pluto manifested on his Pluto Midheaven line, it did so in
an entirely external and devastating fashion. An interesting example of a:
Pluto Midheaven line operating from the inside 0ut (rather than from the
outside in, as with Kennedy) is seen in regard to a particular chart for the
United States, as we shall see in Chapter 7· r8 SPACE ~ND TIME IN TH E HOROSCOPE C. G . Jung, in contrast to Kennedy, had Pluto angular thr~mghout his
life near Zurich, though in his case it was very close to his IC, with
itH exact dist~nce depend.i.q. Vênus on the precise time of birth out .of several
pnssibilities.6 Jung's Pluto is widely square Uranus and square Saturn and
wluely conjunct the Mo01=1, hut abov:e all it ,is ang.alar in the natal location.
( Jcnrly, Jung was able to employ the energy of this planet in an entirely
positive way since he spent his ~h0le life going within himself in order Gêmeos 1 lransform the base material of the psyche into the gold of conscious
lllllll.sformation. A planet on the I C usually refers to transformation on the
dl•opest levels, with all the 'givens' of self- family, home, religion, class
identity - surrendered to some highe.t calling.
' rhe Sun D escendant line also passes through Switzerland, so it was
th11ough his patients.and his relationships to them that the innertransform.a-=
1ion of the Pluto on the I C manifested. He wrote in his autobiography
1h.nt everything he knew had been taught to him by his patients. It should
hl· mentioned here, incidentany, that perusal of Pluto lines in maps such
1lM this will reveal differences between the standard horoscope and ACG
nHtpping. The former considers only the longitudes of the planets, while
l'hc mapping process also makes use of a further dimension, the planet's
hllilude. Pluto's latitude is so great in Jung's case that .i:ts 'true rise' moves
ltH line several degrees closer to Zurich than one might suppose it would
he• when looking at Jung's standard horoscope.
JitnJones 7 and Liz Taylor8 provide us with two other interesting examples
nnd an interesting con,trast as well. Jones was the cult leader whose 9oo
lnllowers committed mass suicide under his direction in 1978 As we will
ltl'l' (Chapter 5), Jim Jones's Mars and Sun lines go right through Guyana.
A litde consideration of his birth chart will tell us that his Mars line is
lllccly to produce problems since this planet squares his Sun in fixed signs
11nd forms other difficultaspects as well. Thus, Mars was for him in conflict
with his inner self. Liz Taylor, on the other hand, mov:ed to a place where
hN Mars Midheaven falls near Sun, Mercury and Neptune lines. In her
rn~ly life in Hollywood she acted out some of the .more negative and clearly
pn 1jected manifestations of the Mars archetype with her countless marriages
11ntl the resulting string of scandals in the press. But in recent years she
hus taken it upon herself to raise money for Aids research and, in an era
when President Ronald Reagan was afraid even to utter the name of the
tliiiCRSe in public, she has single-handedly raised $6o million for medical
l'r.Kcatch to combat it. MA ME JU
MH MH MH SU
MH PL MH SA NE
MH ti1 11' UNJT·£0 SIT Al fS zo· o· ' ...'.\
...
··: ~q· . .(. J.: . '· . . ... ."'t .
• ·~ ,, I • t • .. ! Júpiter ,0' ·s u VE AS.t: ASG SA NE VE M
r U~ MA
SW VE
.ASC ASC MH AS'Ci: 0SC'OSC'G>SC: 8SC DSC ., UH MO ["C ~H SPACE AND TIME IN THE HOROSCOPE PL SA NE
ASC IC IC MA ME JU SU PL VE IC IC IC IC OSC IC UA
MH MO IE 60' 40'
CHIN A 20' ~ .. • ~~ ' 0'
INDI W OCE
20' • 40' ... ·40' UA
ASC 60' 80' MO osc 100' PL
IC 120' 140' ME MA JU ASC ASC ASC l'igJire J- John F. Kennedy: an appointment with Pluto in Dallas
2.1 Sp·eaking of presidents, let us consider the AGG map. ,0 f George Bus<~
and see how well he assitriilated some of his-more prGbtematiG·al ·archetypes.
Tile fact that -Bush's Mrru:s line goes right thlpugh tlie;Parrama Canal speal~s
for itself; ifs quite clear he ·did not tmtha,ge to as·sJ1:nUate.his' Aquariari Mars
ill a_, positiv~. mannet; despite · die fac-~ that it ttiP,es llts $\:m. Perhaps ~e
9pposition of Mars to Neptune. was the S"Ol,l!ee (\)f ili:e prdhllem. Another
Macrs line; ilie~ A.sc~!:ldant, crosses his JuJ?ite~ Ivlli.dh:~a~e:a right in Be~jing~,
obviously indicating his continued pto'9lems with China. As. one exarop'le~
the ma.ssactre m Tianartmen Squate was ,a siwufieant defeat for George
Bus' Saturno , ·and t}je·face that the Chiiiese- Vênus ~ronto<ttaty abs0httdy'teflifsed to ·allow.!
the reforms demanded b: Netuno t):leir people resulted. in,.cent;ih.U:ed diffieulties. tf1ati!
exte11ded i;nto the administration of .Bush's succ~ss<;>r. '.Nea:fly ev:ery Ame$'canpresident for whoin.a reliable birth time is avai:hible 1las had to eng~gli'ill
in som,e -m:i:litary activity under one ~.r aa0ther of his M-ats -lines. For
Rxmsevelt, it was Pearl Harbot; For"J'1iiJ:I;ran, Japan aad: K mreatfot Kennedy,r
Johason and Rord, Vietham; f0r Carter~ Iran; "'ah:d for- Reagan) one might
say 'everywhere'.
Bush followed one, of his Mars,., lines in Panama, $ough oftly after severil
false starts ·i n which opportunities to .ledocalleade.~:~ de~ with the problem
of General Norhtga were missed. His most not~ble action, 'Desert St. Plutão 'rm1,
occurved l!lnder his natal Sun-Jupiter line.s~ Two thlrrgs -arl:! futeresting in this
Yespect, the first of which is that much
SaH<ftam b.fussein's m~gnificent
weaponry was accumulated with a , Vênus enerous shower of goodwill and <::asfi;
from the Bu~ Saturno admini$·ttation, as a result of the mistaken notion that
S.addam would provide a stabllizing coun,terweight to the. Irania.ns. Th~
se_cond interesting point is that~ perhaps. unfortua.ately f0r $addam,, his
invasion of Kuwait was undertaken. at a time when Mars was enga~ed i11
a long, slow transit of these two very planets ill Bush~s ·chart, Sun and,;
Jupiter. Thus, acting as a 'stand-in', transiting Mats ensured rllat Bush ' Vênus ot . ' of the messa~e and replace~ his Su~~~upiter bla~ Urano cheque to the ~vilih'
a Sun-Jqpttet-Mars mass1ve reta!).ia)lo.n.
This movement of diploma~s, .soldi:el(s ,and military hardware to areas
touched by Mars at the birth of a single individual is surely the· most
fascinating and often tragk example of the way in which our mnermost
thoughts, feelingS and fears cart become events in tl!ie outside wo.tld.
Though few reading this book ·c an eve,r hope to have a.nything like thtU
power of~ natiomllleader, the ways in wh,ich the asttologiq~l eircums:tances
' of our birth rrra, Netuno affecthow we .rel~te t0 the w:q:vld at latge., and how the
2'2 SPACE AND TIME IN THE HOROSCOPE world in turn relates to us, are just ~s important in our lives. These lines
;I cross the world can tell us at least as much about ourselves as the planets,
Hlgns and houses in a: traditional horoscope do - and perhaps in showing
how our innermost selves relate so precisely to space, time and geography.,
~hey can tell us more. 2 Lines and Cro$siags As we have seen, each planet in a. standard horoscope for .a given time
and place can also be mapped as a set of lines that denote those places
where it was rising, setting or at upper or lower culmination around the
world at the instant for which the chart was set. Though adding this _new
dimension to the standard horoscope can be very valuable in mapping and
understanding the long-term psychological development of the native, in
the shorter term the way in which the planets manifest in this global
context is often more direct. The simplest application of an ACG map in
fact uses the most rudimentary astrological principles to show where we
might, for instance, be likely to find fame (Sun and Jupiter lines), or to
find ourselves dealing with our emotional natures (Moon), to find romance
(Venus), or perhaps to be more assertive (Mars). Along with these' planetary
principles there are, of course, basic modes of action which depend on
which angles highlight the planets. Over the years, clients who have purchased these maps have provided a great wealth of anecdotes showing
evidence of the way in which the planets work at this level. 1
The stories of travellers passing through areas where individual lines are
strong are particularly interesting for the way in which they illuminate the
action of planetary lines. An extended stay along a particular line is likely
to be psychologically important in much the same way as a slow transit
or a progressed aspect, but the action of a planetary line encountered on
a brief journey can at times be very striking. While these 'tta~l transits'
may shake us up or otherwise stand out as epgaging memories Netuno ~~ later,
rarely do they bring us the kind of self-awareness or self-realizatio~ we
can gain from longer experience in a particular location.
"""
Consider, for example, the story of a young American woman travelling
through Europe with a girlfriend neatly twenty years ago. Having completed
college and not being quite sure what to do with the rest of their lives,
the young woman and her friend set off on a journey that took them from LINES AND CROSSIN~GS Greece to the Netherlands, working to pay their way along the road by
1~ick.ing up odd jobs available to students in those days. Along the journey,
Hhe resided for a few months on Crete, which is situated between her Suh
I )escendant and Moon I C lines. During her time there, she became very
involved in writing, recording her daily activities and o~servations in journals, all of which is in keeping with the kind of creative urge o.ften sparked
hy Sun lines. Leaving Crete, she then spent some time along the western
edge of Greece, particularly on the island of Cefalonia. During her time
rhere she continued her writing as she lived for a time in a rustic setting
on the beach in a grass hut, but since in travelling fr0m Crete to CefalGnia
Nhe had moved from between her Sun and Moon li.nes to a spot almost
directly on her Pluto Midheaven line, her experiences began to take a new
tHrection.
The first signal that Pluto was involved came when she met a man a
few years older than herself (she was in her early twenties at the time), who,
rts she would later put it, awakehed her sexually. Though her generation was
generally quite ·open ~in both talking about sex and experimenting with it,
~lp to that point her own experiences had been, if interesting and eduCR.tional, less than satisfactory. The man she spent time with on Cefalonia
was, however, experienced and skilled enough for her to find herself really
•
enjoying sex for the fitst time. This spark of self-discovery was one of
IICveral 'epiphanies' (her word) she experienced on the road.
.After leaving Cefalonia, she and her friend travelled north, hitchhiking
through Yugoslavia, west of her Pluto Midheaven line, and it was here, just
outside Skopje, that her youthful feelings of immortality we+e challenged as
she came face to face with the prospect o£ her own death. As the two
women travelled along the highway from Skopje, walking along in the
warm afternoon, they were for a time mainly aware of the pleasantness of
t·he day and the camaraderie, and not much concerned about the weight
(}f the backpacks or the length of the journey ahead of them. Suddenly,
ns if startled awake. from a dreatn, the twG of .t hem realized they w:ere
being watched, if only by children who had suddenly emerged from the
l~ndscape around them. Though at .first they were unconcerned, as the
number of children grew and as older-looking ones filtered into the group,
nnd as they began to move closer, the two began to worry. Then some of
I he group began to make animal noises, neighing like. horses, while othe.rs
tnoved closer and began striking theii backpacks, all the while eyeing the
I wo women to see their reaction. That reaction came like a blow to the LINES AROUND. THE WORLD stomach, as the two began to understand that they were in danger from
these strange creatures, that they were being stalked and, as they were all
alone in a strange country, they might in fact be in mortal danger. All they
could do, however, was contit::m e wa:l:king, trying riot to seem afraid as the
children came closer and the harassment increased. ]i,ust as th~ Netuno were
beginning to wcmder how they could possibly escape, a toU;rist bus came
over a rise. Quickly they ran out on to the highway, directly in front of
the bus, waving it to a st:op. The bus driver picked them up, calming them
by saying he would take them to the next town and safety, and as they
looked back they saw that their tormenters, who the driver said were
gypsies, had melted back into the scenery, disappearing as swiftly as they
had appeq.red. The experience left an indelible mark on the young woman,
one whieh she carries to this day, and one which was as unpleasant as her
awakening on Cefalonia had been pleasant. From sex to death, she had
experienced Pluto close up.
Other experiences in the ACG files offer similar meaningful personal
triumphs and tragedies, such as the. case of a woman with a 12th-house
Saturn debilitated by sign who travelled to her Saturn I C line a few months
befote her Saturn return was to take place. While there, she managed to
experience political unrest, a romatK:e which altered her life .for quite some
time to come and, most interesting of all, hospitalization for treatrn~ril1: of
a potentially life-threatening illness just a few weeks before her Saturn
return. All of this, unfortunately, took place before Astro*Carto*Graphy
had been fully developed and made available to the public, so it was only
years later that she discovered the kind of peril in which her astrological
situation had placed her. Because of the involvement of the Saturn return,
this story parallels a similar 'Saturnian journey' out#ned in Chapter Júpiter , but
also makes, with that parallel, two il\iteresting points, the first .of which is
that not all planetary lines are the same; and the second of which, as
anyone using standard astrology could tell us, is that planets in two different
birth charts do not operate exactly the same.
In the case of the debilitated r zth-house Saturn, personal and social
upheaval were followed by illness, while in the case of the Saturn in Scorpio
in the 7th house, which we will discuss in the next chapter, the focus
of the Saturn return and the activities ·s urrounding it ultimately involved
p~rtnership issues. The action of p1ap:eta.ry lines is not always, clear-cut in
this sense, but cases such as these sh.ow that a planet's angclarity at a
particular locality takes place within the background of the natal chart itself. 26 These lines 'and thei.J: .effe£.ts ,also ~v6lve th€ ·chatt.s .~f etihers~ ,_e;spe!!;i::i11y in
tihe Case a.£ dose relatiortsbips ~Wfl~fher persen:al Ot business) Wl~t d.e:veJ:Op
at lm~ales where tw'0 people hav.e sl\rong planetary emphasis.
A woman who was o<1ra near Saturno :er :Venu·s~setting, (V:E~·~~G~ 1rtre fi~s
fend memories of her ofuldh0od :when she was the ~em.t1ie of .attention
and had an interest hl $e:aris! Wliefl .$ke,..was s,Jill faidy ~oung, $:o:w€-v:et,
her family was for~e<d to··move a Vênus !i.eat ~stance to;"-'~ _.place ia whlpli the
· plan:ets empbasizecl: wer~ Mats,,Satul}n aro:t!l N ep:tl:lB:e. N·o t onLy did sh~,.feel
completely •but gf Mnicn with the scene, J:5ut,:She 'als.o f.ound that .tltr'e p.e0ple
she rpet over the oex·t few years had an .entirely diffet:ent set 0f i\laJ.ll'es,
and s,be was•highly aware of tl;lej:t pro. Urano 'li:vity tQWall_cls viol~nce and the use
of drugs ~the latte-r of w:hi<i: Saturno she nersel'f dab:bled m for a, time ~~s w~H:)~
Finally, she.le£t ;tliJ.at place fotJ. .aiaethett whidi, while sqm~. di,sta:r:rce a,.waf ,
was scill dose.;>t0 th.cose' Mars, ~ait~n a:nd 1:':\J.~ptutt.e lines-. Ov:er the ,n~xt
decade '0'! so ·she ma.tiaged t<i:>: learn skills tha.t la:ndett her a jP>.b 1n the film
indust:cy, though the wo~ Urano its.elf was difficult and demamclfng, Wheh she
finally"'reali!Z_e a 1Jhi:at at,ly effort to ;a:ct ifidgp-ertdently w0u!la be.·squelched by
th.o·se atoUlild her, sh.e and the husband she Saturno .ad byinow a~quiied le£t 1t0
move a~t:oss d;.e eo:untcy. ~ adq,iti®nal factQ:r ia the, m0.ve wa&, E11~-1;n~ital
problems ci;r®~ had be.e n e?X:peri€-neing, and both had st!G>E. Vênus , 1t4~hou:s~
Venus lines in the place fuey decicf<~d to move to. TJiioJ:l.'gli it w~s·a,sfruggle,
they:tn:anaged ro- r~pairtbie pr<i>blems in €heir ·:t-elationsh:ip artil aoth managed
to make progress ln their respectiv;'e- careers. Everything was mot mootirli'ght
and roses,. but the ·switch from M~ts-S~turn-Neptu.qe to Venus made a
definite difference in e;asing thyit situation.
As the latter story with its ·.relatiyely happy Venus-D eseenda:rtt ending
makes dear, the meanings far eaGh type of -line a.ie ,,:roughly in keeping
with t!he ttaditional meanings· fot each angle ih a horoseope. If a pla:m:et·J.s
on the Midlieaven, it mearrs' the .planet'.s ene~~ wi!ll ma>:nifest in terms of
yemr BOS:ifi0n in ;soeie}¥. If i't;';:s 0lll t1le Ascendant, &t ~s:M,o~s it$elf in yo~
o~ter persol;lality, so ·tih.at - the_,peep.l~ at~l:llld' y0u ~m s~~ yot!J. as fue 0u.ter
exp·t;es,sion - almost. the persoriifi<Dation: '- ,o£ th::J;t . planet-. If ip?s ~0n the;
IJes,cendant, this is- most apt to t;epresen>t a r>:t~jecri:0n cof. the planet's
energy, a plaee. wnere. 0ther people Wi11 symh>olize or act out tkat pla11:et
for you,_a:s the- Vefuus-De-scendant eo~p.le •ae;teo 0ut Venus for each other.
The Iml!li:ll Coeli, <?t' I C,is probably"tlle~~sdat'erestirtg and most tlfiex:pectedly impo1itant of the ~gles. T:he IE .J;epresents the fOlun.dation, with
whieh Netuno !:D::U. are equi~ped :when y0,u e~me int0 this w~rlcl, er the partieW,ar LINES AROUND 'THE WORl:.D individualized context into which you emerge when you are born - your
family, your ethnicity, your race, your social class, your religion. A planet
on that line indicates a change of that context into something else. For
instance, if you go to a place where Uranus is en the I C, you very likely
will transcend your family, your race, your background or your class in
orde.t to become a more individualized, Utanian person.
Aside from the obvious differences between the angles, the operation
of each planet is modified slightly, depending on which side of the line
one is considering (few localities will in fact coJ.ncide p.ttecisely with a
partic\:llar planetary line). For example, if you were considering a move to
a place near a Jupiter-rising line, the usualt pr(])mise of suecess might be
less in your control if you were west of the line, and more in your control
if you were east of it. Such differences result from the fact that the angles
of the chart - the Ascendant, Midheaven, Descendant and !mum Coeli,
or IC , are still and all part of the house structure. Thus, )f you were to
live west of your Jupiter line, your Jupiter experience would be coloured
by the rst-house tendency to be directly aware of your personal identity
as the fecal point for much of what happens to you. On. the other hand,
east of the line, the more subtle 1 z.th-house influence would tend to make
you feel that things which others see you as producing are actually coming
to you from outside. Neither viewpoint is better or worse than the other,
but the difference can at times be crucial. A general explanation of the
differences to be seen in each zone follows. THE ANGULAR LINES Ascendant/ut House (West of Line)
Among the possible manifestations you could see with a particular planet,
those involving your direct perception of your own personality- and identity
should be the major focus of interest. You could come to identify stroilgly
with the various functions, energies, personality attributes and activities of
this zone, and might consciously incorporate them into your repertory of
personality options. Real power can come from recognizing the nature and
potency of this influence, a pesitive personal enetgy which you can come
to symbolize in a very real way for others, whether through exaggerating
it, or through consciously acting out the positive aspects of its role. This
energy flows both ways, as you'll find that other people empower you,
2.8 LINES AND CR·G>SSIN<:;S recognizing yeut instinctive ability te> handle matters that either make
them uncomfortable or escape their understanding, perhaps because they
11 trike too close to the core of personality. In your personal relationships, you may tend to play the role .assigned by this psychological influence, and your partner may well play whatever is opposite. Success
comes from accepting thls role and leat?ning te manage and project it
consciously. Ascendant/I2th House (East of Line)
In this situation, your external personality is very strongly ooloured by ·the
psychological principles of the planet. However, others may see this more
clearly than you do, and in general you are inclined to see these principles
and their role in your life as things that happen to you, rather than things
you consciously do. Gaining control of these impulses can be difficult for
this reason, and you stand the .best chance to capitalize constructively on
the power of this zone or to integrate the planetary potentials it highlights if
yo\:1 worktowards un!=ktstanding 1?-oWi events that frequ,enclyor repetiti0\:lsly
befall you here really are the product of a consistent, inner attitude towards
yourself a111d your identity~ This may s~<;>und abstract, but it is still important,
because if you fail consciously to control your role in events that befall
you here, you could unconsciously be working against yourself. Midheaven/1oth House (West of Line)
llere a planet presents you with those possibilities which seem most outeroriented, yet personally relevant. Since this influence will tend to act itself
out in a social arena, you could find yourself thrust into situatio~s in which
Imposed leadership or responsibility requires you to develop the capacities
und skills of tb.e planet in .question. At first, of course, yem are likely to
be exposed te people and situations that command your. attention - or
rhat force themselves on you, if these are concerns which you tend to
deny having to deal with. In either case, they will pe>se examples of how
you can assume the required authority and thu·s properly act it out, but
very quickly you'll tind that you've been left on your own, immersed in
challenges and situations that clearly require you to develop the skills and
nwareness natural to this planet in a public and highly visible manner. If
you feel the world is watching you, that's because it is, as your career or LINES ARO•UND TH•E WORLD your vocational position in society demands acceptance of and growth into
the potentials signalled by this·. planet. Midheavenj9th House (East of Line)
In a location. such as this, those planetary potentials· which seem m0st
external, objective and detached from your self and your personality are
the ones most apt to manifest. The planet's influence will act itself out in
a soda:l arena, but more specifically and most often through people, situations and social or cultural influences that represent external authority or
the whole of society and its values. If you're in a position of authority at
this locality, you will clearly exemplify the potentials of this planet, but·
more likely you will .find yourself repeatedly exposed to others who act
out this .role for you and play the role of authority as well. You can
assimilate your own lead ership }i'Otentiais from t:heseexperien.ces, as·you are
powerfully influenced by cultUral, educational, legal or religious institutions.
Expect the people, gend~r and social roles, and the professions con.aected
with this planet to become dominant in your social and career life, and
anticipate that they will offer important guidance and valuable i.asights
about what your ultimate social power is and where it lies. Descendant/7th House (West of Line)
As manifestations of a strongly external nature are apt to predominate
here, you will likely (project' the qualities you ought to be learning from
the planet, and Netuno <Dur mate, partners and onhers closest to you will frequently
seem to exhibit the patterns and potentials associated with it. It is very
difficult for you to see how your own acceptance or rejection of parts of
yourself can bring this all about, and thus you may blame others when
you fall short in certain areas of your life. However~ thes€ other people
are really teachers and pupils at the same time, as they first show you parts
of yourself you are reluctant to accept, and then learn from your reactions.
One thing you may find mystifying, iri fact, is to hear people acknowledge
your importance to them, since you yourself may be unable to see the v:ery
qualities in yourself that they are acknowledging. For that reason, here you
will learn most by example, as the qualities of this planet often seem remote
and opposed to who yem are within. L'tNES ANT> CR<!J-SSINGS Descendant/6th House (East of Line)
,, Since a planet in this house for a given location is a litde east of the actual
planetary i.p.fluence, it is likely to manifest in a more extern.al and practical
fnshion. The planetary energies require your attention and understanding
by repeatedly challenging you with problem s, the soluti0ns of whlch requilie
you to accept and learn the potentials of that planet in ways that you might
not have anticipated. Many of these problems will deal with other people,
especially in day-to-day work and vocational situations. You will want to
Rce this planet as operating externaiJ. Netuno to tli'ose th:irtgs Netuno <!Ju identify as centta!l
to your concept of self and personhood, so if the concerns it represents
happen to be repugnant to you, there is real danger of such dements
Intruding quite beyond your control, forcing you to come to terms with
them, if only to 'keep them in their place - that is, out of your conscious
rnind. But such mental gymnastics can be very time-consuming, and a
waste of energy as weJl, so it is far better to take the numerous hints
offered by this planet and accept, develop and mature the qualities and
potentials of this zone. !mum Coeli/Jrd House (East of Line)
'11hose planetary matters which relate most to your environment and to
your growing awareness of it as ·an important lo:fl.uence in your personality
will be most strongly emphasized here. You are sensitized to your immediM.c neighbourhood and surroundings, challenged to react to external reality;
~u1d day-to-day immediate concerns by altering your personal image of
your identity in order better to conform to what the planet in question
r-epresents. !mum Coeli/4th House (West of Line)
Planetary energies relating directly to the influence of your family, cultural
or ethnic backgro"Qnd are most likely t0 manifest here. The planet tends
to act outside of you, polarizing your self-image in opposition to its more
ncgatiye potentials, requiring your devel0pment of its qualities by either
positive example or direct coercion. Who you are - meaning in this case
who your family, past and 'roots' have been - becomes a potent force in • LINES AROUND THE WORLD this creation of who you are growing to be, a force whose nature will
conform closely to the meaning of this planet Living here will change
your most inward concepts of self, often by bringing you into direct
confrontadon with your origins and your past. *
In addition·to the obvious ten basic lines, two other factors need to be
considered.
The first of these, which will not be a factor at latitudes greater than
about 2 3° north or south, is the relative distance of a planet exactly at
upper or lower culmination (M C or I C lines) from the nadir or zenith.
T hese are the points directly overhead (zenith) for a culminating planet or
directly opposite this (in essence, directly below your feet!) for a planet at
lower culmination (nadir). The first point is indicated in a standard ACG
map by a small oval at the latitude equal to that planet's declination, while
the second would be found on the' I C line at the same laticude, but in the
opposite hemisphere. For example, if a planet has a north declination of 21° o6',
its zenith point would fall in the northern hemisphere on its Midheaven
line at 21No6, and its 'nadir point' (not shown on a ACG map) would
fall in the southern hemisphere on the IC line at 21So6. In fact, this
example fits John F. Kennedy (Figure 5), whose Midheaven line runs just
east of Cuba, an island which covers latitudes from about 21 ° north to
2 3° north. Thus, the scene of Kennedy's greatest foreign-policy disaster .
is well within range of both the latitude and longitude where Saturn was
at its greatest height above the horizon at the time when Ke.nnedy was
born.
More important than this, however, is the idea of 'latitude crossings',
also referred to as 'line crossings', which are just what they sound like the latitudes at which lines for two given planets cross on a map. As such
crossings only involve the combination of a Midheaven or I C line on the
one hand with a rising (Ascendant) or setting (Descendant) line on the
other, they are somewhat like squares in their action, and have been found
to be about one third the strength of the lines themselves. Though most
ACG interpretation emphasizes the lin~s more than the crossings, the
latter are particularly important in those areas where one is not within 'orb'
of regular lines. That orb itself should be considered as about 700 miles
on either side (east or west) of a planetary line, or about ! inch on a
standard ACG map; and about 100 miles, or Urano inch, on either side (north LINES AND CROSSINGS or south) of a crossing. These suggested orbs have been determined through
experience and through feedback from Astro*Carto*Graphy users.
Finally, just as we can 'stack up' chart upon chart upon chart, so it is
possible to consider questions of astrological geography from a variety
of possible viewpoints, such as transits and progressions. Even within a
horoscope, this can quickly become unwieldy, requiring a good knowledge
of astrology and great care to interpret properly. When using a map, all
the more carre ·must be Qsed. For this reason, the best method of going
beyond the natal map to look at current indications is to combine progressions of the inner planets with transits of the ou.t er planets, since the
two sets of planets will move along at roughly the same speed.
These then are the basics of the mechanics of Astro*Carto*Graphy.
Understanding them, we can now consider how they are used by an
astrologer. 33 3
Shadowed Planets: Stages of
Psychological Growth An astrologer's clients generally have two types of problem: circumstantial
and repetitive. A cir<mmstantial problem is the produ«t of a moment or a
particular situation that is essentially of a transitory nature - for example,
'I can't seem tG> get the contractors to fix the too£ of my house.' T he
circumstantial problem is usually easy to deal with b ecause all the astrologer
needs to do is to identify the transits or progressions in the chart that
seem to have created it and then to explain exactly why it is happening.
Following on with advice 'as to when the problem is likely to stop, and
what transits would alleviate the problem with builders, the next step is
therefore to identify the solution. For example, if Saturn is transiting Mars,
and the client is having trouble in relationships with men, the astrologer
could begin by noting that since that transit is the clear reason for these
difficulties, a coming sextile of Jupiter to Mars might provide the solution
by helping to expand the consciousness of the .latter planet, so to speak.
This could be done through the client taking up athletics, or perhaps by
doing something like taking a trip to a foreign country - in short, by
engaging in some sort of Mars-Jupiter activity which would balance out
or integrate the undermined or unfocused M ars.
The second basic type of dilemma, the repetitive problem, is much mote
difficult to deal with. For example, a common problem of this type is the
complaint that 'every time.I get married, he turns out to be an alcoholic';
another typical example is the difficulty of holding a job. When the astrologer hears the phrase 'every time' as the client is talking about him- or
herself, and this leads to a history of two or three repeated .events of the
same kind, then it begins to become obvious that something at a deeper
psychological level is at the source of it. The teehni€)_ue of dealing with
such repetitive, deep-seated problems can be tied in to the geographic
dimension of astrology, and thus directly concerns Astro*Carto*Graphy.
Before seeing how this works, we must understand something about
34 SHAE>OWE'lD PLAJ>:!ETS ,. the growth and maturation of the psyche.\l'he psychological .st:JJucture at:
the root of such things as our personalities, our interests or our motivations
docs no~ emerge fully formed at birtih, any m0re than our p1lysk~ chru:actetiIHtlcs dq,..bviously the growth of the psyche must be considered ~pro~e~s,
JllSt as the groW<tifl of the body is a process. Pot the hU1i11an psyche,
wowth proceeds through the assimilation of unconscious contents into
the conscious mimi. I11 order to understand what is meant by this, first
ronsider how most of the experience your brain has accumulated and
t':ttcgorized a,s you interacted with the w0rld aronnd you from childhood
to your present age is ·not immediately available to you, but is rather
llll,ppressed into the unc0nsdous mind. From time to time, elements of
this unconscious emerge into consciousness in some form, but it is only
when you directly .acknowledge them and learn to deal with them - when
you can integrate them and assimilate them - that they become part of
your whole self as you reach a hew stage in the growth of your psyche.
Specialization is a very important concept in human behaviour. Why,
t'ot· instance, do some people live in the Arctic, while others live in New
York, or Paris, or Hong Kong? The answer to that question is that J:Deople
do not enjoy competition that emphasizes their weaknesses, and choosing
ntrcfully where they live is one way of dealing with it. Those living things
t'hnt inhabit the Arctic perhaps do so because they don't enjoy other things
I rying to kill them and eat their proteins. If you've ever had a lion, for
e-xample, try to kill you and eat your proteins, you know it is not a pleasant
cxpetience. Some will deal with this by living where the lions live and
lltkingon the role of hunter. Others, neither willing nor able to be hunters, Netuno <.~t mindful that lions inhabit hot, tropical climates, say tG themselves,
'Well, I'm going to go live in the-Arctic, so I won't get my proteins eaten.'
In each person, the psyche also specializes in this way, so that not
t•veryone equally expresses the mental structures associated with the planet
VMus, or the pla.n,et Jupiter, or the planet Pluto, since some planets may
lw more suitable for that person's immediate environment than others.)
Pnrtly as a method of adaptation, the psyche will choose one planet over
the other, and while this may be good in the short term, the result of this
lciii'I.Gl of specialization is that certain parts of your psyche will become more
tlt•vcloped, while others will lie dormant, at least until circumstances (either
t'XI'crnaJ or internal) challenge you to 0ultivate them.
If you're going to grow as an adult, then as you live your life and learn
llt'W things or are exposed to differing and changing situations, previously 35 LINES AROUND THE WORLD undeveloped parts of your psyche may begin to emerge and to demand
first development and then assimilation into your consdous identity. This
is in .fact the reason underlying the astrological version orCarl ~ery
important observation that 'every planet in the horostope seefs- ~uter
manifestation'. Every planetary principle in the chart needs to be expressed
at some time in the life, and it will seek outer manifestation whether or
not we wish this to be. A planet whic.;: Saturno is seeking m;tter expression, yetjs
being resisted by the .conscious ego, is what is called a 'shadowed planet',
and these are usualiy at the root of repetitive problems.
Some planets, when their turns come to emerge upwards into the conscious personality, cause a great many problems, something which happens
mainly in. those cases when we force them back down each time they try
to emerge. When we suppress them in this way, rather than accepting the:
situation we're trying to force, they go back down into the unconscious,
do their 'planetary push-ups' and get a little .stronger. Then, next time a
transit or progression comes to trigger them, they emerge once again only tl)is time they're a litde meaner, a little nastier and a little more insistent
on remai~ng out in the open. This cycle of a shadowed planet's emergence
and ·repression lies at the root of nearly all repetitive problems.
Certain planets generally seem less welcome than others as participants
in our emerging personality, while others seem to emerge very easily. For
instance, relatively few people have problems with the planet Mercury.,
though some indeed do. In our infe>rmation age, Mercury is usually very well
understood and appreciated, as there are educational institutions created by
our society solely to encourage the perfection and expression of that planet.
Thus, the planet of communications will rarely cause problems unkss
perhaps in the case of someo.l!le who suffers from a learning disability,
deafness or a speeeh problem, th0ugh when such problems have a psychological rather than physical origin, they may in fact indicate a suppression
of Mercury for other reasons. In contrast to the situation with Mercury,
the principles represented by Saturn or Pluto are less easy for most people
to deal with, and thus they are more often likely to be shadowed.
A ·s hadowed planet does not eme1'ge..into cogsciousness like Venus, ful1J,Ii
formed from the Cytherian sea-foam on the half-shell, but instead goes
through several typical stages hinted at previously which we will elaborate
on here. In the first of these, repression or denial, you refuse to accept
the fact that this particular psychological process is going on, even tho'ugh
you a:re in some sense aware of it. Art interesting example of the denia1 of a, -p>,sydiplogical p,attetn aR€1 the ll~s·uJ;.t 0£ $~~ deni~ is the &.toJZy of
ltomee at.:rd Juliet. TwxD happy tee:Fl\ag:;ers in &iocteepth-centaty ~t:ily fall in
love, as teena&ers·ate, we>nt~to <!10, ·and yet i:r<J: eopiflg :wiili the situati.~n theY'
duny-and repress aft eme:t:gj.tlg ps-ycholGgi.call potenti:d which m.i:ght €Otltrol
I hei:r .p,assion oand Gfl:artrrel it to m0re ·SO~ially- useful· emds-. We E:.a.a. M'sily
l~«,JUal:e this ·poti~ntial with Sawrn, as it re.p>resents the soci€thl -att<d ,Eaniilial
Hltxl!lctar~s tbtat contr.0l thetp, w}!etlq:er tlu~ Netuno are awaJ;e of it or .ta.ot. E.tieud
"·~ll)ecl. this {ulil,c~pn the '~uper:-ego<'. In. .thei:r im:apaeity ~nd . thek i.pabil,i:!i¥
1'0 abs.orli> this, e.m¢.r~v. Vênus Saturn. they SlJ.ppress ·it, aft~ the reswt 'is•tra,gedy.
When we 'supp..11ess atL emerging psy:ch<DlQgieal potential, tragedy is not
:1lway:s the result, bl!l:t we--ar.e usually highly aware G£ an intense-level 0f
dlscomfot-t -heveftheless. S0eiety,. or the.'super-eg~', tooll! precedence ®:v'er
Romtm :and Jiiliet"s own personal Saturn fuhctibn ef social eonsoiolllsfless.
'fhe next >Stage in fue accetDtanee: of an emergipg .psychological p.e.te11.ti1ll
IN proJection. At this s.tage, you.are mo,re aware of the pla{let, as you aeeep:t
llhe fact that what it r~presents exis.ts, but Netuno ;e;u se.e these · things .-~s exi~ting
In 0thers more, th:an yourself. Because of this., you ate ac.tua:lly lik:e~ Netuno to
nllld people w.ho .repres!imt the very thing·you -a te tryia Vênus to ~suppress pdj:mia:t-:htg ;your life n:HDre and mere_, :w;.I,;J:ej:he-r b-ecause ycm- a1re lll:ne'0ns<S:iOtrs1y
1~tttacted t€>' lthe.PX'l· . Júpiter ;1 ..so,me s.efl,se or simply hec~:use you are more aware 0f
them. Jn part, th,en; tthls s·tage. of proj·eetion allCDws ;yolJ. to st¥t<iy tit~ way,
ill which thls potential has -.develope@ in o.fu.e.ts, ,familiaciziqg ; Netuno ;ow:sdf wit; Saturno it w:bil€ at the same ·time not o;V\ertly €JQmmitting te ·solving it-s preblerns
wlthih yours.el:f.
However~ sinc:e you are still S·l.:lpptessing this potential within y6-urself,
d1.u'.iag those times -when YP¥ are doing s_o more actively and aggressivdy,
you >are likely to fina yoarself in c@nflict with tho.s~e <qn t0 whom : Netuno (:)u a:r.~
pt'<?ject'ing the. plapet, ancl this can eause-pmblems. A basic rule is, t:Bat an
OIUC11gi1ilg psychological potential will .ma:aifes't as- an extem-al event to. tfu.e
d"!fee that it is being repress·ed. Th~ more it 1s· .rep:11essed and not accep~teG.,
l'lll.c m'G>re it is going to biappen as. ~til external ev:ent that s.eems to be fate,
liM JUt:lg said. Thus, s.eemingly 'fated occurrences that Saturno ~ppen to people ate
m~t just things, that happea randomly 0t .foolishly or s·:tupidly because
of~» unlqcky .B;lrow of the die~, but rather they represent an emerging
p!lychohDgica:l pote11tial tha,t has been;repliess.ecd:a:ncl.thetefete is manifes-ting
llH fate.
1m the next stage ill the aw;aremess ·€>'Hu:i etnetgi-l<lg"psych0l0gical potential,
'll!tsit:nilatiot}', you actually begin to deal with cite planet, makirrg.~ conscious LINES AROUND THE WORLD attempt to incorporate its particular energy into your personality. Just how
one should do this is not necessarily self-evident, so assimil-ation may
actually be ~ process of trial and error, and an astrologer or other counsellor
is often helpful in making this step successfully.
The final sta,ge beyom:d this, 'exemplification', does not oecar in ev:ery
case. Reaching this level is the main way in which one becomes a celebrity.
The Pope and other well-known religious leaders, for example, take care
of our Jupiter for us. We ourselves can talk to God whenever we want to
if we happen to be in touch with our own personal J upiters - you just,
so to speak, call the Deity up on the cosmo-phone and ask him or her
whatever you want. But certain people who have set up institt;ttions for ·
handling communication with God will tell us, 'Oh no, you have to go
through us. We do the connection with tthe divine so much better than
you that you really should give us your money and we'll take care of that
Jupiter stuff for you!'
Those who act out a planet well can do it by proxy for those who are
in denial about that planet and its potential within themselves. Even though
this might sound like a desirable stage at which to be, being an 9bject of
other people's projections can be quite difficult, mostly because the people
whom you are serving iri this way will not let you be your own self. Thu~,
if it comes time to grow beyond that role you have taken on, those whom
you have been relieving of the burden of dealing with their Jupiters or
Saturns will now have to face them squarely. An example of this might
be seen in the televangelist Jimmy Swaggart, who apparently developed a
high-pressure, very secret and somewhat bizarre sex life that seemed to
deny everything he preached. Perhaps when Swaggart was a young man,
he thought to himself, 'I'm just so holy and great, and God's talking to
me.' As he grew older, he began to find out that thelie was mote to his
'
psyche than that, but he had placed himself in a position which made it
difficult for him to change. As with so many others in this situation, he
tried to repress and deny and project and then deal with these furious
energies within himself through the back door, so to speak. But the end
result of exemplifying one planet while· denying others is often the same
as it was in Swaggart's case - some day somebody catches you, and then
everyone involved in the situation must change, quickly and traumatically.
Thus we see that through a .series of steps, every planet, every potential,
in the horoscope seeks outer manifestation, eventually emerging into conscious acceptance. Some planets encounter more resistance than others - ~-----------,..:::::::::: ~ t•csis.tan:~e b! Netuno the ,ege·- 'aPd the~~ ·~r€,'hl:Ie'd9)1es we·cal1 'sha~ewed plao.~ts~. Remembenngthatwh:em anitlmeJ: sitl:lationis £otmade C$D.11Sil:ious,,it Saturno ~pp~.ta.s
ol.!lttside ,as fate~ we can ·see that an -e.neo.untet with. a shadowed pl-anet is
Lnore -apt to manifest as am event. This'· is partietilarly true irt r6lat:i:en. t(j
As.tt:o>i<CartO'*Gna,ph_y, as when }rOU tr.t;av:el to a: f>lace where a sliacloyve~
plrut~t is: ang\}lat, ¥O.u ate ~ost lik€ly to. e"*p,er: Urano ;mce Jt a:s ·e~te:mal ev.e.tats
that relate.to that plooltlt. When Netuno ~>Jit.are bro'llght {ace tq fac:~e with-the ·:vet.- Netuno rhLm. Vênus :you have been av,ojc31i~ Vênus , it must show itsdf in some way.
The longer a shadow-ed ,planet is 'ignored and the ·ti10te- it is foJtcibly
1•cpte's:sed, the ,greater the 'charge' it will have when it tries to' emerge the
Ltext time. Thus, it will E>ecom,e mo,11e fat~ful ~an$1. ·ev:en:tful,.·and prabaJbly
l)egati~e, ih its manifestation. Tta:velling to a ,plac.e wl-).ere tha~ planet is
Rt':\gti~J.at; .is alm0s_t .a Vênus !.}~rantee $at sqm.ethivg like .this· will happ~m, as it
b.tings the l!lrgency of. tlle iss:ues it-represepts im your life 'front ·and centre.
. Tibte z - Possible it:fllicators' of a shadowed planet
o in a cadent .hou§~ (sr(\l,. 6£}1, 9th, but pa;cl;icJilarly' -J. 2.th)
.
o stressful asp~ecfls·, .esge~i'lrlly from .outer ·planets
o ~quare er ~pp0site the SUtil or Mocu!l
o genetally on, the western ('other? side of the chat~)l though particlillatly
ih the .6th through ·8.th Saturno :ol:lses
o debili;tated ilifough sigp placeD?-ent
o una~pe.cted
o a singleton Sol 'compus.t' by being· within a degree :of tlhe Stm.
.
' ~ p>lanet conditioned by any of the abo;v;e aspects ot pla:aements should he e:xamirHid carefully to c<;msi<l¢r. wheclle.r # t;might present the, n~tive with
some- diffi<>::u~ty i,n .expressi0a, ~f i~s ene~gy. The..more iP.ems in the list
I hat apply to· a partic_
W,ar plat;J.et,, th.e'_ more likely it ls to be shado,:w.ed~ How can we..identify a·shadowed--planet il1''a l:iotosc<ape? Wh'e-re would
we expeGt it! to fall in a chart? lf it's· 0n the artgles..; it's probably mot
1!1\adowed, but if it's c~dent, it cou!ld be. ~treeys~'l}l ·a;~pects, espe~ially q~
cmter phmets·, are ~so a good indiiq,te~. A sqlllare or opposition to th.e S~n LINES AROUND THE WORLD or the Moon can be problematic as well, as these are, the two planets more
closely identified with your self. Thus, for examp;·ie, if yout Sun (your
consciousness) is opposite Saturn, you would tend to see that planet as an
external factor that it would be difficult for you to assimilate, to merge
with your consciousness. Any planet 0n the wes.te.rn ·side o.f the cha·r t
(which itself represents the external side of reality) is likely to be a little
more shadowed than the same planet would be if found in the east. Other
things that might show a shadowed planet include placement in an adverse
sign or Saturno <!Jtlse, being unaspected or being a singletO'n.
In general, we can say that any planet which is assodated with a 'not-self'
idea is also more likely to be shadowed than are others in a chart. The
planets of the s.elf are, of course,
. the Sun and the Moon, plus Venus for
a woman, or Mars for a man. Other planets, sttch as Saturn, Uranus,
Neptune or Pluto, are essentially not-self and thus will usually be more
difficult to assimilate. Saturn, in fact, is almost always shadowed for everybody to some degree. Venus may be difficult for a man to understand, given
the way our culture distinguishes between men and women. Conversely, it
is usually more difficult for a womah to understand Mars. So one of these
last two planets is often shadowed by virtue of its being the opposite sex
from the person in question.
As an exercise in finding shadowed planets, consider an example chart,
which is that of a woman named Grace (Figure 6, page 48). Saturn in the
7th is the Sun ruler, but this planet, which is, as I said, nearly always
shadowed, is on the west, reinforcing this. Mars is placed in the I zth house
in Pisces, a mutable water sign, and is a singleton - all of which contributes
to making it shadowed. Since this is the chart of a woman, Mars would
most likely be a problem for her anyway, but this is almost certain, given
its placement. So we can see that Saturn and Mars are definitely shadowed
for this woman, and even though this is not unus-ual for her sex (since
Saturn archetypally represents the father and Mars is the opposite sex),
they are shadowed for her even more than usual. Also, Saturn is exactly
square the Moon, and as a woman iaen.ti.fies with hls Moo.n, this is one
more reason to consider Saturn as higilly shadowed. Despite this, neither
planet is badly aspected overall. Mars is part of a loose Grand Trine with
the 7th house and the 4th house and it widely sextiles the Sun. Saturn
itself is sextile the Sun. Because of this, despite the fact that we 'can see
both planets as shadowed; they do not represent any sense of urgency
or CrlSlS. SH~D. OWED PLANETS· How are shadowed planets such as these -activated astrologically? When
are they likely to start pounding on the ceiling of the basement we, keep
1hem locked in for the first twenty· or thirty years of our lives? Most of
1heir time in that basement will be spent pulling strings and doing things
like a:ttraccing us to bosses; who resemble our fat11ers or getting us into
rclationships with people who resemble our mothers or our sisters. In
other words,, for much of its existenee the average shadowed planet is just
n guiet yet insistetl't source of psychological tension. It is much like the
Wjzard of Oz as it pulls your levers and jerks your strings, and all the
while your psyche whispe.ts soothingly, 'Pay no attention to that planet
behind the curtain!'
When does a shadowed planet finally come into conscious awareness?
When does it demand attention, saying, 'No more basement for me! I'm
going to come upstairs in the living-room and march around in front of
all your friends!' Three circumstances familiar to astrologers might activ;ate
this emerging psychological potential. The first of these is time, as exemplified by progressions and transits. Obviously if a planet is strongly
nspected by an important progression or transit, this will activate it and
hring it out of the closet. For example, in I 984 the progressed Sun in
(;race's chart moved to I Mercúrio (:) I z' Aquarius, at which time it had just pass.e d .
Its opposition to the Moon and was exacdy square Saturn. To an astrologer
this should have indicated that during this time the whole Moon-Saturn
pi'Oblem in this chart would demaad some ·sort of conscious acceptance.
Similarly, in 1984 there was a Saturn return, and therefore transiting
Snturn was square Grace's progressed Sun. During that period, the progressed Sun was activating Moon square Saturn, while transiting Samrn at
us own natal place was adding its own insistent pressure at the same points
Ill dle chart. This kind of pattern involving transits and progtcessions is the
thing that most often brings repressed planets up ·out of our psychological
hnsements to start marching around in the living-room, so to speak. Thus,
no matter who you are or where you are, time will eventually bring about
l•ither the emergence of psychological potentials or events that signal they
Me trying to emerge.
Another astrological factor that can bring shadowed planets out into
I he open is a relationship. When you become involved in a relationship,
ym1 are putting youtself into a specific asttelogical €limate, as shown in
1he chart of the other person and its aspects with your chart, and this can
put pressure on shadowed planets. If you mat:1iy someone whose Saturn
41
• LINES AROUND THE WORLD conjoins your Sun, it is much like having a transit of Saturn to your Sun
every single time you interact with that person. This will inevitably bring
a psychological stress to bear on your Sun, forcing you to confront the
energies and potentials of both Sun and Saturn. If either happens to be
shadowecl, th.e relationship will rt1ote than 11ke1y bring them out in the
open.
The third means of identifying an emerging psychological potential, and
one that is not often considered by astrologers in this light, is loca).ity. Just as
with a relationship, moving brings you into a new astrological environment,
though in this case it is your own planets' relationship to the angles of that
chart which can bring one or another of these planets into consciousness.
Whether you rure ready or not, the potential of a shadowed ptariet on a
local angle will cause it to intrude on yo-q.r consciousness in a yery direct
way. Even when you do not move to a place where a particulat" planet is
prominent, events or people related to that area can have the same effect,
stimulating any shadowed planets angular there.
So we can see three different ways in which an astrological potential
can emerge: transits and progressions (time), relationship (personal) and
either travel or long-distance communication (space). More often than not,
some combiaation of the~e three will act to trigger the emergence of a
planet. If the psychological potential is really demanding its time in the
sun, then you can find all three of those operating at the same time, which
is what we will see as we look further at Grace's story in this chapter and
the next.
Repetitive problems are thus an indication of emerging archetypal or
planetary potentials that are being repressed. Encounters at earlier ages
and stages of consciousness occur when it is not possible to assimilate
what that pl!lnet represents. In these cases, traumatic experiences often
result as a psychological potential tries to push its way into consciousness,
only to be repressed. Such repression begets the cycle that itself becomes
the repetitive problem, as despite the repression, a planet not yet assimilated
stays just beneath the surface of awareness, wreaking mischief in our daily
lives.
In order to help a client solve this type of problem, the astrologer must
do several things, beginning with an examination of the chart for aspects
that might serve to link the psychoiogical potential with other more productive life activities. Another approach is.to look at the astrological picture
in place when this problem occurred in the past, and to note when similar
42 SHADOWED PLANETS progressions or transits will occur in the future. Finally, the astrologer-must
explain these things to the client, show what mitigating factors the client
cnn call on to deal with the difficulty and, first and foremost, explain in
just what sense this recurring problem represents an important stage in
psychological growth that must be readied in order to get rid. 0f the
l'cpetitive problem more or less 'p ermanently.
Where Astro*Cartp*Graphy is concerned, the line closest to a particular
place will identify the planetary energy most likely to emerge there. If you
t•onsciously want to bring that planet to the surface, you thus can go
directly to a place under one of the lines on your ACG map, meaning
1hat you don't have to wait for transits or progressions. On the other hand,
If your job or other circutnstances require you to move to a par1;icular line,
this could due you in to tili.e fact that this p.syehological potential is s~el_cing
to emerge in your life in some way.
As already pointed out, you don't have to go to a place under a planetary
line in order for that planet to manifest. For instance, Jimmy Carter had
his Mars and his Jupiter strong in Iran, and he obviously did not have to
p;o there, since in essence it came to him. Mars and Jupiter happen to be
very shadowed planets in Jimmy Carter's chart, s_o when he became president, and thus had a -world-wide span of ir.l£l.uenc:e, Iran came to him in
tbe person of the Ayatollah Khomeini. His Mars and Jupiter lines thu's
manifested outside as fate, and we all know what the result was of that.
Different planets will react differently for different people. Not everyone
~oing to a Jupiter line will have the same experience. For example, if you
lutppen to be a Sagittarian and thus enjoy telling off-colour jokes at church
111 1cials in order to see the reaction, then you will get along much better
on a Jupiter line than will a Virgo, who finds the buffoonery unpleasant
.tnd more than a little vulgar. Also, if you're a woman, your experiences
under a Mars line will be different from if you're a man. If a man moves
to his Mars line, he,is likely to be more aggressive, unless his Mars happens
It> be a shadowed planet, as it was in Jimmy Carter's case. Carter is meek and
mild, not at all 'Marsy', so when his Jupiter and Mars (inflated aggression)
mnnifested together, it could hardly manifest in any way but outside, as
tilt c.
'fhe typical man, however, will go to his Mars line and become more Gêmeos ~J,grcssive unless he is a person with a shadowed Mars. A womah,
the
111 her hand, will have to begin the process of assimilating her Mars when
Nhc goes to a Mars line. rh.is will probably hap>pen in the form of an external on • 43 LINES AROUND THE WORLD event - and often through ·an association witH' a man. After spending a
certain amount of time with him, she will learn enough about Mars to
assimilate it herself.
Let's look again at Grace's horoscope on p. 48 now ~nd consider this
woman's two most outstanding shadowed planets - Mars because of the
1 zth house and Pisces, and Saturn because of the 7th house and Scorpio.
Both of them, by the way, are ·actually tied up with her 7th house, because
one is the ruler of the 7th and the other is the occupant. So we know that
when these planets are activated we're going to have some 7th-house type
. of activities, mainly relationships.
When is this particular problem going to be most manifest in her entire
out the time around her Saturn
life? Most astrologers would probably single
,
return, that point in the 29th year when transiting Saturn returns to its
natal place. As we have already noted, her Saturn return happened to
coincide with the opposition of her progressed Sun to her natal Moon.
Note in her chart that the closest aspect she has is Saturn square the Moon,
meaning that anything concerning Saturn will also involve her Moon.
Capricorn and Cancer are on her Midheaven and I C, meaning this entire
theme must play itself out in relation to home and family. And, as we shall
see, this is exactly what happened. ( 44 Júpiter Grace's Saturnian Journey I laving seen how shadowed planets can be found in the chart, and having
discussed the various mechanisms by which they can emerge, let's take a
t•loser look at the geographical dimension of this emergence and the role Gêmeos ! plays along with the other better-known factors. Of the three main
triggers of astrological potential, perhaps time is the best-known, and in
1his case the time factor is most obviously involved through the return of
Saturn to its natal position, which 4appeJ;).S to everyone around the age of
twenty-nine. The second trigger, relationship, is less obvious in its import,
though it might become more so if we had data on some of the ' main
players in Grace's life during the time period we'll be discussing. Most
Htriking in this case, however, is the geography of Grace's journey through Saturno ~ Saturn return, as the series of events we will describe took place mainly
ulong Saturn lines and at the latitudes of important crossings of Saturn
with other planets. (Both her map and horoscope are found on pages 48
nnd 5o- 51).
First, let's consider an essential part of the background to the events
1hat transpired around the time of her Saturn return, beginning with the
disintegration of her family with the divorce of her parents during her teen
years. Though in many ways what happened to her is not too different
I rom other stories we might hear in this day and age, the most tragic part
uf it for Grace was the effect it had on what had been a wonderful
ll(jlationship with her father. Before puberty arrived and her sexuality began Gêmeos > burgeon, she was in fact her father's favourite, and she was even invited
Into his life by being allowed to attend various social functions related to
his profession, a role that might normally be taken on by a wife. However,
''" her mother had little interest in such things, Grace for a time played
1h~ role · of a kind of social surrogate for her mother, just one bit of
t·vidence of the affection her father had for her, as well as the interests
they held in common.
45 l 1~1 LINE'S A.ROUNE> THE W<:>.·R'LD }l{t plilberty_, ~tQnnd 1 Mercúrio @8, Grace· began to dts:ta:nce. Saturno ~rsd; {1r9rn bet
father, Sh~ wa~ growing up ·aqd .rnoviQ. Vênus en ma nQtrm~ way, ~stablishing Saturno ~r o;wo. neJwQtk of frknds as well as pursUing a':ctiViiti<7s -usual to someon~
her age. Ber .fa.ther, howeY:er, wa:s losing his.surrogate marriage eompanion
and he waS\ angry and,_as we shall see, v.;engeful. A mo~ath after she was
allowed to b.egin dating at the age of sixteen, hei: father stormily announGed
that he wanted a ·divorce fi:om Grace's '1hotlierl a:nd, in almost the same
bnea~, told Gra:ee he didn't love _
het: any more. Th~mgh he never ~rep~at~d
th~s. statetpent, fpr Netuno ;ears Gr,aee felt deva$tatet;l and pe.t;pfe:x:~d by. his outb\ltSt, whi~ Saturno sh~ felt sho:ul€1 have beeH ~ed .a t Saturno ~:t. HHi>ther. Qn1y years
later Mid .she hegin .to understand that: he was Fl:Qerely; lasl:iiri.' Vênus olitt at her £et
leaving him i·b. an empt; Netuno . marriage -as, she !Degan: to~date. Alni:@.st'bverrught he
became eritica'l of Saturno 'er in a way he had not been in tbe· past, particularl>r:
attaeEng her· for any attetmpt she made to ma,ke l;J.erself more attras;tiv~
aad ·ap.peali~ Vênus . Pe.11hap15 far WtOtse than tblat; for legal rea·s<::>os he .stayed in
the hous:e as the clhroree pt;oceeded, C1ieating a strait:\ed Sltl{lati()n whi.ch
was o.liily aggra:v:ated wh.ea b0th her paren:ts, who weren't s:peakiag t0 on¢
anothet,. made Graee .their 'co·nf:idante and comier', as -she described it. Sl:ie
offen refel~s to tfus grim sifuatiem as her tirs·l! ceunselliag j.ob. I:flterestingly,
her father aru:tounced that he wanted ·a divorce to end this ma.triage off
.cineteeta yeats alnxest coiJaddent with a lunar edipse that occur.lled within
t:?le degrees of G:face's- natal Moon, an:d sql!la:ting her Sawn~, ·0f eo~se,
During the divorGe p.r0<tess, and whlkher patents wene li:ving 'separated'
in -the same house, her mother, ih an attempt .a t t:evenge, too1{, a lov:er.
This was a grave mistake from a legal point <o'f View, because, as the law
stood .in that .time and place, it _gave her husband leverage that allowed
him to keep the bulk of them common wealth. Between the relatively small
a:m<;>unt allotted to her an.d her naive rnj.smana,gement .of i:t, ill het later
years tt was a 's.tmrggle fQr Gtrace's mothe.r t'0 make ends ;me~t. Thus, the
sitq.ation that began.in t97-1 played itself out agonizingly oven many yeat's.
Grace and her siblings watched fr0m afar as their Jather, distancing hi-mself
from them ·and rejecting their mother, bailt ;a new life for b:if.nself while
their mother's p.1rospects V[ithe.t:ed Gn th€ ¥fie. Grace herself left home,
m<Dvihg as. f~ away as she cquld po~sibly go and still b~ in the sa:Ul,e
conntry, ~s so0n ~s she had finished high -&ehool in early 1974. .Pell0wim: Vênus after Gra<Se's ·'greatesc;a.pe', as. she e-aJ.J:ed.it, <i'ame a period.of her life that
eoincides well with the-repression aad denial phase of a ·shadowed planet
- or in this case two of them, Mars and Saturn.
• • Netuno ' GRACE'S SATURNIAN JOURNEY For someone observing from the outside, her life from that point on
would have showed the same kinds of ups and downs experienced by
many of her generation. She attended a university for a year, then moved
It) the west coast of Canada at the invitation of a friend, ditching both
hur university cafeet and ·the last geographiGal ties with her family, thou~ Saturno Hhe would return occasionally for visits. During the first six' or seven years
on the west coast, she fell in and out of love a few times, hung out in a
high~powered community of performance artists with political connections,
and developed an interest in becoming a psychologist, which she in fact
{'Ventually became. At this time, Grace slowly began to separate herself
from the life of the artistic community. After attending a large conference
In Los Angeles in :November 1982, she made a firm commitment to her
cat:eer.
It was during the p>eriod in which she began exploring the best way to
begin her studies that Grace made the contact which was to provide the
theme (both geographical and psychological) 'that ran through her Saturn
return, signalling the painful process of Saturn's emergence. In the summer
of 1983, while in Toronto, she had occasion to meet an in-law, a native
[}f Trinidad who casually invited her to visit him during Carnival in the
apring of the following year. Grace accepted, though at the time she was.
c.1uite sure her finances wouldn't allow her to make the trip. When the time
came, however, she somehow managed to scrape together the money to
take what turned out to be a fascinating journey to her Saturn line (see
her map, Figure 7).
In February 1984, when he sent her a postcard saying that he was
l!xpecting her to come down to Trinidad for Carnival, she decided at the
last minute to make some quick travel plans to visit this place where she
had never been before. When she arrived at the Port of Spain airport 'in
early March r984, with Carnival in full swing and the country crowded
with visitors from all over the world, she immediately found herself, in
her own words, 'immersed in a sea of black men'. As a fair-haired white
beauty, she rather stood out in the airport crowd, and during her wait for
her host to pick her up, an endless stream of cab drivers approached her,
offering to take her wherever she wanted to go, and generally to show her
n good time. That, along with her feeling of being quite alone, made her
feel highly uncomforfable, but also made · Saturno er more than ready for the
vacation which was to follow. On many occasions she would find herself
~he only white person in crowds of black men and women, a new exp7rience
47 GRAGE'S SA -x:uRNIAN JOURNEY I ell' her, despite her upbringing near a large city with a diverse racial mixture
In which whites were probably a minority.
As her adventure began, transiting Saturn had stationed retrograde just
1wo degrees short of its return to its natal position in her chart, and Mars lmd conjoined her natal Saturn just two days before the station of transiting
' Snturn. It is also worth noting that Mars 'haunted the early degrees of
Sc:orpio through mid-August of that year, adding an urgent emphasis to
hur pJJolonged Saturn return. As if Mars and Saturn pressuring her natal
Snturn were not enough, her progressed horoscope also indicated a waterNhcd time as her pr~gressed Sun in the 10th house was opposing her natal
Moon in the 4th, which meant that both were squaring natal Saturn in the
7th during the time that it was emphasized and re-emphasized by transiting
Mats and Saturn. Perhaps the most interesting and direct reflection of the
deep father-mother symbolism embedded in these progressions .and tran~ths was a brief and wqolly unsatisfying affair she had in Trinidad with a
11nti;ve-born Trinidadian doctor who was himself there on vacation from
his medical practice in New York City - an awkward affair which was
c'onsummated at his aged mother's house, as she lay dying in the next Gêmeos )Om. The house where she was to stay was, like many in Trinidad, built so
th~t the ground floor, which one might call the 'party floor', was completely
open. All over the country, all-night parties took 'place on these ready-made
dnnce floors, which are actually an architectural feature designed to prevent
llooding during the rainy season. Speakers as large as refrigerators boomed
out the latest calypso tunes while everyone drank large quantities of highprc>of sugar-cane moonshine, smoked lots of marijuana and danced. Given
her earlier apprehension at the airport, what was Grace to think as she
became the centre of attention not only for her whiteness but also because
Hhc was, at the age of twenty-nine, often the only childless person in the
w oup, something which lead to many friendly offers to remedy her situation
n situation almost unheard of in a country where at that age most people
hnve become parents several times over, frequently with different mates.
If the offers themselves made her aware of how very different and alone
~ he was, it probably did not help that these sexual advances were punctuated
by the national dance style, which was sensual and seductive to the point
wbere the men would often be vety obviously physically aroused as they
111bbed up against the women.
Her time in Trinidad was memorable for many other reasons, however, 49 LINES AROUND THE WORLD NE SA VE SU JU UR ME MO PL MH MH MH MA MH IC I C MH IC IC MH • 60' 40' 20' I •..,
' t r' • • 20' 40' .. 160' MO osc 140' 120' 100' MA
ASC so· 40' NE osc 20' SA osc GRACE'S SATURNIAN JOURNEY NE SA
IC IC VE MO IC MH PL
MH MA SA
IC ASC 140" R U S S I
60" •.. 40" /FtC 20" ,; .... ... I C• Gêmeos 0 .. ....·.· •, •, • •s .
I A '• ' .. o· I INDIAN •, OCEAN .. '•~ol
~· 1,• 20' 40' Gêmeos 20" 40' 120' SU JU UR ME MA NE PL VE SU JU UR ME DSC ASC ASC DSC DSC ASC ASC ASC ASC OSC DSC ASC Figure 7- Grace's journey in space and time LINES AROUND THE WORLD as in many ways her contact with this culture was like being on another
planet. Funeral pyres burning along the rivers and by the oceans were
evidence of the practice of Hinduism in this largely Catholic country. The
local flora and fauna seemed exotic as well, and she sampled some by
eating (iguana) and some by more direct contact (one day, while she swam
in the sea, she was stung multiple times by jellyfish). The events surrounding
a machete murder also made an impression on her that stays with her to
this day. All qf this, added to the partying and the sexual stimulation,
served to deepen her Scorpio/Saturnian experience.
At the end of nearly a month of fun with a core group of new friends,
something sped~ occurred. An enormous black man her age, who was
married wi~ children and w~s a high-level harbour official, invited her to
walk with him.on the last evening of her visit. As they strolled out behind
the house and into a big sugar-cane field under a canopy of stars, Grace
was shocked when he suddenly lifted her up high over his head and
declared his love for her - and then began weeping. He confessed that
until he met her he had hated all white people, and he shared some painful
memories from his youth of the British and their influence over Trinidad.
Getting to know her had now changed how he felt. Grace recalls this as
her most cherished memory of the entire trip. She herself had, of course,
met a simil.ar (though certainly lesser) demon, ;recalling the <:lifference
between how she had felt in the airport, much of which came from her
awareness of being the only white face in a sea of black ones, aggravated
by menacing cab drivers, and how perfectly natural it seemed to be in this
situation now. For the first few days there, she had in fact been quite
uncomfortable, but had dealt with this in a consciously positive way by
telling herself that here was a new experience and she had to embrace it
in order to leam from it.
After leaving the scene in Trinidad, on·the way home she took advantage
of a brief stopover in Barbados to call up a friend of hers from a payphone,
a Capricorn man who lived in Ottawa, right along her Saturn Descendant
line. She ended up spending a few days with him before she flew home to
the coast, and though they got along well, there was no sexual involve1n:ent,
although Grace was deeply attracted to him. Starting in July of that same
year, just as Mars was finishing its long transit of Scorpio and as Saturn
was beginning the forward motion that would bring it into c:ontact with
her natal Saturn, he sent her a ticket and she spent six weeks with him, GRACE'S SATURNIAN JOURNEY though again ·i t turned out to be a disappointing effort to take a nice
friendship to a romantic level.
Around this time, and still in the, depths of her Saturn return, she began
to come face to face with a decision she had made back when her parents
were divorced, especially considering how her mother ended up financially.
This decision was simply that she never wanted to be put in the position
of being financially dependent on a partner, either thtough marriage or a
common-law relationship. However, she began to notice more and more
that the men who wanted to be in her life tended to be wealthy and
powerful, and in fact a milllonaire even proposed to het at one point. The
result of all this attention was simply to reinforce her decision not to be
put in the position of becoming accustomed to a lifestyle she could not
maintain financially on her own should the relationship -dissolve. On one
level that might have been a wise decision, but at the same time the interest
she attracted from men of wealth (her father was, after all, himself a
highly paid professional) signalled at least some movement from denial to
projection in the emergence of her shadowed Saturn.
After the brief but unfulfilling fling with her friend in Ottawa, she
journeyed to Montreal, where she made eontact with someone who
specialized in the style of therapy she wanted to study. In a few brief
exchanges with him in August 1984 on the subject of setting up a study
group, he encouraged her to pursu.e the idea. Thi·s led to a second meeting,
in Vancouver, at which Grace proposed that he lead the group for a year,
which he agreed to. At their third meeting in two years, though no previous
sexual interest had been shown by either of ·them, the iRstractor surprised
her over a late dinner one night by proposing an affair in Montreal, at a
later date when his wife would be out of town. Though u~prepared for
this, especially since she .hadn't sensed. any initial attraction, she was none
the less drawn into a long and often painful drama that took her to the
next step in bringing her Saturn into consciousness - it was now at least
tapping at the door, asking to be let out.
After a brief involvement with the instructor, in August 1985, she told
him firmly that she wasn't going to rearrange her whole life by moving
acros~ the country from Vanc;ouver to Montreal to study with Saturno .i.m and
take on the role of mistress in order to accommodate him. This, of course,
meant he would have to tell his wife and, most likely, end the marriage if
he seriously wanted to become involved wirll Grace. Not wanting to lose 53 LINES AROUND THE WORLD Grace, when his wife came back from her summer trip he in fact confessed
to her about the affair, thus beginning the process of ending his marriage.
Grace was on the edge of this, involved with him both as lover and student
since she had, as she initially suggested, organized the study gr0up. The
encling of tHe marriage took nearly tw:<D years, dutiag wPich time she
finished her university education.
As the instructor's marriage came to an 'end, it became apparent that
Grace's relationship with him had descended into routine, and she finally
reached the conclusion that perhaps her major role in his life was to help
him get out of a marriage he could no longer endure. Despite the almost
two-year relationship, both partners had resisted moving in with each other,
and she now decided that their time together was coming to. an end.
However, a few months after the £nal break in the spriflg of 1987, and
after spending some months considering what kind of partner she really
ought to be spending her time with, she met her future husband. After
their meeting in late 1987, she began living with him immediately and
ended up as an adviser to highly placed people in Canada's capital city,
Ottawa (which is, as we have seen, on her SA DSC line). It was with him
that she reached the final phase in coping with her Saturn.
Before continuing the account 0fher life, however, note that in. Grace's
story we have seen all three modes of triggering the emergenee of a
'
.
shadowed planet. First of all, the time dimension was attributable to the
coincidence of her Saturn return with the opposition of progressed Sun
to natal Moon - spiced, we might say, by transiting Mars. The personal
dimension shows itself in two ways, the first of which involves t:he kinds
of social relationships thrust upon her in Trini~ad. There she had to learn
to face some of her deepest fears, both racial and sexual, and her forthright
effort to face both might have clued her in, at least unconscic>usly, to the
fact that she c0uld confront the dark side of Saturn in which was embedded
her feelings and fears relating· to both her mother and her father.
These two astrological dimensions, time and personal relationship, would
probably be singled out by most astrologers as central to Grace's development. More interesting, however, is the distinct spatial and thus geographical triggers to the emergence of Grace's Saturn. In order to see this, look
closely at Grace's ACG map and note that the Saturn Descendant line
goes right through Trinidad, and also through Ottawa, through Montreal
and everywhere that was important in this whole chain of events. In other
words, some of the most crucial events from her Saturn return actually
54 1 GRACE'S SATURNIAN JO·URNEY look place right on her Saturn line, and transit:iag Satu;rn ..itself would have
hccn present all along that line, or very close to it, in the context of Grac0's
•
natal map.
The events of that year and later events that flowed from them were
t•cplete with Satutm, symbolism. T:o begin with, consider th~ Roma:m aame
lot 'carnival'- the·Saturnalia. While the Romans were probably not drinking
:mgar-cane moonshine, smoking marijuana and 'groin dancing' to Latin
t•hythms, the purpose of their Saturnalia was much like the Trinida4J.an
c~rn.iv.al, as it was a time in whieh to shed one's inhibitions' and for all to
IlC equalized. However, .in the Roman case, the orgiastic revelry was. to
~ymbolize the emergence from a Saturnian period, the depths of the winter
~nlstice, -while Carnival in Trinidad is related to the coming of a Satmnian
pcttiod, Lent. [n Gtace's case; the time of Cafniva1 signalled both., as her
l'mergence from the shadow of Saturn perhaps began here, though only
after she sank further into its grasp.
In addition to the presence of her Saturn line near TrinLdad, its capital
P0rt of Spairt, at 8° 48' north latitude lies at the same latitude as a crossing
of Saturn on the Ascendant and Moon on the Midheaven, and quite close
to another at which Moon is on the Ascendant and Saturn on the IC.
The involvement of two ,key planets in this whole complex of transits,_
progressions and natal planets that were central to the titne dimensio11 of
(irace's experience simply reinforces everything we have already noted.
'J'his is called a 'paran', wherein two planet lines, one in Ascendant or
Descendartt and one in I C or Midheaven, cross each otb,er, forming a
'mundane square'.
What is perhaps more interesting over the long term is that Grace's
,tctual residence at the beginning of all this (and at the end as well) was
on the west coast of Canada, yet somehow she seeme<d to ~~vitate to the
Saturn line that dominated the other coast. Perhaps someiliing inside was
telling her that she could face her Saturn-bound fears just as surely as she
faced certain personal and irrational fear by plunging into the Carnival
Moene. More time aad effort was required, however, as a last effort at
Huppression kept the lid on Saturn for several -years to come. In the mean
time, her journey from the west coast of Canada to attend Carnival in
Trinidad had led to Ottawa and thence to Montreal, and would finally lead
hell back to Ottawa 0n0e more - a:ll al0ng Saturno ~t Satur.n li.ne.
As Grace drew away from the affair with the instructor in Montreal,
Snturn had by this time moved to trine her natal Moon, perhaps making
55 '
LINES AROUND THE WQRLD her efforts to cope with the cosmic taskmaster less hectic and more stable.
Mter a period of several months on het own, during which she had much
time to think about what she wanted in a partner, she met th:e man we
have mentioned whom she eventually married, and the <?hemistry between
them was very good right from the start. So began several high-power€d
years in Ottawa,. as her husband's work as a political consultant soon thrust
her into the midst of the inner political and governmental circle surrounding
the prime minister.
Though the upward surge in Grace's life and career may have fulfilled
the positive side of Satum, it served tq make her to remain unaware for
a cime;of what negative complexes she had come to her Saturn Descendant
line to face. However, she was reminded with full force at a time when
transiting Pluto was approaching a conjunction to het na:tal Saturn, .in
February 1990. The Me tonic cycle, which marks the repetition of the phases
of the Moon in the same degree and sign every nineteen years, began to
bring Grace fi.ill circle on ~ February, when, at the time of the 'same'
lunar eclipse that had triggered her patents' divorce, Grace experienced
something new in her life - a panic attack. Long ago and far away, as her
mother had carried on her affair, her anxious daughter would sit reading
and trying to stay awake in the living-room, worrying and waiting for her
mother to .tretmn. Every- time a car would drive by her home in ,t he .early
morning hours, it would starde Grace awake. Nineteen years later, the
sound of a car driving by her home in the night would once again set her
heart racing, and a torrent of se~mingly irrational fears would cloud her
mind. After the first attack, others followed, and over a year of various
kind~ of treatment, nothing could end the attacks. For, locked in the critical
degree of the lunar eclipse, was the memory of mother and father - Sun
and Moon - the primal eclipse in her young life.
Finally, in January 1991, when both a solar eelipse and transiting Saturn
touched her natal Jupiter-Uranus conjunction in the 4th ho~se (Saturn was
conjunct her Sun and opposing her natal Jupiter-Uranus9, Grace suddenly
realized the connection between her attacks and the painful feelings of
many years ago. Awakening Saturn from its long slumber, Grace began to
deal with the unresolved feelings from her parents' divorce. First and
foremost she decided that her long stay (extended by circumstances to six
years) on her Saturn D escendant line should now be over and that it was
time to move back to where she would really like to be, on the west coast.
That summer, as an eclipse exacdy contacted her natal I C, she and her GRA.CE'S SA TURN IAN JOURNEY husband moved to Vancouver. This done, she still faced a, struggle. with
Lhose long-suppressed emotions, and as she moved deeper into her old
feelings over the next few months, she became mere and more"depressed
ond exhausted. Finally, in the spring of r 992 as transiting Pluto s.q uared her
Moon/Pluto midpoint, as transiting Uranus-Neptune conjunction began to
conjoin her Midheaven, she wrote a long letter addressed to her patents,
which she also sent to her siblings, c<Dnfr<Dflting them with her feelirrgs and
trying to open up a dialogue, even though her parents had not spoken to
each other since the divorce many years before. H er plea that they try to
establish some 0pen commanication with each other, at least for the sake
of their children, simply resulted in her father distancing himself further
'
f'rom her than he had done already.
Through the next two years, she continued to work on her own problems
related to this widening of the gap betw.e.e n herself al!ld her father and to
the realization that he and her mother might never again speak to each
other. After a series of eclipses from late 199 3 through to early 1994leaned
heavily on her 7th-house planets; Venus and Saturn, she accepted the fact
that there was no way to heal the past with her family's cooper.atiom, and
rhus it was time to move on by processing it in full by herself. Perhaps
~he last item on the agenda for $aturn's emergence was her understanding
that her partnerships had been guided in part by the fear of becoming
dependent in the way her mother had, something which had led her either
to forgo relationships she might have had, to get involved only with men
who were of lesser status and earning power or, as in het marriage, to
keep a strict sense of financial sepatl;l;tion and independence that made her
feel comfortable. Grace began to realize that, in pursuing this course, her
efforts to keep financial entanglements at a minimum meant she was free
to exit the partnership at any time without fetters - a somewhat noFicommittal, even fearful, approach to her most important relationsh,i.ps.
Oddly enough, by pursuing this course, in a sense she had ended up
just where she did not want to be. Despite the many good things about
her marriage, her partner in fact (and in part with her unwitting collusion)
was financially controlling in the way her father had been. Thus began a
11cdes of discussions about how to bring about more equal sharing in the
marriage, a sign that Grace was fully aware, if not yet in control, of the
dark side of Saturn that had struggled for so long to see the light. How
rhis will finally come out depends on the two people involved, as these
things always do.. Transiting Pluto contacting Grace's Venus throughout 57 1996 and 1997 may bring the , necessary reorientation of v~ues around
shared resou:t:ces•to resolve some of the finarrci~ dilemmas that have been
so mu<:: Saturno a part of the .themes sounded along her Sarurnian journey.
Grace's story is uniquely her own, but in, man¥ respects it reflects .a
broader range of the principles of Astro*Catto*Graphy beher th~ Saturno many
other personal examples the :reader is, likely to ~orne across. On the other
hand, illustrations that .have at least some .o f :'the breadth and depth of
Grace?s individu~ Saturnian journey (both in time and st>ace) are- more
easily found when we give -Out e:x:amination of this kind of astrology a
more univers~ scope by looking at the charts of news:ma:kers, na:tional
leaders and nations themselves. In the case of (}race and so'me of the less
comprehensive examples we have discussed so far, the relationship between
the individual's chart and factors such as_the charts of other people --are
often not known to us, if only·becau:se we _do not usually have access to
the full range of charts that might apply to ~ given tase. Moreover, changes
in the lives of most individuals -usually happen slowly over a petiod of
time, as we saw with Grace, and thus may not be- ob'v:ious without an
in-clepth interview or some other Kind of vetting process.
When we look at the lives of people who have made an impact out~ide'
the1r imrneclia:te·environmel;lt, bringing themselves to the.atteRtion of the
world in some way, we often see a different type of pattern frotn the one
we saw in Grace's case. Her cha.r ts showed an intensive and repetitive set
of patterns over time. Most of the people (and ·nations) we will look at
~rver the next few chapters may show similar pattems, but the events
-involved are more sharply. focused in time - and in their effects on the
people themselves a:ncl on those ru:ound them. 5
Winds of Neptune,
Fires of Mars The grim story of the mass death of 900 followers of a cult known as the
People's Temple in the South American country of Guyana in November
1 97 8 was perhaps the most shocking news item of that year. T hough the
lltess exploited the sensational aspects of the occurrence, while choosing
IQ ignore some of the more complex political undercurrents, the fact
remains that an extraordinary event took place - a whole community of
people, willingly or unwillingly, gave up. their lives, seemingly under the
11lmost hypnotic influence of a mentally unstable and charismatic leader,
J itn Jones. Perhaps as interesting as the event itself was the way in which
It tied into another tragedy back in the city of origin of the People's
Temple, San Francisco, a tragedy that would eventually take the lives of
Mayor George Moscone and supervisors Harvey Milk and Dan White,
11 ffecting the political climate of California for years to come. But perhaps
most fascinating of all is the central role in these events played by the.
nstro-geography of Mars and Neptune and Pluto.
One must wonder what kind of power Jim Jones had to influence so
many people to follow him into death. While his birth chart presents the
picture of a magnetic leader who could easily project the power of his
dsing retrogra.de Capricorn Saturn on to people socially dispossessed,
nowhere does it seem to suggest that he would become the very personifit•ation of the 'Grim Reaper' for hundreds of trusting souls.
As we have seen, location plays almost as important a role in astrology
ns does time itself, and the horoscope is in fact a product of both time and
place. Furthermore, though we can choose consciously to take advantage of
tllis spatial aspect of the horoscope, by moving to a locality where we
wish some underdeveloped aspect of our psyche to emerge, we can also
unwittingly release the power of parts of ourselves that we have repressed,
1lnd the consequences in these cases can be difficult to handle at best. In
the case of Jim .Jones, several factors might lead us to say that his Mars, 59 LINES AROUND THE WORLD one of i:he central points of identity for a man, was 's~adowed' to the
degree that it would be integrated into the personality only with som~
difficulty.
One point in its favour is lts placement in a fixed fite sign, but this is
quickly mitigated by its placement in the western ('other') half of the cha~
and its wide square to the Sun, which itself is in a sign favourable to V enuSi
(by rulership) and the Moon (by exaltation), not the Sun. Under som~
circumstances, the tr~ne to Mars from the Moon in the 3rd house might,:
be a helpful factor, but here Moon is in Aries, a captive of Mars. ·All
this might lead us to believe tlhat Jones would have trouble expressing the
masculine energy 0£ Mars,, finding it suppressed by a.need to do this onl~
in ways dictated by others. The suppression of Mars· is problematic because
the red planet is almost ·by itself the piimary significator of energy an<t
aggression. Bottling these things up, or Vênus \liding them ip;to unnatural outlets,
can make for tremendous fury when it is released in its :rawest form.
That there ·was a potential for this can be seen from a quick glance a~
Jones's map for Guyana, which shows that this troublesome Mars wa~
e~actly setting in that locality at the moment of Jim:] ones's birth in Indiana:
Unde11 normal circumstances, one.would expect that Jones's Martian poten..
'
rials of violence, passion~ sexuality and paranoia might -be encounter~d m
thatlocality. However, aside from the shadowed nature ofMa~s in Jones'~
horos€ope, other factors combined to unleash -these p0tentials in a particu~
larly lethal way.
Near the Mars -lihe is another, labelled SU IC, sbowing that at the
moment of his birth the Sun occupied the lower meddian· (I C) in J onestowrr
'
- the midnight position known to horary astrologers as 'the end of the
affair', one associated with establishment of a home and a leading role in,
the community. The combination of·Sun and.Mats has long been associated.
by astrologers· with excessive passion, sexuality and recklessness. The late~
Cyril Fagan wrote: 'Should you scan through the horoscopes of those of
both sexes who have uncontrollable sexual passions, the vast majority have
the Sun configurated with Mats. Should Mars be eonfigw;_ated at the same
time with Neptune, thek passions become -a surging torrent, impossibh~ .
to restrain.' A glance at Jim Jones's natal horoscope will find Mars sharing'
the 8th house with Neptune, not conjunct; but certainly related.
A little deeper analysis of these .two planets, which totally dominate Jim
Jones's relocated horoscope in Jonestown, will furnish insight into thtt
power he held over the masses he led to destruction. 'Fhe Sun is·associatedl' oii 1 6o WINDS OF NEPTUNE, FIRES OF MARS 28" ~ 00' 13" 58' \eJ
CT.! 02" \:0 ss· $ 04" 19" 16" + 2t 04" ~ ~----------~_.
19" ~ 23"
24" ~ 19" 11' &
OT 28" 1' 00' Figure 8 - Jim Jones of Jonestown, Guyana 6J LINES ARO·l:JND THE WO'RLD VE MA ME NE MO UA VE SU ME SU OSC MH OSC MH I C IC IC DSC IC IC MO
ASC 60' 40' 20' o· ·.. ·:•,, PACIFIC • . •,
' .'• 20' 160' SA IC OCEAN .. .. ... so· 120' JU PL SA
OSC OSC ASC MA 60' NE osc osc 62 40' WINDS OF NEPTUNE, FIRES OF MARS MA YA MH IC NE IC MO UR VE su JU PL MH MH MH MH MH MH 20' S 140' A 60' 40' PACIFIC
I
1 O·CEAN ., 20' ;' '
I ,; ... .. :. .'
M I (: ....'
' ' ·~ 0 N' f. S 'j' A, .. o· '• •, ., 0 E ,. • ~ . ' 20' •
40' ..
20' VE
ASC so· 40' ME
ASC 1 su ME ASC MH JU PL SA MA NE MO UR
ASCASCOSCASCASCOSCDSC ... Figure Mercúrio - Jim Jones: burned by Sun and Mars in Guyana LINES AROUND THE WORLD astrologically with fame and leadership. In many ACG charts for the
famous, it is often in prominent positions in those locations at which they
made their most powerful public impression. Krishnamurti had the Sun
angular in Los Angeles, Timothy Leary haq the Sun rising in San Francisco.
Leontyne Price and Willie Mays both had the Sun prominent in New York,
as did Enrico Caruso before them. Numerous movie stars have the Sun
angular in Hollywood; in fact, it seems almost a requirement for stardom.
For Astro*Carto*Graphy clients, the Sun areas have been those in which
fatherhood, leadership, religious interests and the outward expression of a
paternalistic ego have been most prominent.
Mars, the god of war, of course, is associated with violence and assertion.
Presidents become in;volved ·i n·wars under their Mars lines. Among those
who have given feedback about their experiences under various. ACG
lines, the Mars Descendant line has been particularly unpopular, and the
complaints include reports of car wrecks, fist fights, wife-beating, violence,
injury, sexual coercion and hostility in these locations. Why is this so?
More often than not this placement makes for projection of Martian energy
on to others, so that we are liable to see them as focusing their aggression
on us, even when the opposite may be true. A grim feature of J ones's
behaviour in the Jones town incident was the fear expressed to his followers
that the Temple was under attack, and the visit of Congressman Leo Ryan
(with news cameras in tow) to check out rumours of people' being forced
to stay against their will and take part in bizarre sexual rituals was simply
taken as evidence by Jones of the truth of his paranoid fantasies. He
dispatched gunmen to kill Ryan and his party, but when word reached him
that some had escaped, Jones ordered his followers to commit suicide,
killing their children in the process.
Even so, to establish a pattern, tnoie than just Jim Jones's ex~mple. is
needed. Does the relocated Mars Descendant line seem particularly
favoured by others whose violence involves many? It seems so. John Wayne
Gacy (17 March 1942, 12:29 A.M. CWT, Chicago, Illinois) had his Mars
Descendant line within 5° of Chicago, where he committed a chilling
number of sexually motivated murders. Uranus was also near by. Charles
Manson's natal chart (12. November 1934, Júpiter :40 Plutão .M. EST, Cincinnati, Ohio)
has an exact conjunction of Mars and Neptune in the 5th house; but relocation to the southern California desert in which he orgaruzed his 'family'
puts those planets exactly on the descendant, within a degree of arc.
Thus, we s~e two patterns, both of which apply equally well to Jim WINDS OF NEPTUNE, FIRES OF MARS J l~nes. Those places in which the Sun is angula.r at the time of one's bitth nre those at which one might expect to achieve fame or notoriety. ThQse
places at which Mars is angular seem to be the ones at which one will
encounter violence, <::oercion and aggression, directed towards either onetcclf or others. J o.t'lestown, Guyana, happened to· be one 0f the two plates
on the entire Earth (the other is near Borneo) at which both of these
conditions prevailed at the moment ofJim J ones's birth. It is not surprising
that short residence in that locality brought about the tragedy which so
~l~ocked the world in 1978.
Of particular importance is the exactitude of the contact - assuming
rhe birth time to be accurate, the Mars line passes within one half a degree
of Jonestown. Such precision often puts the person in 'touch with the
t~lanetary energy exaggerated to almost superhuman proportions; it is as
i r, under the direct, exact, angular rays of th~ planet, one becomes entirely
dominated by its energy. This will, of course, be harmful in direct pr-oportion to the degree to which the person in q-qestion ha,s suppressed that
l'>lanet's potentials, making him or her both unwilling and unable to ·cope
with it.
In every person's ACG map, there are four intersections of the Sun
nnd Mars lines somewhere on the planet; this does not mean that each of
us has the potential to become a cult mass murderer at these locations.
What it does show is that each of us has a potential for intense assertion
of our will in certain areas of the world. Conscious of this power, and
having int~grated it into the psyche, one shquld be abk to charutel it
positively into constructive activities. Unaware of it, however, one could
t•asily set the stage for a personal tragedy involving oneself and perhaps
others. Knowledge is the key to transmuting the potentially disruptive energies of planets such as Mars, Utanus and Pluto into produ.ctiv:e channels.
One may also conjecture what might have happened had Jones tried to
found his commune under a more favourable line. Central America shows
Jupiter angular, and it was at such a location as this that J acqueline Kennedy
Vf)Und her successful former residence in G.t eete. Under such lines, many
CJrdinary individuals have met and befriended the powerful and wealthy,
won competitions of various types at the international level, and generally
pl'ospered. One wonders what might have happened if only Jim J ones had
p~id more attention to his horoscope.
1 * LINES AROUND THE WO.RLD Not long before Dan White shot him down in eold blood, the openly ga
San Francisco supervisor Harvey Milk said of him to a colleague, 'Da
White is a closet case ... ~nd he's dangerous·. '2 Priot to that, Milk ha "
made a similar assessment of the People's Temple, which had become
political force in the city over the past few years, calling it 'weird an
dangerous' and warning his own staffers and campaign workers to be o .
their guard ahd to be extra polite when dealing with Jim Jones's group.
Tragic events in Jonestown had proved him right on 25 November, bu
little did he know that on the morning of the 27th, just two days later, Saturno would also be proved right al:>out Dan White, at least in so far as his bein ·
dangerous was concerned.
White, who had served on the Board of Supervisors with .Milk, was
known to his constituents and the press as a clean-cut all-American boy,
a high-school sports star who had gone on to prove himself in military
service as well as in the San Francisco fire and police departments. In
1977, he emerged from a Catholic blue-collar district in San Francisco to
run as a 'traditional values' candidate, saying in one piece of campaign
literature, 'I am not going to be forced out of San Francisco by splinter
groups of .radicals, social deviates and .fncorrigibles.' White and Mi1k, the
liberal, gay-activist politician, were natural political antagonists, and so they
became when both were elected to the Board of Supervisors, their votes
often falling om opposite sides of the political fence.
Despite this, there were times at the beginning when they seemed able
to get along, with White toning down his conservative rhetoric and Milk
opining £rom time to time that White was 'educable~. Milk himself was in;
many ways like White, at least superficially. He, too, was a high-school (and
college) athlete, a college graduate and a navy veteran (not dishonourably
discharged, as he would later tell political gathetings, but rather just anothe11
swabbie who did his three-year stint and got out a month eady for good
behaviour). His politics in the early years were quite conservative, and he
was an avid enough Goldwater supporter in r964 to get l:lp early in the.
mornings with a friend to ride the subways in New York and hand out
campaign literature before work. As an occupation, Milk settled on the
business world, working as a researchet: for a prestigious Wall Street firm
for many years. A good friend from those days felt that he was just biding
time and that, well as he did his job, he just didn't want to fit in.
One reason for ~his perhaps is that from high school on, straight-arrow,
'man's man' Harvey Milk was living the kind of off-hours secret life gay 66 WINDS OF NEPTUNE, .FIRES 0 1F MARS men had to lead in the 1940s ancl I, Mercúrio 5es. In fact, by the early I 96os he Saturno :td established a middle-class existence that would have been the envy of
most Americans, with a steady, Saturno :igh-payip. Vênus job., a niee place to live and a
happy domestic life. The only difference, of course, was that his domestic
mmpanion was: a nice-looking yeung man, something which few of his
t•olleagues at work or in other areas of his social life knew about.
In the restless I 96os, Milk himself became restless about the same old
tlllrroundings, first transferri,ng in his job to Dallas, Texas, where he was
nmt at all happy, and then to San Francisco. Here, as one friend put it, he
'fit in too well', and soon Mr Wall Street's hair was sprouting a litde too
lt.~ng, he was openly dissatisfied with the treatment of gays by the police,
and was talking about running for mayor. Finally, after making a few waves
lr1 the press by burning his Banl<Atnericard at an anti-war rally one lunch
hour, Milk was given an ultimatum to cut his hair or be fired. He exited
ft·om the middle-class lif~ with hair .intact, fired for the first time in his Gêmeos fe as he was nearing forty.
Within a few years, Harvey Milk was running a litde camera shop on
Castro Street and right in the thick of local _politics. His penchant for
lighting City Hall on behalf of both himself and others soon earned him
rhe nickname 'The Mayor of Castro Street', and he made his first run for
rhe Board of Supervisors in 1973. Among other things he learned from
losing was that if supervisors had been elected by ·distriet rather than
city-wide, he would have won, so he duly supported a change to election
by districts that passed before the next election, r 977, in whieh he was
elected to office, along with Dan White. White may himself have bene.fited
frem Milk's efforts at changing the election process.
Over the next year, although Milk and White would occasionally find
<.lbmmon ground, more often than not they were ou the opposite side of
ISsues. White in fact at times seemed to be skirting the edge of political
decorum in his statements about San F1:ancisco's gay citizens. The main
feature of his brief stint as a supervisor, however, was that Dan White did
tll.Ot like to lose; and lose he did on an important issue which had been
part of his campaign - with Harvey Milk casting the deciding vote against
him, after having fi.rst said he would v0te with him. The issue itself was
whether or not to use an abandoned convent in White's district f0r a
psychiatric treatment centre. The more Milk learned about it, the more he
was for it, and after the vote, any cordiality between him and White seemed
10 be gone. LINES AROUND THE WORLD Even worse, while White felt himself mired in frustration and ~et:tu~:
nowhere through the system,, Hatve¥ Mllk play~d it like a finely LUJ..''"'""
instrumen~, often netting press attention for his causes. Those causes meme~
selves did not, as one might suspect, all centre on the politics of gay'"""'''"
straight, and in fact on·e of his best'-known efforts centr~d around
simple idea of getting dog owners in the city to clean up after their ...... j-""
Surveys at the time showed that dog droppings in public areas was
number-one complaint ,a bout life in San Francisco, and Milk grabbed
headlines with his successful effort to bring that probkm to heel. As
pointed out to friends, stories about this did not centre on his gayness
such, but on the fact that he was a supervisor doing hi? job; and that,
told thetn, was a good education for the publie.
Aside from his political frustrations, Dan White was a family man uni'"'
a wife and a child who quickly learned that it was difficult to make enc1s
meet on the lowly salary paid to supervisors in those days. Though
wife ran a small family-owned food stand in a lo.cal tourist area, beru11ee~rn
his lowly salary and her troubles running the business, he decided that
would have to resign as supervisor. Little did this politieal amateur . . . .
the repercussions, however, as hls immediate relief was soon followed
trepidation when those who had support.e d b.im complained that he
left them with the prospect of a Board of Supervisors tilted against their
political and economic interests. Moreover, some might have suj;m:e:ste~€1
that they liked him as·.a spokesman and that a great political future a
him if he would simply stay the course. Within a few days, he tried to L"'"'"'
back his resignation.
Mayor George Moscone,3 a liberal whose politics Dan White desp1s~~o
was the key, as it was he who would have to appoint White's succes
'
At first Moscone said he had no problem with reappointing
White,
then Harvey Milk lobbied hard against it, pointing out to Mosc:one
the right appointment would make it easier for both of them to get tne:n;
pet projects through the board. More than this, however, was the srr<Jn~
threat of the large gay vote that now listened to Harvey Milk ttll'tUJ:J$
elsewhere when Moscone was up for re-election. Moscone telented
let w®rd get out that he would not reappoint the frustrated conserva ·
a move which sealed the fates of himself, Harvey Milk and Dan White.
On the morning of 2.7 November 1978, White, fuelled by days of rru:stra:.t
tion and a sleepless night in which he had stoked himself with
soft drinks and cup-cakes, methodically selected ten cartridges for his . 3
aJ,.l.<J"- 68 WINDS OF NEPT'UN·E, FIR-ES OF MARS. pt)lice special (five were hollow points, which cause massive destruction
111 close range), loaded five of them, strapped on his gun and then .rode
down to City Hall to· confront both Moscone and Milk. After sneaking
rhrough a window to avoid the security checks at the door, White went
upstairs and wrangled a quick appointment with the mayor. Th'ough several
p~eple in the vicinity heard the shots, no one paid much ·attention as White
hurried out, already having pocketed four spent cartridges and one live
11holl, and r~loaded his gun with the five hollow points. Almost •casually,
he asked Milk to leave his own office and go to his own old office for a
private conversation. There 'he murdered Harvey Milk by firing five shots
Into him. The last shots for both Moscone and Milk were to the head,
rausing instant death.
The end of White's stGry .dragged out over the next few years, but the
pertinent facts are these. First, in what amounted to a show trial, White
was convicted only of manslaughter, the key being what the press called
''l,he Twinkle Defense', in reference to a popular sugary snack cake- poor
Dan White, according to his attorney, was so stoked up on junk food that
he wasn't in his right m.ind. Secondly, though he removed Harvey Milk
from the scene, the outrage from the large gay community in San Francisco
c1ver the verdict completed what the gay rights movement had started and
llarvey Milk had taken into electoral politics, as the gay community in San
llrancisco began to exercise its political power with a vengeance. As Harry
Britt, appointed to fill out Milk's term, said to shocked reporters after the
riots that followed the verdict: 'Now the society is going to have. to deal
with us not as nice little fairies with hairdressing salons, ·but as people
t·~pable of violence. We're not going to put up with Dan Whites any more.'
Dan White himself served his time in jail for having killed two men while
under the influence of cup-cakes, and within a relatively short time after
his release committed suicide.
There is an interesting contrast between the lives of Harvey Milk and
Dan White that has a definite geographical feature to it that plays around
,, Mars-Neptune theme. For many years, as he stayed around his place of
hirth on the east coast, Harvey Milk lived a relatively normal middle-class
life, despite the part of it that was secret to all but a few. Moreover, the Gêmeos fe he led was not necessarily just for camouflage, as for a long while he
really seemed to like its stability as much as anything else. Even politically
In those years, he might have been closer, and sincerely so, ~o the Dan
White of San Francisco days than to Supervisor I:Iarvey Milk. The times, LINES AROUND T HE WORLD o9o ~ 35' 11° 't1 Vx 14° fW
49' fW oo• 02' 23° 33' oso ' Júpiter :' * og· 17. )€ 23. dl
33' 31' Mercúrio ' 'r 03'
13. 'r
30'
210
ti
02°
21° 26• o9· 1[ 35' • '
I Figure zo - Harvey Milk, at his birth place in Woodmere, New York W I NDS OF NEPTUNE, FIR ES OF MARS 20. ~ 48' u
o2·
30' $
57' 29.
;'
09' 36' 11. \1' 43'
17" \1' 11 EP 25'
52' fl. 'f 17. 29. n: 26° Mercúrio li 21° Júpiter 2o· 1' 48' ' ' Figure rr- Harvey Milk, relocated to San Francisco
71 li
36' LINES AROUND THE WORLD 15' $ 13' a:
45" 02" ~ 07' a: 18" 13' c! 15' a: 24 'l' EP
2t9 - .A. 41"
17'
. A. 37"
25' 42"
a:
25' 45" ·22"
~ 29' 15' 't1 02" Figure 12 - D an White, at his birth place in Bellflower, California - a W I ND S O F NEP T U N E, FI RE S O F M A R S 11° $ 04' 21" 16" 1I1I
3155' 2s·
31' Vx 1' o9· 09" ~~------------~ T
49' 49' 16° 11 " r1 04' Figure 13 - Dan White, relocated to San Francisco
73 LINES ARQl!Jlj.lD THE WORLD however, began to change him, and after his move to San Francisco,
'came 01.1t' in more ways than one, tapping into a potential he had ~LOC·,~
been dimly aware of before. His rise in politics was the result of a ~'-J..•u.u.o..-.,
talent that certainly would have cartied him to higher·office had he ·
Dan White, on the other hand, seemed to be one of those people '"n'"'
reach their pinnacle of success in high school, and for' whom life an1r;,1
graduation becomes a floundering for a way back to the glory days.
did well in the military, did well as a fireman and did well as a P9J1cema:: Sol ..;
yet in what should have been a natural role as a blue-collar '"''"'''"''
expressing the frustration of stolid, conservative home-and-family tu.-,-p.,~
over the political and social turn their city was taking, White
miserably. It was not simply that he coUld not make ends meet on
super-visor's salary, but that he seemed to feel powerless before the om:Je,..
sition he faced. After all, Harvey Milk probably lost more political battles
than White by far, yet he w0uld often turn a loss today into tomo•·rl"\·nr.""
victory by keeping his shoulder to the wheel and his eye on the prize.
the difference?
Consider first these two sets of positive and negative descriptive tenns,
drawn from more comprehensive lists in Jeff Mayo's Astrology: A KVJ
Personality: Júpiter Po.ritive: self-assertive, lrutiatory, enterprising, impulsive, competitive, persuasive.
N egative: combative, reckless, irascible, over-excitable, quarrelsome, brusque.
Positive: sensitive, impressionable, tender, gende, humane, idealistic, informal.
Negative: impractical, unstable, touchy, hypersensitive, worrier, drug-addictive. Perhaps the reader will agree that the first set, particularly the posi ·
list, seems more in tune with Hatvey Milk's situation in San F.L............""'"'•
while the negative terms in both sets seem more in tune with Dan
during his tise and fall in local politics. Furthermo~e, it would not be
difficult to argue that the reverse Oeaving the same emphasis on po:siti'v~
and negative, however, with regard to the sign and aspect conditions
the planets in question) might have held at earlier stages in their rn"'·"'
when each lived close to his place of birth. The first set of terms 1ae:none~
a 'stimulus reaction' to Mars, while the second identifies the same in re~:arc
to Neptune. At his place of birth, Harvey Milk had Neptune setting a.JnlO'S·
exactly, while in San Francisco the planet closest to an angle was ....'""""'
74 WINDS' OF NEP'J;'l;INE, FIRES OF M4-RS 01enus and Jupiter are near angles as well} On the other hand, Dan White
had Mars closer to an angle at his birth place, while Neptune was closer
in San Francisco. Depending. o.tl the orb a:llowed, some wowd say that
White had a conjunction of the two planets, though in any case· both were
certainly bound together by their placement near the same angle. While
rhe difference between birth place and locality is not as stark -as in Milk's
case, it is there.
One difference that is, stark, and which relates dil:ectly .to the question
of whether either might have had a problem in expressing Mars, is that
whlle for Milk th.at planet is in Aries, its own sign, with a hard-edged
Hquare to Pluto (and to" Saturn as well, if one allows wide orbs), White's
Mars is in fact debilitated in the opposite Venus-ruled sign of Libra and
flanked (if not closely aspected) by benefics Venus and Jupiter on the one
11ide and fuzzy Neptune on the other. Thus, even though White's Mars is
111·rong in being close to an angle, it is not in a particularly Martian environment, while Milk's back-.channel Mars, so to speak, is much more healthy
In a Martian sense.
Whether Milk was right or wrong about his 'closet case' diagnosis of
White in regard to sexual orientation, he may have been correct in sensing
1hat White was someone whese Martian-sounding background came in
part from overcompensation for some kind of inadequacy, for the feeling
t'hat somehow he did not measure up as a man unless he could perform
brave deeds, handle a weapon and so on. Mars as a horoscopic factor
nlone indicates the need or ability to perform actions in a directed way,
und to match one's performance against others. Neptune, on the other
hand, is anything but directed or competitive, but by itself indicates a kind
of 'go along to get along' mentality that can be charming on the one
hnod, or frustrating (and frustrated) on the other. The heavily Neptunian
i"dividual is forever getting lost in the details of everyday life and while
perhaps observant or even visionary in matters that don't concern him
personally, he may be quite lacking in insight where his own place in the
w:and scheme of things is concerned. L~0king at Milk in New York and
White in San Francisco, one might say that a key term for Neptune <;:ould
he 'the invisible man'.
In that light, consider H arvey Milk's first forty years, spent for the most
pnrt where Neptune was strong. Even though good at his job, since he was
l!Uite insightful where financial and ec0nomk matters were concerned, Milk
was never exactly a team player and always, according to the observation of
75 LINES AROUND THE WORLD a good friend who was aware of his sexual orientation, seemed to be
somewhere else, even if it was not exactly clear where that was. J::?uring
this time, even though Milk played out his relatively strong Mars in certain
areas of life, such as athletics, it never became integrated into his passionate
(even pushy) interest in politics - until he hit San Francisco, where his
gayness and his· political feelings were merged in the forge of Mars. Thus
began the resolution of his own Martian dilemma, which for anyone is the
problem of giving drive and direction to one's life based on one's own
essential strength.
While Milk was in San Francisco, at last listening closely to his own
inner drummer, Dan White had his ear to the ground, listening to everyone
else's rhythms, and many of his personal choices were most likely dictated
by a need to 'do the right d'ling in the eyes of others. In part at least this can
be explained by the tentative, not-self nature of his Libra Mars placement
combined with the heavy influence of Neptune. Thus, as Mars waned and
Neptune waxed in San Francisco, White's moral and psychological footing
became uncertain, as indicated, for example, by his reputation for being a
sore loser. In a sense, proving himself through winning was probably the
only way he could be sure that he was in fact doing the right thing. His
.final assault on the problem may have been driven less by Twinki:es than
by the need to perform, by the desire to perform, an act that would make
him a hero to those whose admiration he sought in everything. The denouement for him was the same as it is for many a surviving martyr who wakes
up the morning after realizing that those he sought to please must now
treat him like a pariah in order to keep their veneer of respectability intact.
Moreover, the strong Martian hero had staked his life on convincing people
that the cornerstone act of his time on the planet - the thing the world
knew him for - had been laid not on the firm support of traditional values,
but oh a foundation made of Twinkies. The name for White's infamous
defence is an apt expression for the marshmallow Neptune surprise iqside
his thin and brittle Mars.
On the day of the murders in San Francisco, as for the Jones town
massacre two days earlier, Mars and Neptune were conjoined in Sagittarius,
emphasizing patterns suggested in the charts ofJim Jones and Dan White. 5
Other than the fact that a strong transiting or progressed aspect between
two planets tends to resonate with and activate the same kind of aspectt
in a natal chart, the conjunction occurred within a degree or two of a
conjunction to Dan White's South Node, and square to the natal Moon WINDS OF NEPTUNE, FIRES OF MARS of Harvey Milk and to the progressed Midheaven of George Moscone's
chart. Furthermore, for Moscone, who natally had Pluto near the
Midheaven in San Francisco, several Pluto themes were reiterated, the most
striking of which was the fact that an opposition of progressed Sun and
Venus to progressed Pluto was found across the horizon of the New Moon
preceding his murder. Such Plutonian emphasis in the chart of a politician
often presents the kind of danger that brought Moscone's life to so tragic
nn end.
No planet, even those usually classed as malefic, is wholly negative in
l,ts action, but when light and heat are turned up too high and too· quickly
(>.n a shadowed planet hiding in the cool recesses of our minds, whether
that comes from transits, progressions or geographical emphasis, or all
Vhtee, the results can he devastating. More than 900 lost souls at jonestown
in November 1978 attest to that fact, as do three more consumed in the
Martian flames fanned by the winds of Neptune two days later in San
Francisco. 77 6
War Lines across the World War is perhaps the most puzzling of human options. Love, ambition and
other motivations seem understandable for their rewards, but the perennial
practice of pitting one society's .strongest and best against another's in a
fight t0 the death:,in which more is destroyed than could ever be plundered,
remains an unexplained enigma of human behaviour. Societies never seem
to learn; generation after generation, having just recovered from the previous conflagration, busies itself preparing for the next.
What has Astro*Carto*Graphy to sa. Netuno about this periodic human appetite
for collectiv~ destruction? Can it shed light on the reason for and, perhaps,
the future manifestations of this societal violence? From client feedback,
as well as from the observation of eases such as those discussed in the
previous chapter, certain correlations between these maps and personal
behaviour have become clear. Among the most definitely consistent is that
the Mars lines on an individual's map show places where he or she is apt
to become either the victim or instigator of violence, assertion, belligerency
or aggression - as well as identifying those places where one can expect
one's courage to be tested.
Many men have confessed to having become more combative and irritable in places where their natal Mars was angular - often responding to
challenges to their masculinity and finding it more of an issue in ·a Mars
zone than in other places. One basically non-aggressive personality wrote
to tell of several fist fights and four auto wrecks while he resided under
a personal Mars zone in Connecticut. Another, a Vietnam veteran, noted
that he had been very lucky in Vietnam, surviving intense combat and
prolonged exposure to danger under his Jupiter line there; however, as
soon as he was ordered for an overnight stay in Cambodia, under his Mars
line, his helicopter was hit by gunfire. Accidents, fights, enhanced sexuality,
and generally assertive behaviour seem consistent responses in people
travelling through zones marked by Mars. WA.R Llt"'E.S, A~ROSS TH:E WORLD This should come as no surprise to the astrologer, as Mars has been
ltne>wn since antiquity: as the god of war, and ·even modern research confirms this. To take one example, work by Michel and Frans-;oise Gauquelin
hns demon;5ttated that Martia11 types (particularly those with.Mars ~ear the
ungles of a chart) seem able to succeed in professions such as surgery and
t•he military. Even t:W-e planet itself - extolled by poets for hs ruddy colour
seems confirmed by space explorations to be a place of harsh extremes
nnd climactic violence that fit well with the kind of temperament astrologers
usctibe to Mars. And as we have seen in the case of Jim Jones and Dan
White, at times the energy unleashed by a Mars line can be furious and
fn,r-reachirtg in its effect,
If Mars on an individual's map denotes where he or she is most apt to
t'Xpress assertion, initiative or belligerency, is there some way to find a:
~imilar set of zones for the kind of war and conflict that engulfs entire
nations or alliances of nations? Yes. The maps for many US presidents·
!!how an inescapable pattern that usually has Mars as its central lecus. A
ptesident is, of course, more than just an individual doing his job. He is
'' symbol for the whole nation during his time in office. Elections are a
tremendously intricate pwcess and seemingly select one member of society
tn act for the whole (or at least most of it), so it stands to reason that the
l'crson selected reflects to some extent the needs, desires and specific
IMrtentions of the society that chose him or her. Thus, a president's Mars
lines should show where the society he led or presently leads is most apt
to wage war. A:t the same time, a purely personal element is involved as·
t·nch president has his own personal demons to deal with, meaning that
the growth processes of his own psyche are oftea :re.filected o.utwardly in
1he:: life and events of the nation he leads.
At least as interesting, if not more so in certain cases, is the relation of
Pluto lines to a president's war-making proclivities. Astrologers tend to
11peak of Pluto as a 'higher octave' of Mars, and this seems amply confirmed
hy the history of military involvement directed by US presidents, since
this planet often serves as a stand-in when a close Mars contact is absent.
Iust as often, both planets will on occasion interact in some way to mark
the location where the power of US military might is to be felt.
'To begin with Pluto, t:hi'ee. presidents who led a military effort to control
the tiny Central American country of Nicaragua 'had Pluto on the
Miaiheaven (Calvin Coolidge• and Franklin D. R.oosevele) or rising (Herbert
llooverl A fourth president, who suffered the consequences of their 79 LINES AROUND THE WORLD actions some forty years later, Jimmy Carter, Júpiter showed Pluto on the
Midheaven as a near miss to Central America, thGmgh it actually w:en1l
through Mexico, a country with which Carter had somewhat strained
relations. However, just off the coast of Nicaragua and running directly;
through Panama, Carter had Saturn rising, and it would not be too much
to say that his foreign-policy dealings with these two countries alone would
have .caused major problems in his re-elec::.t ion effort, had they not been
overshadowed by his disaster with American hostages in Iran.
Where Roosevelt's most notable military involvement is concerned,
though it is difficult to localize a war whose battlefields were littered around
the planet, it is intere:sting to note that since Mars and Pluto were within
thirty degrees of longitude of each other, throughout the world the two
flankmany of the hot sp0ts of the Se~ond World War, with Pluto on the
western edge of the war zones and Mars on the east. Pluto and Mars set'
on either side of Europe and North Africa, Burma and areas of the Pacific.
Interestingly, though Mars rising passes near the scene ofRoos.evelt's major
military failure at Pearl Harbor, his planetary set-up for the protagonist
country, in that case Japan, £eatutes. Saturn, Neptune and Jupiter. Though
some conspiracy theorists have held that Roosevelt actually alloweq Pearl
Harbor to happen (something which makes no sense militarily, as the loss
of men and equipment was too great, even if Roosevelt had been so callous
as to pennit their destruction), the major verdict seems to be that, despite
atnple w:arrilings, tl!Le whole chain of command., incluclipg Roosevelt, was
simply looking the other way, distracted by a Japanese show of diplomatic
activity.
Given those three planetary lines in: Japan, one wonders, in fact, what
might have happened regarding Japan if President Roosevelt had lived to
finish the w:ar with that country. This ta·sk, howevet, was left to his successor, Harry S Truman/ who of co\:l!se made the decision to drop the
atomic bomb on Hiroshima and Nagasaki - a decision whose military
necessity is s.till argued at length by histbrians some fifty years later. Five
years afterwards, Truman committed. US troops to yet another w~r, this
time in Korea. His ma,p (Fi~re 14) ilh:1s,trates these events with much clarity:
and precision: Mars is bn the I C exactly through the Korean peninsula, and
Saturn was also on the Ascendant in the north, as well as near Japan.
. While Mars is near enough to Japan to affect it, Pluto is the planet that
reigns over the cities in Japan on which Truman ordered the first A-bomb
to he. dropped, ushering in the atomic .age. So WAR LINES ACROSS i:''HE WORLD It seems almost incredible that a planet which would not be discovered
for forty-four years rose at Truman's birth moment just west of the spot
1hat would be obliterated by a device not to be invented for- five decades.
'l'~:urnan's other major involvement of a military nature (though US troops
were not ditecdy engaged) began with his manoeuvring to end the Soviet
oc;:cupation of Iran and to damJDen Iranian nationalist fervour after the
Second World War, one result of which was the long reign of the Shah
nnd a steady supply of Iranian eil, so it is interesting .t hat Truman's Mar~
11cts exacdy over Tehran.
Dwight D. Eisenhower did not wage war while in office, and as his
birth time is somewhat disputed, his chart canilot be considered, unfortulllttely. John F. Kennedy6 had the unenviable distinction of being the first
president to commit troops to Vietnam, early in 1962; his map (Figure 5)
11hows, not surprisingly, Mars, Saturn and Neptune angular in the China
Sea, ·a theme which we will find repeated in a particular US chart as we
explore it in a later chapter. Significantly, the Mars Ascendant line dominates in South-East Asia, suggesting an initiative on his part. Of more than
passing interest as well is the fact that his natal Pluto culminated in D allas.
While Pluto can on the one hand indicate force majeuf!e tw:ned against an
enemy, it can just as often show the same turned agaiflst the native itself.
Lyndon J ohnson's chartl shows less personal initiative where Vietnam
Is concerned, but rather hints at the great p'ersonal sacrifice the war cost
him. Mars, Jupiter and the Sun are on the Descendant near Vietnam;
however, they rise in Washington, showing that his 'Great Societ{ was to
be clouded by the social cost of the escalating war and that his expensive
nnd ambitious 'war on poverty' would seem insignificant next to the impossible war in the Far East. The conjunction of Mars and Jupiter, prominent
In Kennedy's, Johnson's and Nixon's charts, has been traditionally associnted with extravagance, which is reinforced by the fact that the bills from
Vietnam will be comin~ due for the rest of the centw: Netuno in. the form of
Inflation and cheapened dollars.
The horoscope of Richard M. Nixon8 alone seems to vary from the
established pattern; though Mars conjoins Jupiter again, it does not do so
near Vietnam. Instead, Neptune, planet of deception and disillusion, lies
nt the IC in Cambodia, and (significantly) culminates over Washington.
This suggests that Nixon's major personal contribution to the South-East
Asia war was his <::overt invasion of Laos and Cambodia by CIA troops.
With Gerald Ford, Mercúrio the old pattern returns, as his Mars dominates
81 L I NES AROUN D THE WOR L D MO SU NE ME PL SA
IC MH MH MH MH MH VE
MH JU
MH MA
MH UR
MH 160' o· , . •,, • ·. ·•· PA IF/C 0 EAN . . .... . ..
20'
... . . .
~ l 60' SA
ASC 40' VE JU MA UR MO SU ME NE SA VE PL
ASC ASC ASC ASC ASC OSC DSC DSC OSCDSC OSC JU osc WAR LINES ACROSS THE WORLD JU
IC SA SU NE IC ASC ASC MA
IC UR rc 140' 160' 60' •• 40' ., 20' \ I ; , ; ... '0 : • ... •, ., 0' .'
NOlAN ,... ·. OCEAN •• 20' \ 40' ..
20' 80' 40' ' UA osc 100' VE MO osc IC 160' 140' PL
ASC Figure I4- H arry S Truman, whose Pluto line struck at Hiroshima 8; ME
ASC LINES AROUND THE WORLD Saigon, and the MA DSC line again shows his less-than-willing role in the
continuation of the conflict there. Mars is also near Cambodia, where the
Mayaguez incident displayed Ford in his most assertive ppsture. His map
is remarkable for other a~pects, among which is Pluto exactly angular ovet
San Francisco, where twice he was subject to assassination attempts (echoing our point about Kennedy and Dallas), and the Moon and Uranus
lines crossing near Washington, indicating his unexpected elevation to the
presidency.
Jimmy Carter has Mars rising with Jupiter at the Midheaven in Iran, a
pattern which calls to mind the chart of Hany S Truman, whose =~.....,.
parallel Carter's almost exactly in this part of the world, though they are
reversed in polarity - that is, the planet found on Truman's Ascendant
there lies on Carter's Descendant, and so on. This might seem to · ugg:est'
that Carter had to deal with some of the outcome of Truman's involvement
in Iran, which some historians assert was the first act in a long drama
driven by the Western world's need for petrofeum. Ih fact, many of the
twists and turns of the Iran hostage Grisis were made understandable by
knowledge of both Truman and Carter's Mars lines in this area. 1° Carter's
natal Mats is opposed by longitude to his conjunction of Neptune am&
Venus - the two of which are also angular near the aforementioned areas,
though more to the west, near Israel - so the scenario for Carter turned
out to be quite different from Truman's. Venus with Neptune identifies
the idealist. The opposition to Mars suggests that while Carter dislikes
violence as a rule, as president he became involved in others' problems ·
patt through pursuit of his ideals. The opposition seems aptly defined by.
his necessary involvement with repressive regimes such as that of the uJ.J,aJ.'-'1.
of Iran or the South Korean government. As a private citizen he ~~f'.,•• ~.,
not have supported these leaders, but as pt;esideat he was bound to.
President Carter had long since moved on to build housing for the poor
(among many things he never had time to do while in office) when l:'r<:~slclen.t·
George Bush had to meet his own Mars crisis. Interestingly, several startllng
factors link Bush to Carter. For example, both presidents have Mars and
Jupiter in exactly the same degrees: 27° Aquarius and 14° Sagi
respectively. In the four months that separated theit births, Mars and J upitelT
each turned retrograde, then direct, and by one of those coincidences that
suggest some cosmic conspiracy to make astrologers pay attention, occu. pied exactly the same degrees on the two birthdays. For this reason <UVJ, ......., 1 WAR VINES ACROSS 'I'HE WORLD Bush's problems with Saddam Hussein can be seen as an extension of
Carter's problems in Iran.
Bush's Mars lines fall in places that are of more than passing interest
to the mundane astrologer. His Mars D escetrdant line falls right across
Panama, while his Mars Ascendant crosses his Jupiter ~dheaven line
(Ca.r ter's fateful combo in Tehran) at Beijing. Readers may remembeJ: that
nmong Bush's first crises in office was one touched off by the democracy
demonstrations in Tiananmen Square, the suppression of which Bush didn't
try very hard to prevent; nor did he hold the Chinese ,gerontocra~ Netuno accountnble for it on an important diplomatic occasion not long afterwards. His
Mars I C and MH lines also emphasized Eastern Europe, Libya, Central
and South-West Mrica as areas also under stress.
But what about Iraq and Kuwait, the scene of the massive military action
known as the Gulf War? Surely his map must show something ilil this
Handy oil patch which half the US Army was devoted to defending in 1990
11
nnd 1991? Given an n:39 A.M. (12 June 1924; 71Wo5, 42N1 ~)birth time,
l~ush has expansive (the word takes on new meanings in this context)
j\l.piter squarely on the Ascendant in Baghdad. Does this mean victory?
Surely, if anyone won a lottery in connection with Baghdad, it wasn't the
US president, despite the political points he scored for his handling of the
CrulfWar. After all, those points did not pre:vent him losing the pllesidency
less than two years later to someone whose political antagonists consider
him a 'draft dodger' at best. Is M.at?s also there somewhere in Iraq, as it
was with Carter in Iran?
Near the end o·f the day on zo October 1990, Mars paused in its orbit
!\round the Sun as seen from Earth, and began apparent retrograde motion.
'Phis itself isn't news, since Mars does this routinely every two years or so.
But this time it chose for its station 14° 34' of Gefl'\ini. From that ·point
11 closely opposed the Carter/Bush Jupiter at I Júpiter ° Gêmeos ' of Sagittarius. In
,.hort, October and November repi esented a critica1 and perilous time in
which events occurred or decisions were made that affected the course of
rhe conflict. (Bush announced the build-up on 8 November 1990.) Mars'
11tation was the same tra,nsiting factor that provoked Jimmy Catter to try
to rescue his hostages.
That station of Mars, whioh seemed to signal a turning-point at which
was reached what might be called the fail-safe point for military involvement, fell in exact opposition to Bush's Jupiter, which itself is angular at LINES AROUND THE WORLD Baghdad. This would seem to have offered little hope for any other outcome of the confrontation between the United States and Iraq, especially
s.ince the aspect so closely reiterated what happened to Carter .in 1980.
Mars made its station conjuact Bush's Midheaven, and Jupiter rules Bush's
7th house, so it was not surprising that subsequent events led to an
announcement of a military build-up of sufficient size to drive the Ira~
army from Kuwait. Table 2 - Transiting Mars and the Gulf War
Nat.
25::::Z A
B
c Gêmeos )! 4Jr:
I 3'd D E F z8'o' z8b' 29'd Gêmeos )! 13)! 6 b. b. G H Natal
MC I~
Asc 16,?' b.
~ ~ ~ ~ ~ Prog. MC9l
Asc z6z:z ~ ~ 0 d 0 0 Transiting and natal Mars to President Bush's natal (top) and progressed
(bottom) Midheaven and Ascendant reloeated to Baghdad dur.ing the
Gulf War. Columns are identified below, with dates and times posted by
J amie Lankford in the library of the Astrology Roundtable on GEnie.
Lankford noted that many times were derived from viewing live coverage
of ev:ents. Nat - Natal Mars. Progressed Mars was at I Pisces.
A - Iraqi Invasion, 2 August 1990, 3:13A.M. Baghdad Time (BAT).
B - Bush announces troop build-up, 8 November 1990, Júpiter :05 Plutão .M. EST.
C - UN resolution, 29 November 1990, 5:28P.M. EST.
D- Congress approves use of fot;ce, r I January 1991, 3:oo/ 3:50P.M. EST.
E- UN deadline reached, 15 January 1991, o:ooA.M. EST.
F- Bomb.ing oflraq begins, 17 January 1991, 2:30A.M. BAT.
G- Allied ground offensive, 24 February I 99 I, Júpiter :oo A.M. BAT.
H- Bush announces cease-fire, 27 February 1991, Mercúrio :05 Plutão .M. EST . 86 WAR LINES ACROSS THE WORLD Even less surprising, perhaps, in the light of what we have shown about
t'he ways in which the geographical emphasis of Mars seems to drive and
tUrect the aggressive energies of American presidents, is the set of aspects
Involving transiting Mars and President Bush's natal and pJiogressed charts
f'wm the invasion through to the end of the Gulf War. Shown in Table
z., these make two interesting points. First of all, there is no doubt that
transiting Mars was driving President Bush astrologically in both hi.r natal
rmd progressed charts relocated to Baghdad. In the history of his dealings with
Iraq (possibly even going back to advice he proffered during the Reagan
ndtninistration which became the basis for US policy towards that country),
Bush appears if anything to have acted like the proverbial sugar daddy. In
fact, it does not stretch credibility to say that many of the more exotic
weapons American and Allied soldiers faced had either been paid for with
US funds or their development allowed through a naive and over-generous
US policy that looked the other way in order not to see violations of
internati6nallaw - and winked at those it did see. Since Saddam Hussein
was deemed to be a necessary foil to the destabilizing plans of the ayatollahs
In Iran, he was given a blank cheque to go shopping in ·a weapons toy
store and allowed to buy whatever his whimsies dictated. If this sounds
like Jupiter, then so it should, since, as we have pointed out, Bush's own
natal Jupiter was rising at Baghdad at his birth.
In fact, it was that kind of J upiterian Santa Claus policy which, right up
until th~ last minute before the invasion, seemed to make Saddam H ussein
feel he could swallow Kuwait whole, like an oily delicacy on a plate. Even
the US ambassador to Iraq seemed to signal that such an action would
go unpunished, and one can only presume that at least her lack of a
sense of urgency about the prospect of Kuwait being invaded came from
Instructions to handle Iraq as an important ally that could do no wrong.
If George Bush later changed his mind, it might have been the result in
r>nrt of a reported lecture about 'backbone' from the British prime minister,
Margaret Thatcher (compare her progressed Mercury on 20 October I 990
1\t 12° 27' Sagittarius with Table 2). This in fact directs us back to the idea
of shadowed planets and the way in which they are sometimes forced out
in the open by either transits or progressions or locality considerations.
All three seem to have played a part in Bush's case, with Thatcher as an
ndditional 'relationship' trigger letting him kn9w the problem he faced on
11 personal level in dealing with this crisis.
As we can see from the table, during the entire crisis Bush's natal Mars LINES AROUND THE WORLD was rising in his progressed chart set for Baghdad, at times squared by
transiting Mars after its station on zo October 1990. Transiting Mars wasalso, of course, opposite both his natal Midheaven for Baghdad and his
progressed Ascendant for the same place -with his natal Jupiter at 14°
Sagittarius and his progressed Jupiter at 10° Sagittarius. This begins to
sound like a cosmic message bellowing to Bush, 'No more Mr Nice Guy!'
These transits to Bush's natal and progressed angles and Jupiter are all the
more interesting since, even after an earlier military adventure in Panama,
he still had a 'wimp' image with the public that was hard to shake. The
Gulf War may have ended that, even given the later dissatisfaction: among
the public over his gentlemanly end to the war. Table J- Harry S Truman's natal, progressions~
transits for Hiroshima, 16 August 1945
Rise Set Natal
0 Upper Lmver
320015 I rt 324oool 'Progressed
*' 3250091
1
331°29
3260361 rt 'Transits
*'
8 325007 0 I 328007' Mars, Saturn, Pluto and the Sun were actively assaulting President
Truman's natal chart relocated to Hiroshima on the day he ordered the
atomic bomb to be dropped. Figures in the table are sidereal times (as
degrees) at which each planet would reach the angle shown in the same
column at the head of the table. Compare this with the sidereal time for
1
Truman's natal chart for Hiroshima- 329°34 • . Fully as interesting as the transits to Bush's chart for the Gulf War are
the transits and progressions relating to Truman's chart at the time when
88 WAR LINES ACROSS THE WORLD 27. = 23' '¥ 22" tl 17° :0:
27' d' 15° 1I 'f' w ii
>tj. 16° 1I ,..21 • "1 18° 1I Vx 17•
~ 27' 1o· '2 rw 22" 01· 27• [2 23' Figure If- Harry S Truman, natal (inner), progressions (middle) and
transits (outer) for Hiroshima LINES AROUND THE WORLD he ordered the dropping of the atomic bomb on Hiroshima. In Astro*
Carto*Graphy, the favoured method fo~ considering progressions is to
look at the progressed planets within the framework of the natal chart (i.e.
paying less attention to the angles of the progressed chart). Truman's natal
and progressed chart along with the transits for that day (Figure I 5 and
Table 3) give a clear picture of the destruction his order to drop the bomb
would engender. Truman's chart obviously repeats a theme shown latet: in
President Bush's chart at the time of the Gulf War, but as we shall see, it
also repeats a theme found in a particular US chart, for the same date,
for the same place- Hiroshima, r6 August 1945 at Mercúrio :15 A.M. JST. 7
Prisoners of the Horoscope No More Though normally in astrology we think of everyone having both a birth
time and a birth place, as we have seen there is a sense in which we are
born everywhere at once, with the world as our horoscope. Travelling
rwm one place to another, or perhaps interacting with people in some
part of the world distant from our usual residence, brings us into connection
with parts of ourselves that we may have ignored or suppressed, forcing
us to face these hidden facets of our psyches and deal with them. Even
In this day and age of easy international traYel, however, relatively few
people will have the opportunity to experience more than one or two
changes of residence significant enough to alter their experience of their
planetary lines in a noticeable way. In the normal course of events, eYen
those who traYel a great deal often have the option of ignoring, at least
for a time, the effect of a shadowed planet engaging their attention on a
journey that takes them through an important planetary line. This is not
to say that such experiences are not important, since quite often th~ thing
that is memorable about our experiences in distant locales serves to guide
l)Ut response when later on some other astrological mechanism such as
nn important progression or transit, or perhaps a relationship> again brings
that hidden part of ourselves out into the open. The recorded experiences
of Astro*Carto*Graphy users tell us that people tend to remember even
'
brief journeys through their Pluto lines, especially, for instance, when these
hring them face to face ~th their own mortality in one way or another.
Similar statements can be made for Mars and, on a lesser basis, Saturn, as
nJl of these planets are more immediate and demanding in their action
rhan some of the other planets, which often require longer stays in order
tn reach their peak.
One step up from the life of the ordinary person is the experience of
those who have international dealings on a regular basis, but most particulnrly those who, like American presidents, not only must live lives that are J..~NES AROUND THE WORLD international in scope but are also themselves the focus of attention from
pe9ple and nations all over the world. In these cases, all parts of the world
horoscope are strummed like a zither day in and day out, making them
good examples of the way in which the lines on an ACG map work.
Even more interesting than events in the lives of heads of state are the
experiences of entire n3:tions, something which was brought into sharp
focus some years ago . with the publication of a book called The True
Horoscope if the United States 1 not long before Astto*Carto*Graphy was
brought before the public. Its author, Helen Boyd, contended that the
traditional charts for the United States, most of which are for the signing
of the Declaration of Independence on Júpiter July 1776, had less substance to
them (or, we might say asttolegically, were less radical) than ·a moment
earlier in the country's history when the Second Continental Congress
actually issued a declaration of war against King George III, spelling out
the reasons for the conflict already taking place. Simultaneously, the congress also issued the Olive Branch Petition, which some time later was
rejected by the Crown. Through the use of historical documents, Helen
Boyd pinpointed a span of time when this declaration was passed by the
congress, and then with assistance from Roy Firebrace arrived at an exact
time: 6 July 1775, Gêmeos :oo A.M. LMT, in Philadelphia.
Though endless arguments can be offered as to why a particular national
chart should be more or less radical than any other, the bulk of the proofs
for most charts seems to depend on the political beliefs or patriotic fervour
of the adherents or detractots of a pa:tticular chart. In contrast to this, th€
main argument for the Boyd chart is astrological, as it provides sharp and
pertinent symbolism for a variety of events, and through the use of a
variety of techniques. Moreover, this chart also shows the same kind of.
sharp sy,mbolism when the geographical techniques of Astro*Carto*Graphy;
are used, particularly where the idea of 'war zones' is concerned. z
As Firebrace showed in Boyd's book, this chart actually times at least
one of the Júpiter July 1776 contenders, and one which is more historically
possible than the well-known 'Gemini-rising' chart for circa z:oo LMT in
the morning. F.il:ebrace's example usei'll a technique called the Progressed
Sidereal Solar Return that, while not well known, seems methodologically
sound. The essence of the technique is the notion that any solar return
(the return of the Sun to its natal place, something which occurs each year
around the birthday) becomes, by progression, the solar return for the·
following year. Because of the fact that the length of the year is about one PRISONER.S OF THE HOROSCOPE NO MORE quarter day beyond 365 days, the time for a solar return each year will
average to about six hours later than the one for the year before, th0ugh
~his varies according to the, time of year an.d ' other factors. As Firebrace
showed, progressing the Boyd chart to Júpiter July 1776 (two days short of its
solar return), yields the same angles as the Júpiter July 1776 chart, w:hich is set
fot about 5:ooP.M. LMT, thus relating this particular chart to the Boyd
chart in an interesting way, with its angles a progression and its planets a
transit. Also intere.s ting is that this progression has the Boyd natal Mars
on.the Midheaven (with natal Saturn not far off) and the Boyd natal Jupiter
setting on the date the declaration was signed.
These are interesting preliminary justifications for the chart, but more
telling and more pertinent to our subject here would be any relation Mars
nnd Pluto have to places where the United States has used military force.
In the case of Mars lines highlighting war zones for American presidents,
we have a simple equation that doesn't depend on what we think of a
rarticular president or his politics. Instead we know that American presic.lents are often called upon to make war, and that such wars will tend to
occur on their Mars lines. So, too, it should be for nations, and particularly
for one so involved in international affairs as America has been since the
beginning.
As we can see £t0m the map (Figure x6), Mars was near the Ascendant
directly over both Richmond (the Confederate capital) and Washington at
the time when the 1775 Declaration of War was signed, the two foci of
che most savage and costly war the US has ever fought- the Amerkan
Civil War. The Mars rising is of course a good indicator of the subject
of the original declaration itself. However, almost ninety years later, the
progressed Midheaven conjoined that Mars, thus activating the Martian
potential for the area shown in the natal set-up. Moreover, the progressed
Midheaven· c6njoined the natal Saturn, which is only six degrees further
along, not long after. This aspect was strong during the whole Reconstruction era, which saw the highly political and ~surpatory attempt to impeach
Andrew Johnson, as well as an attempt to remake completely the political
nnd social culture of the South by a group of radical Northern Republicans
in Congress. Obviously one should·look to times when these two planets
progress to angles at Washington as periods in which the nation will be
divided against itself in some fundamental way.
Having pointed out the involvement of Both the natal and progressed
Mars in the American Civil War, let us go on to consider those areas it 93 LINES AROUND THE WORLD NE MA SA
IC IC IC MO UR NE
MH ASC IC MA
ASC su PL ME MH IC MH
40' 60' 40' 20' o· , •
' :·: I 140. UR JU
ASC ASC 120' SU JU ME PL VE SA M
O UR JU
ASC MH ASC DSC ASC ASC ASC OSC OSC 94 PRISONERS OIF THE HOROSCOPE NO MO RE ME
IC PL
MH MO MH VE
IC 140' 60' 40' I
1 20' I . ..
o· 20' 40' ..
40' 20' ME osc 60' VE osc so· 1 NE 120' 140' MA SA osc osc osc Figure r6- Natal map for the United States of America (Boyd)
95 160' LINES AROUND THE WORLD touches in the rest of the world. Though not all US wars involved Mars
lines, many major conflicts did. The Mars Midheaven line on the ACG
map, as one can see, goes direcdy through Berlin an~ through Tt:ipoli.
latter city has been enshrined in the lyrics of the 'Marine Corps Hymn'
which begins: 'From the Halls of Montezuma, to the shores of Tripoli .. .'
This refers to one of America's first uses of its military as :an arm of its
foJ:eign policy, aside from its early struggles with Great Britain (the w~
of I 81 2) and with France, mainly over economic issues. The pirates of the
Barbary States along the northern coast of Africa had been HaJ..a"".u.•!!.
nations on the high seas for hundreds of years by the time the ruler
Tripolitania, Pasha Yusuf Karamanli, declared war on the United States
for having had the audacity to take firm action to halt such activity. Tl;te
US reply was a war that extended from 18or t0 1805, and which mctucledll~ }
the fabled Marine raid on Tripoli, resulting in the defeat of the pirates. 0£
note in this regard is the April I 986 air raid on Libya, intended to destroy
a terrorist training camp as well as to kill the Libyan leader Muammar
al-Qaddafi (in retaliation for a bombing of a discotheque in Berlin thatt
had resulted in the death of a US serviceman), as well as a 1989 skirmislJI
in the air over the Mecliterranean. Both these incidents were instrumental
in at least toning down terrorist acts that were held to have been sponsored!,
by Libya for many years previously.
This same Mars Midheaven line also passes near Berlin (which is actually
between the Neptune and Mars Midheaven lines), the source of twO world
wars in which American troops have been instrumental in Allied victories.
Though US relations with Germany have been very strong and cordial
since the end of the Second World War, the presence of that Mars indicates
how tension between Washington and Bonn is always a potential in the
future. In fact, as the US Mars, Saturn and Neptune Midheaven lines cover
all of Europe, this does not bode well for relations between the United
Statt:s and its NATO allies with the end of the Cold War. Having no
common enemy, these countries now face tricky problems of economic
competition and political cooperation that would seem to require more
harmony than one usually finds under a Mars line.
Also of interest is the fact that the Mars and Saturn Descendant lines
go through Vietnam, flanking both Saigon (now Ho Chi Minh City) and
Hanoi. It would be difficult to think of anything more fitting as a symbol
of American entanglement in Vietnam than Mars and Saturn on the
Descendant, emphasizing the 1st/7th-house axis in the same way as anothet
.. PRISONERS OF l'HE f:I0•RiOS,e O;pE N(j) MORE divisive US war. The Vietnam conflict in fact resulted in a kind .of polarizntion similar to that present in the Civil War, even if on a lesser scale. For
many years, an important line in American politics has divided t}:lose who
tmpported the war from those who had not, as well as those who had
fnught in other wars from those who refused to fight in this one. As
long as the generation represented by the current ( 1 996) president and
vice-president of the United States is fliont and centtre in American life,
1his line will continue to be important.
Despite the obvious involvement of Mars lines in US military engagements, perhaps the most dramatic line on the map does not involve Mars,
hut is instead the Pluto Midheaven line which goes right througlil Hke>shima. Hiroshima is at a longitude of I 32E27 and the national Pluto is at
1 33E3 I - less than a de!¥ee of <:>rb. Thus at the time when the Second
Continental Congress signed its D eclaration of War, the planet of force
111a}eure was on the Midl:ieaven at -a: place where it would become activated
r69 years later. It is also notable that in the standard US horoscope, Pluto
It~ what would be called a. singleton in the Marc Edmund Jones system,
meaning it is standing all by itself in one hemisphere of the chart, opposite
nnd quite distinct fr.<:>m everything else.
Of course lt was only discovered in 1930, which may, according to one
nstrological school of tho1:1ght, mean that the consciousness of those things
J>tuto stands for only came to public attention around that time. We can,
lr:~ fact, date the change of the United States of Arn:erica from what it was
to what it has become as having begun in about 1930, in the depths of
t'he Great Depression, and the basic symbol of that·change was the atomic
bombing of Hiroshima. When the atomic bomb wa:s. dropped on that city
In August 1945, the innocence that had been part of the national myth
was gone, and there is still argument among historians about how necessary
11he act was in order to end the war. Before that the United States could
~ay that it had been on the 'right' side, and though it certainly was in the
wa.r itself,' the question of whether it went too far in demonstrating its
might will probably not be answered even by future generations.
This Pluto line is, of course, all the more interesting because, as we
I'Ointed out in the previous chapter, the man who ordered the dropping
of the bombs on Hiroshima and Nagasaki, Harry S Truman, had Pluto
1tnd Saturn rising for those locations at the time of his birth,. with proKressions and transits etching that symbolism sharply into the scarred
ground around the two cities. Thus the coming into being of consciousness 97 LINES AROUND THE WORLD through Pluto is symbolized by the US chart and by Harry Truman's chart.
When Pluto came to call, the United States of America matured as a nation
with the. realization that it could indeed do harm. It is interesting also
note that in 1968 the progressed Sun of the natal US horoscope, Whil<::.l!:u·l
began its journey in the 10th house, had progressed to a conjunction
natal Pluto, down in the 4th. This was in the middle of a period rn:<:~1r••
showed great evidence of national disillusion, with anti-war riots and the
growth of a so-called counter-culture.
This movement was perhaps in p'a rt a reaction to the Plut. Sol factor. ootn.
authors grew up in the America of the · I95os, which, for all the
splendour bestowed upon it by those nostalgic for the quiet days of
Eisenhower presidency, held a quiet terror for the American school child,
who was made highly aware, almost on a daily basis, of what to do in .......,....
of nuclear attack. It is hardly surprising that the generation which ,.."',rn.-n.
that they would have to crawl under their school desks, or jump into
handy ditch (and at all costs not look at the flash), as Soviet uu""LJ·'"""'
destroyed their home towns might tend to have a fixation on this issue, a
fixation which would emerge as political activity at the time when the US
Pluto was activated. Even with the end of the Cold War, the threat
nuclear weaponry continues as a rather formidable reality in our pres
world, and as a very basic reality in the national consciousness of both
United States and Japan.
Those who might be inclined to challenge the truth of this interpretation
of Pluto in the Boyd chart as both horoscope and ACG map should
consider the following interesting fact, which mirrors what we saw in
President Truman's chart: if you progress the Mars Midheaven line, which
was over Berlin in the natal ACG map, it will move eastwards across
map at a rate of apptoximately three quarters of a degree a year, ~v~.,.... ...~•Ft·
points east of Berlin as it goes. In I 94 5, at the time of the bombing
Hiroshima, this progress.e d Mars was in fact right over the Midheaven
Hiroshima and was therefore within orb of conjunction of the PlutG line.
If 'right over' sounds a bit much, consider the following: Mars had ore>-·
gressed to a longitude of 13 zE 3I, keeping in mind that Hiroshima is a
I 32E27- four seconds of arc difference. And the national Pluto is r 33E31
less than a degree away from both of those. Certainly there is a st.gru!hc:anc:e
there for those who will see, and Figure I 7 illustrates it clearly.
In line with this, consider that a conjunction of transiting Saturn
Neptune was close to the Moon of the Boyd chart during much of the PRISONERS OF THE HOROSCOPE NO MORE 25• ~ oo· 'f! d' ])
25 Júpiter °17°
rn-1 r1 og· 09" tS 1----~~~--_;...+--1 ~+-----~----+---- Júpiter ~ 54' 54' 25. $ 06' Figure 17- USA (Boyd chart): the mise-en-scene for a Martian progression
Inner: natal; middle: progressed; outer: transits 99 LINES AROUND THE WORLD McCarthy era, with all its anti-Communist hysteria. Note that the US lVH)Olll
for the Boyd chart is on the Midheaven. at Moscow in the ACG map,
locating very well the source and object of the national paranoia that t-:~1r~1',..,'11,1
the times overse~n by the Saturn and Neptune transit: the Russians.
Moon, of course, represents the way in which one is sensitized to incoming
information, one's feelings, uncertainties and unconscious mind. It is almost
as if the Soviet Communist government of Russia became sort of a shadow
image of the United States itself, a bogeyman to a degree that was almost
unbelievable and incomprehensible outside of the United States, just as a
negative lunar image often becomes for an individual under the stress of
transits.
These are only a few examples of the way in which this chart seems to
reflect the national psyche of the United States, but they serve to makeo
the case that Boyd's proposed time at the very least deserves closer consideration. In a larger sense, both this chart and the fascinating connections
between the charts of US presidents and the geographical areas in which
their aggressive urges merge with the needs of the nation they serve make
a point that parallels the one made by Astro*Carto*Graphy itself. In the
case of Astro*Carto*Graphy, we see that the scope of astrology extends
well beyond the place of birth, just as surely as it extends beyond the time
of birth through progressions and transits. The idea was already inherent
in the older idea of the locality chart, but it has been made much clearer
with the mapping of key elements of the individual horoscope across the
world through the development of Astro*Carto*Graphy.
In a similar way, while mundane astrology has always held that nations
acted and interacted, in a sense, just like individuals, this has not alwayS'
been easy to see from inside the land-locked traditional birth chart. A
nation is a citizen of the world, so the reach of even the smallest country
extends far beyond its borders. T hus it makes good sense to consider a
national chart as it applies to the world as a whole, alongside the mons
traditional modes of analysis based on a chart set for a national capital or
other crucial location. So whether we are dealing with nations, or presidents,
or individuals such as those we interact with every day, we now know that
all are citizens of the world and not just prisoners of the birth place. This
brings us to what one might call the admonition of Astro*Carto*Graph~
jtself (with apologies to Robert Browning and Andrea del Sarto):
A horoscope's reach should exceed the birthplace's grasp,
Or what are the heavens for?
100 PART TWO Your Planets and Their Lines:
Natal Astro*Carto*Gtaphy • Introduction: Zen and the Art of
(Not) Cookbooking nach year a. high-school chemistry teacher of ou,r acquaintance goes through
11 dtual, a rite of passage for his young wards meant to teach them that
knowledge without understanding is folly- and can at times be downright
tlangerous. His class is taught in an old-fashioned laboratory room with
hlg slab tables replete with plumbing for Bunsen burners and locked
drawers full of all kinds of toxic chemicals. Lab day is once a week, and
when it comes around, he begins the lab session by admonishing his
11uudents, 'Don't cookbook it!' The meaning is simple: read about the
experiment in the laboratory manual bifore you do it, .rather than consulting
1he book as you complete each step.
For most of the year, his warning makes little difference, but when
11pringtime rolls around, a particular experiment is called for that illustrates
~he truth of what he has· been telling the students all along. 'Don't cookhook,' he says once more, but this time emphasizes firmly that anyone
who does so will end up at one point with a test tube full of chemicals with a rubber stoppe'r in it - clamped. firmly over a Bunsen burner on a
high flame. The stopper is necess~ry in order to keep the chemicals from
~ pilling bifore you place them over the flame, but it should be removed
he::fore the heating process starts - as the lab manual nicely informs you
overleaf from the instructions to get the burner going. 'Anyone who cookh0oks this experiment,' he says, 'is going to blow up that test tube. As
many times as I've had classes do this, it never fails. Twenty minutes into
the experiment, bam-bam-bam, test tubes start going all over the room!' And
Kute enough they do in each class where he tells that story each spring.
And what, the reader might ask, has this to do with Astro*Carto*Graphy?
Nothing as such, except for the admonition not to cookbook the section
which follows, which is a series of essays about the fundamental psychologinl natures of the planets by Jim Lewis. Surely enough this information is
~~~:tended to be applied, as it can be with either an ACG map or a simple .,) 103 YOUR PLANETS AND THEIR LINES relocated horoscope. But before applying it, you must understand it, wtttcl!lj
means this should be read only after you've gone through the book as
whole in order to understand the context in which the things that ~v.u.v
are said. Having done that, you'll be able to go with the flow of L.U.'-·""'~
planetary pieces, rather than simply following them from page to page.
Bon appetit! 104 8
The Sun: Can Anyone
Really Be a Star? Obviously, the 'star-consciousness' engendered by a strong Sun does not
work well for everyone, so if you are normally shy, retiring and like the
background, this area may present its potentials to you in the form of
Inner struggles around love and self-image or in the unpleasant form of
domineering and egocentric individuals. Though Aquarius, Pisces and Virgo
types may have more problems here than other people, anyone has the
t•nergy to grow and develop the charisma and leadership that lie within,
t•ven when this must be done in a public context of some sort. For women onfy: Since women are usually not educated to assume authority
und power easily, and in fact may even be discouraged from doing so, Sun
t.ones like this one can seem problematical for you at the beginning, unless
you are already very self-assured. A tendency to attract domineering men
t'nn give way to the discovery of power within yourself, even though you
may resist this at first. Events essentially outside your ·control can force
you ,to accept leadership, and even though at first you may find this
unpleasant, you can grow to like the role of 'star' as you get used to the
perks and rewards. While a more passive and dramatic role, that of 'damsel
Ill distress', can attract many gallant knights to your side, they are likely to
ltnd themselves unsatisfied the closer they come to the real you, at which
point they will gallop off into the sunset, leaving you to cope with the
problem of calling forth your own inner heroism - the real challenge of
1\ Stm line. /•'or men onfy: You can find this zone particularly congenial, since you are
Inclined to model your identity after your father, to take control and to
t•xhibit masculine authoritative power. However, you need to beware of a
lt•ndency to be overbearing and egotistical, to treat women as inferiors and
11 l display pomposity and arrogance, while at the 'Same time suppressing
105 YOUR PLANETS AND Tf.IEIR LINES even pos1t1ve manifestations of your own feminine side. Despite tn<:!S.eJ
rough edges, which must be attended to if there is to be a balance, this
a positive zone for most men, who can find themselves reaching powermij
positions and generally enjoying great success here. The young may
romantic appetites extremely demanding here, something which can
taken as evidence of the need to come to terms with the feminine, s1neg
the intensity of such needs points to the suppression of this side of .,,...,,.
psyche. PSY C HOLOGI CAL INTERPRETATION OF THE SU The Celebriry, You
This is your 'celebrity' zone, where you can come to express in full
Midas touch of the Sun. A masculine, egoic consciousness prevails w~~J.JH.
you here, as the universe seems malleable, laid out before you as if to
acted on by your energy and will. The power of your logic, the strc~n~p!t.
of your inner motivation, and your ability to bring order to chaos are
expanded. Along with this comes a dynamic and vigorous drive tr.'\'lcr-:l
self-actualization, as yo1:1r life processes become more directed, creating
identity that is acutely aware of its own selfhood. This newly rev·eaJ.e.!i
identity is an autonomGus, outer-directed and essentially extroverted 'I
that sees its own existence and function as the centre of the
Your direction is moulded mostly by inner processes, and since it is
tively unaffected by environment and social pressure, you seem more_
from both past and future, existing in a high state of self-awareness au"~"'
the here and now. You expect others to pay attention to you at
location, and indeed they do, to the point where you might find
followed about like an important personage, treated to others' gerler<)Slt
as they identify strongly with your creations - even including your ....u ....\.LL,._..,J
This is the best locale in which to sell or exhibit creative works easily find a publisher here, and even those with more obs.cure cre~au.v'
seeds to plant can find them in full flower. If other planets' influences
coupled with the ·Sun, you could become an extremely powerful, ran10li
(or even infamous) symbol of the affairs governed by those other 1.,....u"'"'
so you should try to understand carefully just exactly what they mean.
itself, the Sun often demands that you follow a glittering, dOJtntlle<r:nm
and sometimes overbearing style of life. However, pride, glamour and
ro6 THE SUN: CAN ANYONE REALLY BE A STAR? ''''petite for the roar of the crowd often conceal an inner incompleteness
11nd self-rejection that demands ·others' approval as compensation. STAGES AND MYTH OF THE SUN Heroes Tall and Small
In the early stages of manifesting the energy of your Sun line, you may either
rxhibit the boasting, arrogant self-importance and prideful ostentation of
the vain narcissist, or you may attract to yourself others who have these
tmits. A solar zone focuses your consciousness on a personal battle with
lulsic fe elings of inferiority, so if you have never yet seen yourself in a
•hotoic' role, then here you may go through a deep, inner preparatory
atruggle first, one in which you painfully reject a childish, dependent,
ht\tnature identity. A later stage of awareness of this planet's power (usually
ll(ter the age of 30) focuses on the Quest, or inner, mythic journey. This
jnumey is at best the genuine quest to perform a deed or to understand a
p~rsonal mystery, the accomplishment of which can define an unchangeable
Inundation of selfhood and power. Pride is the catalyst of this change, so
aome of the confrontations engendered by displaying arrogance, or adoptIng pompous, officious roles in order to mask a wounded immaturity,
un eventually form a strong foundation for a: mature inner dignity, a
Rolf-assurance that grants you the capacity to control your moods and
feelings. In the earlier stages of solar consciousness, you may feel that·
hxing the kitchen tap is a feat for which you deserve a presidential commenthltion, but this imperial myopia soon gives way to a better appreciation
lot the point and purpose of your own and others' deepest, immutable
rower and dignity. In maturity, the solar consciousness exhibits a glowing,
httherly leadership that makes you a creative, self-fulfilled guiding light and
t'llctgizing influence to all whom you affect- and you will very likely affect
nmny at this location. You speak with authority and humour at this place,
•11 you develop self-assurance, loyalty, intelligence - and even, perhaps,
lind fame. YOeR PLANETS AND THEIR LINES T HE PRACT I CAL S I DE OF TH E SUN If You're in Charge, Thry Can't Order You Around
On a practical level, this zone is one in which men often become fa
and where they find success as a self-made hero (through fighting city
for example), as an artist or as a producer. Though plenty of love
your way, you may simply take it as your due, and thus ~ot return it
equal measure. You certainly can make things happen here, since you
ready to manipulate the local environment, both material and spl·Lrl·ltmLl,~ ,~
order to succeed, especially in any business that demands presence,
public image and powerful dignity. Authority is a key concept for you
understand and work with at this location, since not doing so invites
danger of insensitivity to others and overwork for yourself, especially
you have not yet wholly integrated the Sun's power into a more "'""''""
identity. If you find yourself fascinated by movie stars, royalty or nl"'\'"'"'im
leaders, this shows you have not yet accepted your own 'Sun' potential,
which case a Sun zone may hold some critical and bittersweet lessons
you. Pay particular attention to your thoughts about and concerns
parents and authority, and be aware that disappointments relating to
and leadership point the way to a truer sense of your own selfhood..............
and art may be important themes here, especially if Libra is strong
your horoscope, while a priesdy role in religion may dominate if va.u "'"
Sagittarius or Pisces is powerful. This is.a good area for health, as you
find rehabilitation from old problems as you become imbued with a vuJ'""'
vitality that prevents new ones from happening. Awards, titles and CieJ:?;11e
are likely to be bestowed upon you, as everyone seems ready to "''"'"·uv
edge that you are 'somebody'. At the same time, but only if you give
attention to this side of yourself, inner spiritual experiences can
a deep sense of personal integration and identity. Gambling, games
amusements take on new importance, perhaps even professionally,
would serve you well to be very aware of your personal chart ootentli
in this regard - you can win big, but you can lose big as w~ll. 108 • THE SUN: CAN ANY0NiE REALLY BE A STAR? SUN ON ASCENDANT lf You're Not at Centre Stage, Will AfD!one See You?
'[his could easily be a 'hot' location for you, as the general matters usually
aiiiKOciated with the Sun specifically act themselves out through your personllity and through the direct effect you have on other people. You are
ltnsically attempting to discover who you are here, but you are inclined to
tll'(ine your self-image mainly by contrasting it to those around you, a
tendency that may compel you to adopt, try out and then discard numerous Saturno \llubstantial identities, each of which exists only in relation to particular
people. This is not likely to be apparent to many around you, however,
111 you tend to project pride, dignity, vanity and even a bit of arrogance,
•llracting followers and hangers-on with your zestful personality and irtrNistible charisma. Your relationship with your father may lie deep beneath
this personal quest for identity, as you consciously or otherwise seek to
ln\itate the power that be exercised over you in your relationships with
tithers. Work succeeds in areas that attract others' attention: artwork,
theatre, performance, or guiding others to personal transformation.
You may be assigned the role of 'guru' by admiring friends, as a result
ul the leadership, audacity, courage and nobility of character you manifest
hrt·c as you seek to become what everyone admires and desires above all
I c. A profession that puts you before the public is thus likely to attract Áries ' I lit attention, as you feel quite self-confident, impulsive and extroverted,
rr11dy to take on the role of an energetic achiever. Children (of all ages)
hnd you irresistible, and you will probably do everything you can to encourIMl' their unqualified admiration in order to ensure that you have a following
nl some sort. You like to see yourself as 'special' in this locality, and
•rvcral grades better than the ordinary, so there is danger that affectation,
tlwatricality and vanity will add a slick, phoney veneer to your public
fWrsona that may put off those who would rather know something about
lht• teal you. In any event, since those around you give you complete
rrnnission to succeed, you are constandy subject to the dangers as well
IM ~he glories of leadership. If you pay too much attention to the glories
1nd ignore the dangers, you could find that those who satisfy their unfulflllt•d identities in hero worship can later become the most unforgiving of
prt·secutors when the hero fails to deliver all that was hoped for. Still, life YOUR PLANETS AND THEIR LINES can seem like a party with you as the guest of honour in this locale, am:q
the 'prima donna complex' that develops seems justified by your pr"Il' Plutão ~
humour, poise and joyful influence. SUN ON MIDHEAVEN Listening to Others Fuels Your Fires
In this location, the general effects and concerns of the Sun spc::c1ttca.l!
act themselves .o ut in career ambitions and in the social arena. The ,...r..,
change and redirection of your inner processes are apt to be motivated
how you feel others see you in work and social spheres, and by how
react to your emerging sense of public dignity and charisma. You
yourself on an inner journey to prideful selfhood, urged on by an u·,""!';~
of yourself as socially admired and appreciated, awarded and praised
some enviable field. Because you expect to be looked up to by others,
are likely to be preferred in work situations, especially those ·
promotion or public relations, and either the performing or creative
working in an obscure, 'ordinary', or anonymous profession is not u~·~
to be too appealing to you unless you can figure some way to be a
to those around you.
What people think of you is over-important to you here, spurring you
to achieve higher social status; but while your sensitivity and pride moti
you to accomplishment, too much concern with appearances could 1r.ltet:tel!!
with joyful, spontaneous creativity and self-expression. Striving is re,varaec
with at least the trappings of success, so that here more than
else you· are likely to find fame. But the danger ever present under a
line of any kind is narcissism, which could lead you to surrender the
impulses of self-expression to empty acclaim and plastic celebrity status
the big frog in the small pond. An addiction to hollow applause
conceal a ragged self-image disguised in a splendiferous royal costume,
you try too hard to be all things to all people.
Underlying self-actualization in this locale is your relationship with
father. This you must come to terms with, lest you become driven by
that no one will want to care for or protect you in time of need and
everyone's regard for you is merely superficial. After donning
disguises and social roles, particularly in the early stages of living here,
can pursue a successful quest for complete self-discovery and mastery,
IIO THE SUN: CAN ANYO~E REALLY BE A STAR? l'Ould even assume the role of guide and teacher-by-example to others
seeking their own true identities through a deeper self-knowledge. SUN ON DESCENDANT The Road to Yourse!f Is through Others
In a location at which the Sun sets (and thus would lie on the cusp of the
7th house in a traditional chart), its energies manifest through other people,
nnd they will be most evident in your relationships and marriage. When
nt their best in this location, your energy, self-acceptance and inner integrity
nllow you to exert a guiding influence over others, and people may actually
be attracted to you as a sort of guru. You exude an air of authority and
purposefulness that when properly expressed can help others to sift through
the complexities of their life concerns and set priorities. Should you resist
rl.ccepting this-leadership role, you may instead attract arrogant and controlling types, surrendering your own power and authority to them. If you are
properly awru;e of your potential at this location, however, such 'surrender'
cnn actually represe!).t an early, immature stage of coming to recognize
11nd assert your own self-determination and charisma in a positive way.
Relationships dominate here, as mar.riage, or in fact any connection with
1111other person, becomes a glittering arena for self-discovery, change and
maturation. With relationship and partnership. concerns taking up so much
1>f your time and energy, the battle for selfhood is largely fought in the
context of other people.
Until you can learn to see and understand the dynamic inner reserves
c>f your power, and incorporate these reserves into your conscious personalIty, you may feel a little out of control. Problems you experience with
rveryone from room-mates to life mates often merely reflect your own
Inner situation, as you try just a little bit too hard to seem generous,
outgoing, vain ·and 'on top of things' at times when you really are not. If Netuno (>U become involved in a marriage, you may enter into it with the thought
that through it you can either stimulate your own inner creativity or support
the creative aspirations of your mate. Since you tend to project an air of
nobility, honour and leadership on to others, you will £nd yourself urging
more than a few to take their first s.teps on tl1e road to psychological
maturity, giving you a kind of personal satisfaction that could border on
the vicarious, as you take their triumphs for your own while downplaying
III their tragedies. B.e cause .of your inspirational gift, artistic peopl~are
to b e ·attt:acted to y0u,. something whioh should be taken as ari ·,.,...,,...,..••,., ..,.~~·hi since their volatile personalities can help you to understand the processes
competition, sexuality and relationship better than. you might have before.
you happen to be involved i:a sales, the arts, medicine· or other a1te:math~·"1
modes of healing, you will find this area enhances your abilities. SUN 0N THE IMUM COELI Pride in Your (Jrigins
With the Sun at-its 'midnight' position, its p.t:inciples play themselves
on an inward level, allowing you to accept yourself and your power in
world with ease and grace. Gradually at first, perhaps almost :invtsibly,
experience a deep, inward renovation of ·soul and purpos~. At the
base ·of your self-definition you .c an find an inner image of who you
that was derived from parents and from other influences in your
envit0nment. It is this inner context - a matrix shaped from tral:iltlorn
family, ethtuc identity and regional loyalties - from which· you see vo~.:trs®.
operating. 'fhis persona:l sense of who you are can be restructured,
and ultimately transcended altogether, in much the same way as a chl'l~
grows beyond his family to b~come a mature, self-defined indivi!iual:
you are doing this, you may fi,nd the need to build on your heritage, G>r
.t:ediseo:ver it, as an interest in genealogy; pride·in family and re.s earch ·
your personal past become allegories for a profound ·q uest to undet:st~rm
yourself at the m0st basic-inner level.
'Fhis zone is exeellent if you are either seeking retirement from
workaday world 0r founding a family, as you naturally take -to the '""...'~
of running a household. A profound sense of personal responsibility ·
family and to tradition evolves within you, as a protective fondness
the roots from which you came strengthens your own identity..
strife tends to disappear here, 0'r to be at least greatly alleviated, esr,ecla!l!,l,:
if others can acknowledge your talent for leadership, and your r.-"'"
in s'Olving problems brings security for yours·e lf and for those you
P_roperty acquired at this place can easily .irrcreas.e in value, or at
prestige, so this can be a superb location in which to build your orc:a!il1
home. In fact, any consttu~tion you undertake would hav:e an inner m<~Mift
that would manifest itself in the outer world for all to·see, making it ·
II2 THE SUN: CAN ANYONE REALLY BE A STAR? 11ntisfying to you and your family. Finally, this is also a good place for
11clf-rehabilitation in the health of body, mind and spirit, a prime area for
the ailing to energize themselves in their batde for wholeness and wellness.
Vitality is enhanced at its deepest levels, and can lead eventually to providing
you with the energy and drive to become a pillar of the community. SUN WITH MOON Parental Issues Inspire Se!fdiscovery
The joining of the two most potent indicators of the masculine and feminine elements of a person's nature pinpoints an area of the world in which
the concepts of male and ·t emale ar~ related, a:nd one where your sexual
ot social identity itself may reach some sort of crossroads. Men may for
the first time find themselves getting in touch with the full power of
~heir nurturing instincts as they feel a 'mothering', gende and supporting
personality flowering within them; women may find opportunities to act
nn long-held dre~s and career desires, especially if these involve demonNttating individuality. in t:he public arena. Either -sex may become parents
here, and in any case you will become aware of the interaction of your family
'karma' or inheritance as it alternately conflicts with and then supports your
ego and its needs; Shallow egocentricity could resw't from this, or perhaps
nn impulse to rebel against authority that masks overcompensation for
feelings of inadequacy while at the same time expressing resentment that the
cmly approved behaviour is one that allows litde latitude for individuality.
Sexual and personal polarities are intensified, making it hard to relate
to the opposite sex except by plodding along in the rut of conventional
~coder cliches, particularly those patterned after one's parents. The need
for approval by others (parents included) becomes very powerful in this
locality, and while you seem to be able to attract situations that feed this
need, still you feel as if you are not ·as much in control of them as you
would like to be. You may become acutely aware here of a social role that
•cems to have been ordained for you, though you will probably resent its
Inevitability, feeling (correcdy) that it ignores and suppresses your individunlity. This is not an area in which you can grapple with truly cosmic issues,
11s your life concerns seem very ordinary- at times to the point of boredom
because of their entanglement with conventional values and what others
l'hink. The best opportunity you can find in being here is to discover how YOUR PLANETS AND THEIR LINES you can integrate selfhood and social position. Until that is done, howe:ve1L'I
you may attract, seek or act out dependent roles or perhaps engage
shallow authoritarianism. The biggest challenge you face here is that ;:.u\..ua
negative tendencies are likely to be supported wholeheartedly by your SO<jlaJI
milieu, which doesn't want to deal with real issues any more than you SUN W I TH MERCURY I Think, Therefore r m Here
This influence seems to suggest success in smaller things: you will ctiscmre
that your willj cteativity and leadership find easy self-expression in
cation, work and neighbourhood concerns, particularly if this is the
influence affecting you. Unlike some other Sun lines, here you are ...............
to be unpretentious for the most part, and able to succeed at things
are useful, rather than those with a lot of snob appeal. Aptitude, ~.....,~.....
and skills can be developed to a high degree here, as will directs self in
way that encourages the development of control over technique. oe,cattSI
of this, habits are formed that could lead to real accomplishment, and
your work is apt to be praised for its effectiveness. Vocational, 'nr:l t'1n
conversation and community concerns receive much attention as you
many new opportunities for their expression, so that recognition co1me
to you for innovations relating to any form of journalism, writing or me~ru
work. Practical, adult-level thought predominates, of the directed sort
also contributes to learning and using science and maths. If this ·
is the only one operating, it suggests that life can easily become ..... ..,,..
theoretical and abstract, and that underlying all your practicality and , ........u .....
cal ability may be an immature 'eternal youth' syndr0me that leaves
content to deal with the real world vicariously, as you engage your in~.._... ....,
through artistic and bookish pursuits.
Others see you as bright and flexible, with a youthful outlook that ....,..._.,_,.
you a rising contributor to society. Your Sun sign is very importarlt at
locale, and you may be able to find a profession or undergo '-U'-''-"'·u'-!
that enables you to express its best occupational potentials. T he key
utilizing this energy is the application of the inner self to some practlc
and creative business. Ftom ideas and training that are undertaken
you may find your life's calling, or at least some new and re-..:~at:d.U:
work, including a high possibility of self-employment. Unless other ......... ,,...,
114 • .. . THE SUN: CAN ANYONE REALLY BE A STAR? Intrude, this is not an area where you will have to deal with big issues, but
ye>ur success is highly likely in day-to-day concerns, as your will gradually
neates the situation you desire in practical terms. Roles as liaison officer,
1tgem, facilitator :}.Dd community organizer are suggested. SUN WIT H VENUS Your Inner Cinderella
llcre you project peace, harmony and love to those around, acting as a
Atabilizing influence in your milieu, something that makes you very attractive to othe~s. You become very sensitive to art and fashion, and may
rmcceed in some creative vocation, if your talents permit. On an inner
lt·vel, these planets suggest the balancing and harmonizing of ego and will,
11 process which serves to symbolize, for those around you, hope for unity
11nd peace, and for improvement of life for future generations. The Sun
nnd Venus together symbolize a '.royal wedding', and while you probably
will not marry into an aristocratic family (there are, after all, only so many
to go around!), in this locale you are apt to be in love, craving friendship
11nd status in high society, which you demonstrate daily with a demeanour
that is cheerful, considerate, fashionably mannerly and even vain. As y0u
project elegance and nobility, you can earn rewards and recognition for
}fOUr taste and refinement especially in creative activities. People seem
Inclined to give you things, to invite you out, and otherwise to encourage
\'OU socially in various ways.
If you have no influences here from the 'heavier' outer planets, the
problems you experience may revolve around an unfortunate tendency
towards shallowness and vapidity - you are likely to be sought after and
11dmired like a 193os chorus girl, a sex object desired for your beauty,
rilt'her than for your personality or humanity. While marrying 'well' is a
distinct possibility here, you should question whether that really is all you
wnnt out of life. Love affa.i.ts in this locality seem to make you feel better
11bout yourself, as you find yourself acting out the role of Cinderella or
Prince Charming over and over again. You may have also an inclination
tuwards consumerism and acquisitiveness, which can make you at least
111ildly obsessed with money and goods. Perhaps the best way to avoid the
JliLfalls of this almost too pleasant and harmonious area is through working
In the arts. Success here does not stem from your being a totally exceptional YOUR PLANETS AND THEIR LINES and gifted human being, so much as it comes from the outer trapp:m~
which lead others to think this is what you are. See yourself as 1'rttet:pr~et~
rather than originator, of the beauty that others constantly remind you
you can project. SUN WITH MARS lfs Tough To Be a Hero
In this locality, the 'macho' expression of a somewhat masculine self-JJ.,..a.~
becomes a matter of personal pride. Your presence is seen as an ex::t~:er:ite~
materialization of all things usually identified with the masculine:
iveness, sexuality, derring-do and boisterous and courageous vi
Excesses of energy and sexuality can burn you out here, as you tend to'\J(laJftj
hyperactivity in all things. Though appearing to others as volatile
erratic, you still appear to get a tremendous amount of work done. Áries ,
admire and project the essence of masculinity, including an arrogant ,J...~""'
in Netuno :our battle scars. Others are likely to look upon you with some
and not a little fear, as y0u can be quick to anger, ruthless, harsh and,
extreme cases, driven by the narrow view that everyone arow1d you
either a competitor or an enemy.
The problem with this location is that society works to suppress
Wlffiitigated projection of such raw energy, except in a few circums .........,.....
areas: the military, athletics, and in masculine-identified professions.
while these may go well in this locale, you are apt to experience cons
friction with authority over what you see as. your territorial rights, or u·1S1!11't
to your pride and honour. With your myopically personal view of w.u•··~
you easily attract attacks from others, and are liable to develop (you
have to) a Spartan love of adventure, physical work, sex and contest.
and vindictiveness are the main feelings of which you are more or
constantly aware, as other, softer emotions are likely to be suppressed.
general, you tend to exclude from your life nurturing and supportive
ings, whether your own or those of others. The constant stress and ~"""'"'"'
you impose on yourself can wear down your health, however, and a
ency towards accident-proneness may complicate the picture. Áries manners are likely to become more coarse here, and though your se]::u
passions intensify, they do so at the expense of love and affection,
they are instead rigidly goverhed by narrow se:xual roles and st:erecrrvJ:le II6
J THE SUN: CAN ANYONE RE:A.LLY BE A STAR? At the extremes, you may find yourself prone to seek the destruction of
llt'lything you cannot master, though this particular Sun-Mars problem
I'IUl be diminished if it is given expression in arduous work or athletic
l om petition. SUN WITH JUPITER Preponderance of the Great
In this locality, your tendency towards cheerful, outgoing self-promotion
finds few barriers to its appetite for expansion in society, empowering you
m seek, prize and probably attain a kind of bourgeois success and prosperity, provided that you unques.tioningly accept whatever the powersthat-be deem to be correct behaviour. Underlying your benevolent
disposition is a belief that the status quo is basically justified, and this faith,
11clf-confidence and belief in the rightness of things as they are is rewarded
hy privilege, tangible success, honours, advancement and preferment. In
keeping with this view that the place you find yourself in is the best of all
possible worlds, you may tend more to the right politically, to the conservative where religion is concerned, and may find yourself admiring, in some
area of your life, a vested authority which you see as there almost by divine
right. You may find yourself in an admired position supported by academic,
l'oligious or corporate privilege, but even if not, faith in yourself and the
r4uity of the universe makes you an excellent sales person, promoter,
husiness person, publisher or entrepreneur. There will be times, however,
when foolish optimism and naive imprudence cause reverses, and gambling,
rxttavagance and speculations are definitely temptations to watch for.
Sexual and creative appetites are given second place, as they are replaced
hy the drive for honour and approval by society, and a quest for the
ll'Cognition that society bestows on those who contribute without
diatupting.
If you are naturally an introverted type, you may take less enthusiastically
lei this climate of self-congratulatory promotion, and, perhaps feeling
unequal to its demands, may take refuge in overeating, other forms of
Indulgence, or complacency. D espite this, the near-miraculous luck, and
tht status which seem your lot in life here make it easy to give in to
rxternal social pressure. In this very fortunate place, opporttlnities offer
themselves on a regular basis, and 'quality' people make your advancement
117 YOUR PLANETS AND THEIR LINES easier by their patronage. Ca~eers in law, music, publishing,
religion, politics, self-improvement, promotion or ·any highly paid
fession should succeed here relatively easily, as you become the acttnH~e,
pillar of your community and a self-identified force for social good.
strong flavour of internationalism and scholarship is also associated
Sun-Jupiter, so you could find yourself mixing with a brilliant and '-V"'..u"'
politan circle of friends and admirers who keep you informed of the
intellectual fashions. SUN WITH SATURN Executive Authoriry
This area is one in which conflicts and problems may come to the tot:ett'0lil'
as Sun and Saturn essentially are opposites. These conflicts are often cen
on society, so you may find yourself rebelling and struggling with aumc;~o~;
ties, but such rebellion actually reflects a deep inner process through whi~
you begin to accept the limitations of selfhood. The relationship of
versus father is painfully evident here as the ego seeks to master .
expression in an atmosphere of routine, repression and discipline that
hark back to your actual relationship with your more restrictive pa1~-~n;
Yet learning your limits is an important part of growth to a mature
effective adulthood; the spirit thinks itself immortal until it discovers
price of its enchainment to the flesh, but this discovery compels it to
for self-discipline and self-control by efficiendy channelling and cor1setv1
its energy.
You project a serious, powerful. image here, one full of self-restraint
a sense of autonomy, a.s you take so]e responsibility for your own pers,o-:t
and emotional support. You could develop a Saturnian fear that you
work ceaselessly for your own preservation, something which tends
make life into a job that, while tedious, merits close and careful a~'"''"'"'·
Fear of love, guilt about unexpressed thoughts and feelings, and
prudery well up within you here, and the sceptical, abstemious life
lead lowers your expectations and arms you inwardly to endure
which, surely enough, come. You feel the need to live a well-or'Oelt:{:
moral life, replete with patience and prudence and other Victorian Vl!tuc:
as you resist any outward change.
It is difficult to make a favourable impression on others in most resP.~t II8 THE SUN: CAN ANYONE REALLY :SE A S'I'Alt?· here, except for the benefits that come from your dependability and' tolerllllce of adversity; love, spontaneity and most affectionate, creative qualities
recede well into the background. Drawn to serious ideas and studies, you
forfeit others' admiration in order to deal with the business and material
llQncerns constantly impinging on your awareness. Hard work takes up
much of your time, yet yields its rewards grudgingly, and you may find
yourself veering between extremes of poverty and, occasionally, affluence.
You have a need to conserve life energy as mueh as possible, so longevity
n\n be a benefit if you stay here for any length of time, though at the
Kome time your health will rarely be really robust. SUN WI'I'H URANUS Idealists Kn01v Best -Just Ask One
'J'hose dull, lacklustre moments of boredom we all encounter in life are
likely to be quite rare for you in this location, as change, creativity and
Individualism cause everything you experience to take on intense colour,
1tnd provide you with the breathtalcing excitement of a roller-coaster. The
fundamental principles you have a need to act out here are social idealism
1111d ideological ~purity', implicit in which there is usually a rejection of the
material - a desire that ego and humanity exist in a world of unadulterated
Ideal and rational, light-permeated understanding. Though you may take
on the role of the opinionated radical, pitting yourself against mainstream
1ociety in some just though unpopular cause, if you look beneath the
•urface you may find that such principled rebellion is actually motivated
hy a thinly disguised disgust for the material. In line with this, you seem
l'~pelled by doying emotional attachment, and feel contempt for the acquisillve, unconscious irrational aspects of humanity, which you see as primitive,
mindless and frightening.
Impelled by these attitudes, you recruit and inspire others to organize
under the banner of your ideals, and so may have a profound effect upon
your milieu. Abstract ideas become integral to your identity, resulting in a
tllvine discontent that spurs you to experiment with the impossible and to
urge society itself to head in the same direction. Everyone will soon know
who you are in this location, as you are likely to become a focus of
'ontroversy through your eccentric, charismatic, wilful, arrogant and inde:..
rcndent behaviour. Your ideas (and the trouble they get you into) serve
I 19 YOUR PLANETS AND THEIR LINES to illustrate brilliantly your own genius and individuality. Aspire to •'-"'U'-A
ship of a purposefully Utopian, ideologically based movement if you
but keep your sense of humour ~bout it all - giggle, don't scowl, at
emperor's new clothes.
Constancy is elusive, however, and rapidly fluctuating events riPt-n
from you a recognition that selfhood is a process rather than a u ........u.a.w•·
entity. You tend to take yourself a bit too seriously, rejecting att:actLm1ent
in an autocratic, impulsive and rather inconsiderate fas~on. However, ...vu.,,
attention given to timing will enable you to enjoy a miraculous existene~
complete with rewards that you probably don't much want or even
about. Words such as 'hippie' and 'Bohemian' were coined to categ~orst(;Z;
the type of personality you embody here, and in playing the part you
your successes away after brief enjoyment, fearing the attachments
can bring. The establishment knows there is something dangerous <1U\,;, ...
you, but you change too quickly for them to do much about it. SUN W I TH NE Plutão TUNE The Perils of Creative Marryrdom
Though you may seem a little mad to some, and perhaps tend to be t" Vênus ;noJc~
because of it, you go right on living out your life in accordance with
principles, rhythms and inspirations no one but you seems able to peJrcetv
in this potent location. Your quest for selfhood is gained (ironically) thr<m
total surrender of the ego, though there are stages on the way to your
that can get you off track if you fall prey to self-deception, illusions
disappointment. Those who are artists, musicians, poets, or who
towards the religious an9. romantic, may find this climate intensely •uo.,..
rational, especially if they can discover some external source to orc)Vl<':
the illuminations they are prone to receive here. Others may make
lives rewarcliQ. Vênus by working in institutions, serving society's w:;pv:::;:;c:.:>l!!l
But the less mature turn to escapism, allowing an over-potent imaginatt0
to lead them into perilous realms of cultism, unrealistic spirituality, ....~....
ive-defeating communal situations, drug dependency and lifestyles that
creativity and health. This can be a place of illuminated imagination wn.eJ
a spiritual path is found, and where life-altering vision and enligh .............
elevate you to extraordinary awareness. However, an inevitable <1LL'"-'-J.Hll'l:>~
to ego can easily bring you down to nnwelcome reality, complete
120 THE SUN: CA:N ANYONE REALLY BE A STAR? disgrace and disillusionment, exploitation and· compromise. At that point,
true awareness begins, and unselfishness begins to flower from the-depths
c,f your illusions.
Ego is weak here, and your personal relationships will tend to have an
dement of victimization and mutual dependency, as you believe you can
tdorm others through caring and self-sacrifice- though this is true only
It you can avoid false humility and delusions of grandeur. You seem
pnssessed of true psychic ability here, though it may be difficult to govern.
Intuition sustains success in business in some cases, turning you into what
the public wants next, but success has its own problems, as it stimulates
" messianic impulse that inspires you to fictionalize yourself as a saviour,
unly to find that the world is quit~ consistent (and often unpleasant) in
1111 treatment of 'imitators of Christ'. Like the martyr, you. m:ay find your
true self at the moment of betrayal, when you have lost all faith and hope.
Most positively, you can emerge with a knowledge of survival through loss
of self and can be a guide and a lighthouse for others, lost in the seas of
•elf-surrender. This· may be best done in absentia, however, possibly through
~~~t, writing, or distant but inspiring example. S UN WITH ~LUTO The MiduJife of Change
llc.re you alone may challenge and pit yourself against the values and
Institutions of society, motivated by an unconscious inner realization of
what will result: society will strike back, often cruelly and unfairly, and thus
cit· fine for you a lifelong role of rebel and malcontent. Society, committed to
'111nterial security', has a hard time recognizing its own need for intense
rvolution and change, so people such as yourself are unfairly chosen to
1U't out the suppressed urges of the group as a whole and then be used as
lit 11pegoats when they cause disruption by doing this. In this location, people
1 nd to feel threatened by you, as your .intensity and solitude represent the
11rocess of change and evolution that leads to death, a subject most would
flit her avoid. At best, you can help people through crises and be a conscious
'midwife of change', emerging as a symbol of evolution and rebellion in
h11 positive manifestation - but this happens only after you have learned
11 lot about yourself and stopped blaming others for the universal changes
tlmr involve you here. Until then, you may have to deal continually with
12! YOUR Plutão LA NETS AND THEIR LINES people wh9 seem manipulative, ruthless, power-crazed, possessive, """'
and spiteful; betrayal and unfair domination are themes that all too r.t"t· Plutão ·
occur in relationships.
You could here exemplify the lonely .genius, creating wonders wn1~
others will not appreciate for decades. You may identify with the carao<J!l
element in humanity, and extreme individualism may result in petty -.............,
nality, defiance of authority, passion and an overwhelming need to recm
nition that often takes the form of intense sexual needs. Inwardly, you
experience a total conversion of self, a new beginning, a transcendence
the needs for relationship and material attachment. Your pride can
you indomitable, aloof, rebellious and antagonistic. Life at times
cruelly fateful and ready to take away whatever you have gained, until
very self is seen as the only permanence. The usual vanity that
one to ignore mortality is shorn away here, so you are intense and s,...,,.,.,,,.,
and life becomes a series of inner crises and lonely struggles against a.u''"'
lutes. A creative self can be born from the ashes of the old personality
1
""..,' 122 Mercúrio The Moon: Why Is Everyone
So Emotional? This location can be especially critical for men, those who have a strong
dose of masculine identity, or anyone who is self-consciously 'superior'.
People who cannot get in touch with their feelings will project them on
10 others at this locality and thus find themselves embroiled in a constant
struggle over emotion and possessiveness. If you see yourself as independent, spiritual and generally superior to the flesh and its temptations, then
rh.is zone will pose real problems for you, although you may insist that
these are the result of other people's failure to rise above their own
l)!ttiness. For 1vomen on!J: You should find this zone easier to take than many others.
Most women have been trained to take care of self and others emotionally,
tmd here such skills are put to the test, quite possibly through motherhood.
A nurturing role in society awaits you, and weaker, dependent people,
children and the walking wounded from life's wars will flock to your
calm, nurturing presence. Still, you feel your own needs powerfully, and
l'clationships are likely to be very intense, volatile and ever-changing. You
11re truly progressing when you realize that yo~ don't need to care for
weak, dependent people in order to feel useful and valuable. For men on/ Netuno : You will find this area particularly challenging. You can easily
become stuck at the earliest stages of Moon awareness noted above, with
Woman (or a thinly disguised symbol thereof) constituting the 'reigning
need' without which you feel you cannot exist. Goaded by desire, you will
~cek to attach yourself, often to whomever or whatever first makes itself
ltvailable, 'in an effort to regain or maintain your autonomy and independence. Since society encourages men to ignore th.eir feelings, if you have
bought into this, your journey of self-discovery in this locale will be a YOUR · Plutão LANETS AND THEIR LINES lonely one; but the intensity and insatiability of your desire will ev<~ntualLV.
force you to seek fulfilment within yourself, most likely through pru:entmg~ PSYCHOLOGICAL INTERPRETATION
OF THE MOON
A World Line Named 'Desire'
This is your most intense 'feeling' zone, as living here puts you in
with your deepest and most significant needs. You may view existence
this place as a constant struggle between a need to find the indepencten·c~
of pure, spiritual expression and a desire to attach yourself more firmly
the physical world, with its attendant requirements of security,
supportive surroundings and awareness and sensitivity to environmen
influences. In this location, you become more attuned to the latter half
the equation so that life is surrendered to sensation, feeling,
needs and attachment. The gratification of appetites seems to become
central focus of your existence, as needs seem more intensive than in Otl1Le:
places, and the senses perceive everything more strongly than
Because of this, your appetites guide your destiny, as you find you
drawn to people, seeking their approval in an effort to replace any m·c:~ce:
you sense are missing in your psyche. On a physical level, erotic urges
be insatiable, and even compulsive.
You have an almost nai've emotional reaction to every event and arre0~
and immerse yourself completely in everyday reality- like a child
a movie, yo.u are hypnotized by the play of sensations and forms ou
you. You become especially reactive to other people's awareness of
unable to ignore their attention or interest, both craving the feeling """'"~
attention gives you and resenting your dependence upon it. Yet, just
no seed can grow apart from the earth, this entanglement in ser1sat1o1
inevitably fertilizes your spiritual potential; the incredible
exerted by people, things and situations acts to draw you to
involvement outside yourself, leading you to engage in parenting, rr•·'l~t"U1t.
or other relatively other-orientated means of actualizing your posslvu.~~:~.-.~
The tides of attraction are so strong here that you cannot remain a..v·"
and thus may be pulled towards a fertile marriage with material reallty
The myth that dominates a lunar line is that of the child who is the ."'._.....
(or mother) of the man (or woman), a union of opposites motivated THE MO·ON: W ·HY IS EV ERYON'E SO EMOTIONAL? the mortality of the flesh to which spirit is wed and the untamable desire
of the spirit to live beyond the confinement of its bodily prison. And, just
ns the child is unaware of its identity as a child while it is directed entirely
towards trying to become like its parent, at this location what you want
robe (or think you want to be) becomes the centre of attraction, something
<Iuite different from the focus on what you really are (or think you really
t\te) found under a Sun line. S TAGE S AND MYTH OF THE MOON Children Come in All Ages) Sizes and Shapes
In the earliest stages of Moon consciousness, the child inside you dominates, as an acute awareness of personal incompleteness and a need to be
cared for are fuelled by the apprehension that you would perish if left
alone. Hunger is the feeling of the unformed lunar consciousness, the
aching void within that stems from the umbilicus, the place where mother
was 'taken' from us. In this almost primordial stage of Moon consciousness
(often the only one that some people ever learn), appetites are so deep
nnd unfulfilled that they almost threaten to devour their objects. This
childlike dependency leads eventually to assuming the role of parent within
oneself - from the vantage point of the child, one switches roles and
begins to act as the parent, the nurturer, provider and mother-to-the-world,
ns well as to seek a 'parent' in the outer world. This can result in the kind
M attachments one enjoys with close relatives, those that spring from an
unconditional awareness that you and the other person are in life together,
for better or worse. The development of this type of interdependency
ncknowledges that there are other entities in the world, and thus we begin
to make some personal progress in emerging from ourselves. Finally, the
Moon matures as the ultimate nurtttting
parent
- the person who can
.
..
by his or her mere presence make others feel secure, protected, loved
unconditionally and safe in a supportive and growth-sustaining world. Since
1111 these aspects of Moon consciousness depend on interactions with others,
It is in the area of human relationships that most of this awareness is acted
out, and it is through such relationships that the different stages are first
defined and then, eventually, assimilated. The tortutred pangs of unfulfilled
needs lead to the ability to fill those needs not only for oneself but for
others as well. YOUR PLANETS AND THEIR L I NES THE PRACTICAL SIDE OF THE MOON The Tears and the Laughter
On a more practical level, this area is one in which you become very
involved in every thing and every person around you. Strong aom~:s
religious, devotional, nostalgic and sentimental impulses that can lead to
xenophobic conservatism motivate you here. You are the centre of att~em~
tion for certain, but in a way that may make you feel self-conscious, ext>os,rtc;
and sympathetic (to the point of exhaustion) to the multicoloured sp
of emotions you perceive in others. Psychic abilities are highlighted,
you may be easily influenced, like a child who is unable to say 'No.
Because of your heightened emotional sensitivity~ you seem to need "-''V'" '
so intensely that you experience frequent crises relating to this area of
life. Romance here thus tends to become one-sided and impermanent,
least until you learn to nurture and care for yourself emotionally.
Your relationship with your mother comes to the fore at this loca ·
(though too often it is re-enacted in marriage), and this makes you
you~ instincts and desires all the more strongly. Perhaps because of .........,,
you will tend to seek security more than you otherwise might, and
find yourself prone to tears and laughter at the slightest provocauvJ..ll
You also may find yourself playing the consumer under your Moon .uu•"•
desperately trying to fill an empty void of incompleteness that you
help feeling here. Since you react with a na:ive emotionality to every art-"'·~·11,
you sense yourself as being much too close to every human situation ·
which you become involved, and may thereby develop an un))retenr•n,,...,
mien as you take on varied characteristics adopted from many d.1tl:ere:n;
people.
Life can at times seem much like a soap opera, because of the ctomtna11ce
of domestic concerns and the feeling of kinship and family and with
and all humans you come in contact with. This is not an area to go to
0rder to feel superior, as you will find yourself much too aware ,of
needs that bind you and all people together to be able to place yours
above them. This can result in you gravitating towards a humble, wc~rKJng.;
class reality, with its variegated feelings and frequent domestic and humla:&•
interest crise~. The Moon is the 'infinite capacity for perception', and
your feelings guide your destiny.
Fields in which you can care for others are likely to be the most inter,est< 126 THE MOON: WHY IS EVERYONE SO EMOTIONAL? ing and productive occupations for you in this place: parenting, cooking
nnd restaurant work, helping professions, counselling, or acting as an
Interpreter or agent. Success is also likely in gynaeco1ogy, midwifery, nursIng, baking, real estate, or sales and public concerns in general. Feelings
11re at the bottom of most of your health complaints, which frequently
centre on allergies, the gastrointestinal tract, breasts and female organs. If
you find yourself attracted to and involved with take-charge maternal types,
uhis may show that you have not accepted your own potential for hurturing,
domesticity or for caring for yourself and others. Work out life routines
that enable you to experience and satisfy your emotional needs; working
with others defines these needs and enables you to find in yourself a safe
haven, and the capacity for self-sustenance. MOON ON THE ASCENDANT You Are W'hat You Feel
Your self-image and your self-concept will he the focal point through
which the general and particular characteristics of the Moon are most apt
to manifest in this area, and the identification with your mother is strong,
liS is the urge to become a parent yourself. It is difficult not to yield to
temptation, and since you are inclined towards being shy, retiring, vulnerIIMe, sympathetic and needful, you could end up moulding your personality
flo as to please or impress others. This tendency to identify with either
your own or others' needs (as your emotions tend to rule your intellect
under a Moon line) means you are likely to become very easily entangled
In everyone's affairs. Ideally, however, you will become the homebody,
patterning your persona after the best and most positive manif~stations of
rhe nurturing mother image. You are deeply affected by events and conditions around you, and though this may make you seem timid on the
11urface, when operating from the depths of your feeling (which is much
of the time), you can be surprisingly unrestrained, even powerful, and can
t•xpress yourself with an intensity that surprises others.
Constantly swimming with the sensitive currents stirred by those around
1111d trying to become what you think others want you to be will only
make you more painfully awar.e of their opinions and feelings about you.
Adaptation is a key to emotional survival for you under this line, but at
Kome point it must be adaptation to some inner standard of your own.
127 YOUR PLANETS AND THEIR LINES Successful self-definition for you under this Moon line is best arrived
through introspection, reflection, intuition and sensitivity, while your .............,
e?cy to attract and to nurture others by taking on their own err:tODLOnLa
colouring can work either for or against you. Negative manifesta.tlOlilS
to watch for in this respect iriclude weight gain, moodiness, instability
unreliability and procrastination. Your preoccupation with others' nee~<iiSj
and the problems this entails, can be used to justify a personal uo.•...n.~.o.i>.ljl
of sorts, as you begin to restrict the dynamic personal potential you
be exploring, living a safe, conventional existence instead. The way out
the one most difficult under any Moon line, which is to take
control of your life instead of just going with the flow around you. MOON ON MIDHEA VEN til{ Netuno Public Needs Me'
Your strongest characteristic in this location is likely to be your err:tottonta
attachment to your status, as you seem to crave social acceptance, ge:ul.ta~
everything you do towards the attainment of 'success' of some kind,
haps thereby attracting the attention of those of higher rank. All of
can affect your image ln society, your career and your relationship uri1~1:1
the social milieu of which you are a part. A definite tilt towards
nurturing instincts reveals itself in your job, so that helping professi0ns,
preoccupation with domestic concerns, and an attraction to public c::Prmr~
(perhaps including populist-type politics) are all possibilities here, as is
interest in professions concerned with food service, real estate, and u ....~''-''
related to these. In line with this, you may find your relationship with
mother (or people like her) deepening. This urge to nurture an~ 1"'\,..,.,,f,..,.:
others is acted out in other ways, so that underdogs (whether
or four-legged) may follow you about in needful confusion. Sensi
tuned to public opinion, you are propelled by a need for approval
acclaim that could well motivate a successful public career. Still, b-..u'-"""
your vulnerable, self-sacrificing public spiritedness, there ls an
self-conscious need for attention, which surely enough comes - u., ...o.u.
from an employer, the socially powerful, or the politic~ Netuno impo.rtaJl\11
Relationship is both a key to success and the source of your gre~ate!S
problems here, since while your influence with others can bring you I28 T.HE .MOON: WHY IS E'V ER¥0NE SO E'M'OTIONAL? status you crave, your stability and emotion;ll security also remain dependent upon others, and thus .elusive. MOON ON DESC ENDANT Seeing Yourself in Others
This particular location is one in which you may see·all the best and worst
characteristics of the Moon exemplified in other people, and most especially
lt1 those in emotional partnership with you. They may seem so clinging,
emotional and sentimental, that you wonder what keeps drawing such
l'eople to you. Simply stated, the source of the problem is your reluctance
to develop your own ability to care for yourself and others or even to
acknowledge the existence or importance of such issues in your life. If
y0u look beneath the surface and examine your innermost thoughts, you
will probably find that you have an unconscious craving for relationship
nnd reliance on others, particularly in order to obtain emotional support;
rhis in turn serves to attract people of a like mind to you, producing a
whole range of emotional involvements, tangled feelings and labyrinthine
relationships, all of which can make you feel out of control and pulled
under by emotional whirlpools. You could find yourself talked about all
~he time, as others become entangled in affairs of yours they have no
business in, especially marital and legal ones. Marriage is a distinct possibility
1\ere, but it is most likely to occur as a result of another's initiative. If you
don't act to take charge of your own life and your own feelings, you may
lind the less favourable side of the Moon's 'personality' dominating in this
locale. The best way to direct this influence into positive channels is through
~onscious involvement in the helping professions. You probably will get
your needs mixed up with others' anyway, so you might as well at least
try to do it in a somewhat controlled setting. Life for you in general is
likely to be unstable and perhaps a trifle Bohemian, but in time you learn
tu fend for yourself and to seek the advances that your charisma and
1ttlractiveness promise. 129 YOUR PLANETS AND THEIR LINES MOON ON !MUM COELI We're Ail in This Together
Your personal Moon here will show itself largely on an inner plane,
you react to circumstances and situations that require you to come to tenJ'):
with your family and your ancestral background. For most people, .....,,illY
race, ethnicity or nationality are used to define self more or less auton:tau
cally by furnishing a set of values and judgements that are never
This, however, does not work for you in this location, as you find
you .must come to terms with a personal instability and uncertainty .......,'".....'
these things, arising from an adaptability and flexibility that allows you
tap into- or at least to w1derstand- the family backgrounds of
You feel a deep longing for 'roots', one so deep that it may never
fulfilled, at least not from external sources. But if you look beyond narro~
personal self-definitions and try to see yourself as a citizen of a hwnat
tribe held together by its common needs, you will at least begin to
that this need can be fulfilled. More pra<:>tically, as a result of this,
matters, property concerns and home-making may take up a good
more of your time and energy than you are used to. Any cotnt<)mtl:>!C:
feeling of belonging, however, is balanced by a constant fear of ross
security; moves are almost constant, as you search for privacy -and a
of controlling your personal. environment. You want to feel at home
in command, but unpredictable things keep happening, and people
intruding into your life unexpectedly. You can blend into any emnrc•nn1en
under this line, and seem to belong where you are despite the cea.sen~s
changes around you. Above all, personal, home and family matters
charged with emotion. MOON WITH MERCURY The Wandering Mind
This is an interesting combination in which your sensitivity, feelings
appetites are linked with your mind, your work concerns and your .............
and place in the world. This could be the batdeground where you take
the sttuggle between your past conditioning in regard to such matters
family loyalties and practical career concerns and try to make a stand
130 THE MOON: WHY IS BVER YGNE SO EMOTIONAL? freedom of thought. In breaking away from habitual patterns, you have
rhe urge to reach out for more sensation, for you find yourself experiencing
what may be an unfamiliar craving to know and experience things first
hand. The result of this can be a kind of mental wanderlust, as you move
your mind from thought to thought, project to project, ceaselessly seeking
1he sensation behind the next corner, over the next hill.
Your mental abilities, ideas, speech, common sense and physical
C'f)Ordination all t.ake centre stage here, as you develop the qualities of
precocity, restlessness, impatience and mental nervousness, perhaps finding
I hat you have a quick grasp of opportunities and ideas that may gain you
public attention. Others find you bright and impressionable, and your
uwareness and your lively, shrewd intelligence guarantee that you can make
n living by your wits, while al's o promising accomplishment in scholarly
ureas, trade or commerce. You can become popular for your lightning-fast
repartee and perceptual acuity, but your tendency to gossip 'c ould get you
In a bit of trouble. Morals could be a little too flexible under this influence
llli well, especially where money is concerned, so either talking too much
or spending too much (especially if it happens to be other people's money)
mn get you and others into trouble. The mind is like a sponge, absorbing
everything with which it comes into cohtact, though its retentiveness is
balanced by a lack of discrimination, direction and concentration. The
mental processes that help you to synthesize new ideas and conc:epts from
rhe old work well here, as do linguistic and verbal skills, so you may want
!() seek out opportunities that challenge these parts of your brain. You
wc:m.'t have to look far, as life here i~ full of quick changes, new people
1tnd plenty of turbulence in your work life and career, while business,
journalism and mental or .office work are successful employment p@ssibilittcs. This is a perfect locale for a job interview of any type) as both your
l'crsonality and your skills will shine here, and it is also a good place for
real estate, trading and genealogy, and generally developing most of your
tl~lents and capacities. Defence of the underdog may be your lot in life
under this combination line, but you are certainly more than up to the
d~allenge. Want to relax? 1f so, then try another place! I jl I YOUR PLANETS AND THEIR LINES MOON WITH VENUS (Life Is a Cabaret'
Under the influence of the two most feminine of planets, a world
beautiful people, high social life, fashion, baubles, bangles and
beckons you. All the archetypes of woman ~ mother, beauty, me:na:smJ
and love, self-esteem and appetites - dominate your attention and
here, as life takes an elegant, sociable direction. Raising your self
in order to attract love could well come to be a preoccupation for
here, and along the way you may have to explore romantic cravings
the one side as you sample the 'beautiful people' syndrome on the otn.el
The attraction you develop here to worldly things such as monetary succeS1
can be more than sufficient to challeHge any natural idealism you are oro~~
to. Since you want to rise into the 'right' social circles, as well as nmett$_•
ing yourself ln sentimental domestic and romantic relationships, you
find that the intensity of your appetite can detract your attention ""'"'
from pursuing any greater ambitions. Still, there is no doubt that this
be a pleasant, comfortable locale, full of glamorous and exciting soc1~
pleasures.
Obviously, laziness, weight gain and self-indulgence are dangers J.J.'-J""
as voluptuous, epicurean and sensualistic excesses are the perils · lheretl
in the atmosphere of polish, taste and elegance. For the same reason, u•'-·Ll
is little pressure under this line to accomplish much of substance, or
deal with cosmic ideas. On the other hand, you can expect some de~~~l
of professional success if you work in any area that deals with art, oe:mtr
or women, as you can hone any talents you have for catering to
fashionable needs, tastes and concetns of others. Relationships
towards 'sisterhood' rather than manly camaraderie, regardless of the
of those involved, with the other person usually taking the initiative,
introducing you to things that tend towards refinement and ~ulti
tastes. You could actually become more attractive here, in part bec:al!IS]
that's the way you feel, so that sex and romance are likely to be ..."'.
readily available to you than in other places, though they might tend
be more superficial and less passionate than elsewhere. You are .... 1"\,-.,
find a good relationship, and develop a steady, calm, diplomatic, umuttlie!
attitude towards the intrigue in your social circles.
w· )_ THE MOON: WHY IS EVERYONE SO EMOTIONAL? For women on!J: This area is quite congenial for you, so you can rise quickly
In the social departments usually reserved for women. The only problem
l11 that you do not seem to need the male component la your life.much,
11nd thus may spend a lot of time with 'the girls' in the coffee shop 9r at
the hairdresser, and may as a result retain a certain adolescent girlishness
that tends to put off the opposite sex. Still, this can be a very pleasant
11rea if you are involved with art or fashion, and you will have ample room
to grow and express yourself. Motherhood is a very strong likelihood here,
which is among the most astrologically fertile places for you. For men on! Netuno : Clearly, this area may pose some problems for most men,
1hough it is quite likely that a lot of the feminine aspects of this planetary
wmbination will be acted out in your relationships· in some way or another.
'l'he bonds you form tend to be strongly desired and a bit on the dependent
aide, and th~ Netuno are often with ultra-feminine women whose natures may
cwnform closely with the description in the paragraphs above. You, on the
other hand, may act out the role of a matinee idol, a pampered and tasteful
Romeo, and though you may enjoy women and their company more here
1han elsewhere, it may be difficult for you to get motivated to do more
I han dine and dance with them. Attachments you have to women (including
yl)ur mother) may be hard to break here. In general, the gratification of your
Appetites and a strong awareness of your appearance can turn you away
I1'0 m more important life goals. MOON WITH MARS Feeling More Than a Little Upset
Society does not do much to encourage expression of aggressive, angry,
pl~ysically confrontational ahd emotional reactions. In polite and civilized
'ircles, these are considered not to exist or they are eX~pected to be either
auppressed or channelled into 'constructive' activities such as sporting
wmpetition, war or environmental exploitation. In this locality, such sublimntion is apt to be very difficult for you, as you are generally more irascible,
tt•mperamental, reckless, outspoken, defensive and irritable than usual
(unless there is already a heavy Mars emphasis in your chart). This state
uf mind does not come upon you without good reason, of course - under
lhis line you tend to gravitate to aggressive people and can't stand by ldly YOUR PLANETS AND THEIR LINES while they trample on your prerogati;ves·. Going around with th€ pr<>ve.llb~
chip on your. shoulder will indeed attract more than enough p·eople
and willing to knock it off for you. As you discover your fighting
and ,your fondness for controversy, you can take some pleasure in
quru:relling, domestic uproar and sensitive pride that seem to sw:.touna
More positively, the shy can become bold and daring under the influer1c
of Moon and Mars, but you do need to keep in mind that the risks
gladly take may come to nought if you don't mix a little common se.tlS
in with them.
Also be aware that you may experience conflicts involving your
needs for security, the loyalty of others, your attachment to family ......-...u.._..."''
and your own pride. The home itself is under pressure, so th.at, in <>u•..uw:....
to the interpersonal crises mentioned above, there is also danger of
attack and injury, especially for those who are not able to feel and """ ~JJ.
anger and belligerence directly. Outspoken and daring feistiness . ._..,.......,LJ...
a distrust and rejection of the dependent aspects of self. A boasting,
demeanour can be the result of your own reluctaqce to admit your
needs for others' affection and sustenance. For women on/ Netuno ; You may find this zone one of special problems for
Women are not usually socialized to be comfortable with their aggres
assertive tendencies and thus may instead attach themselves to men w uw•
overt masculinity is in direct proportion to the suppression of their
Any such tendency will be exagget:ated in this locale, especially in
beginning stages of Mars consciousness. If you understand the less ,
Mars has to teach, you can learn to take control of your own u!lll.,'-'l.ULii
energy and to feel more at home with anger, sex, assertion and
e:xpress.io.n. You may have to undertake integration of your mascuillU;
directly, through assertiveness trairrin' Vênus , martial arts or vigorous
activity. The result of such an effort will be a wider, more mature oersorut
ity, increased personal power and the valuable gift of personal .......va•u.~...., For men on!J: This area poses particular problems for you, as it is too
to reject your own needs for attachment and affection and then blame
associated problems on women. This blame will tend to fall on
closest to you, whom you will probably view in art unfavourable light,
perhaps respond to in coarse, locker-room terms. Your tendency to
grate femininity in general will appear fairly transparent to o THE MOON: WHY IS EVERYONE SO EMOTIONAL? nbservers, however. These pfoblems with ;women will pe Gomp<:>Unde<dr.by
•electing as companions only thos~ who have a low feeling of self-esteem
1nd who admire your macho posturing as expressive of their own selfcontempt. Bar-room-style, Hetningwayesque braggadocio wears pretty thin
nfter a while, as will y0ur air of a:dolescent boyish inexperience, which is
often overlaid by noisy egotism. Still, courage, daring and ·e ntrepreneurial
11hility are expanded here, and you may be willing to risk everything in
order to prove a point to yourself and others. MOON WJTH JUPITER Wish upon a Star
As long as you aren't disturbed by fluctuations in the material aspects of
life, this area can be one of the best possible, as here you will find fulfilment
of your potentials encouraged by the public and personal environment.
Loved arid admired, you tend to be surrounded with the best in social and
mnterial pleasures, and you are likely to be universally regarded, and preferred
hy those in authority, yet still loved by those with less status than yourself.
Advancement comes easily as money and honour accrue to you and your
(Amily members, who also prosper in the congenial surroundings of bourtcrois comfort.
Your humour and intellect attract to your side people ~ho provide
Mrnerous favours and opportunities for advan.!Setnent. The cultured, aoadotnic and exotic air that surrounds you here promises to be enhanced by
1dclitional opportunities that come to you from faraway places, whether
through other people from those locales or through travel originating here.
l~he fact that your capacity fer efij(')yment of the best in f0ocl and drink
111 enhanced here points to one of the real problems you'll be faced with
lmcler a. Moon-Jupiter line - having too much of a good thing, overIndulgence and a subsequent loss of interest in accomplishme. Sol .t. In general,
yu1:1r good nature and your bemusement at life's curiosities point to ah
lmusually happy life at this location, though a life in which the abundance
uf good fortune is balanced from time to time by reverses you suffer as
1 rt!sult of a slackening of ambition and motivation: Feelings of security
and well-being put min.imal demaJJlds on se1£, and laughter and pleasure
art• balanced by feelings of righteousness and social usefulness, possibly
dged with a 'do-gooder' mentality.
1 35 YOUR PLAN E TS AND THEIR LINES Religious devotion can be an important issue under this line,
might be shown by an attraction to its more ritualistic forms or by
becoming attached to a teacher or guru. Social successes and skills
easily learned and polished in the cultivated atmosphere prevailing
and you can do well if you seek to polish your intellect as well, thr10~
academic study. You have a sense that all is right with the world,
authority is not to be questioned, and that what you already have (esc•ec1ail
as it comes to you from your family and social background) is
to establish yourself as ·one of the 'better' people. Your health is also
to be particularly good here, except where strong appetites are .1..uu. w~~~
Recommended professions include philanthropy, charity, family
selling, academia, civil service or anything deemed socially desirable
solidly middle class. MOON WITH SA TURN So Who Said Life Is Fair?
Life under this kind of planetary line can get pretty serious and
nonsense. You tend to feel that there is something in your backgroun<d
perhaps a 'family curse' of sorts - that you can never quite overcome,
that this destines you to a life of hard work combined with service
others, and the acceptance of a supporting role in relationships. Áries pretty sure that you are not going to measure up to the standards
imagine established authority has set, and a sense of 'sin' or karma maKe
all the hard work, restriction of feelings and suppression of your
needs seem justified. It's difficult for you to know what you feel, and
leads to an immature lack of self-kn0wledge and a constant co.u'"''"""·~''·~
of yourself to others, all of which can lead to depression, isolation,
tion and melancholy. A certain satisfaction comes to you from .....u•a.u•J.L
in a low station in life, or through dealing with others who have +-,...,,.,
themselves down and out.
You are inclined to sacrifice yow: hopes and ideals in order to care
dependent family members or otherwise to take on unavoidable respon:
bilities - perhaps relating to care of the elderly or infirm. On the
positive side, this area is good for introspeetion and
although you tend to dwell on details and miss the broad view if you
at least get some feedback from others. You demonstrate a certain oersam THE MOON: WHY IS EVERYONE SO EMOTIONAL? dignity, a long-suffering stoicism and a stubborn self-sufficiency, yet your
horizons seem narrow here, restricted to rather boring and habitual areas
uf life. Inner voices seem to say 'No' to everything you want to do; a
Spnrtan distaste for abstractions, luxuries and pleasures tends to make you
a litde old-fashioned, Victorian, dteary and parsimonious towards those
11mund you. Nevertheless, self-control has its advantages, as here you may
hcst be able to abandon injurious habits and overcome flaws in character
1hrough will-power. Things happen to you here that have you silendy
•wearing, 'I'll get even, some day.'
Since it is not easy for you to know your feelings, your needs tend to
he denied, resulting in cynicism, self-dislike and perhaps the viewpoint that
life is only a task. Authority, for all it oppresses you, is still an object of
11hwish respect, particularly if 'they' set standards you can't possibly attain.
Your health may also be poor here, and your personal pride battered by
rll·cumstances beyond your control. A lack of ability to view your situation
objectively may result in restrictive phobias and a general reliance up0n
women. Anything that might contribute to putting you in touch with your
trcling and nurturing nature can counter such tendencies. MOON WITH URANUS The Road to Oz
llcre you may become the (unconscious?) devotee of an idea meant to
llhcrate people from some real or imagined restriction, or perhaps your
tlnme itself comes to stand for a movement, large or small. Áries 6u can make
quite a pest of yourself by encouraging everyone around you to kick over
thr traces of authoritarianism, old values and tradition. You find a personal
rrward in promoting the novel, the revolutionary and the individualistic,
aml are likely to develop an ardent attraction to the unusual, the Bohemian,
the unconventional, and anything else you can identify as antieatablishment. Strange and uncontrollable things seem to happen to you
hrre, and your life becomes changeable, exciting and full of unexpected
emotional extremes. Home_, finances and family relationships are likely to
hr in a state of continual upheaval, as are most other areas of your life.
Your need to defend the underdog (any old mutt will do), the downtrodden,
and the underprivileged attracts down-and-outers of all kinds to -you in
rn>fusion. Not surprisingly, authorities of all kinds will find you a threat,
137 YOUR PLANETS AND TBEIR LINES thus requiring you to defend your individuality against public pressure
conform.
Inwardly you fight a powerful battle between who you always have
(symbolized by family, home and such attachments) and a powerful ,nc::•1!""
of who you could be through the self-actualization that comes with .............~,
tion from old constraints. Because of this, you need to seek out and '"''"'""'"'
a new personal meaning, something which can indeed be liberating
helpful if it is not done through pursuit of the eccentric for its own
Nothing stands still in your vicinity, as upsets and upheavals occur
in your restless personal life, fuelled by impulsiveness, a fluctuating "-'-V>LL
to various ideals and ideologies, extremes of erotic imagination, a tas<)lt
arion with the occult, a tendency towards superstition and a feeling
your personal development can best proceed through being intuitive
than methodical. The constant state of electric excitement in the air m,a!R'.I
the urge for self-discovery so commonplace that you soon might wondl
if there is anything left to discover. 'Look what we've been missing' is
expression that may quickly exhaust your more conventional friends.
before the storm, you are more than ready to try anything once
often than that might be boring!) in your insatiable desire for tndllVl<juallst
evolution and change. MOON WITH NEPTUNE Sea of Feeling
This combination of planets can be pretty extreme in its effects,
though at the beginning life often seems to have changed only subtly,
at all. The major influence here, though, is one that often leads
surrender of the ego. You will be strongly drawn to act out, either in
own life or the lives of those you deal with, an idealism so powerful
it demands total renunciation of your identity as it was, abandonment
the urge for self-preservation and a general relinquishing of any sense
form or structure in life. Total immersion in the rainbow of ext)erlel'l:
without guidance for your purpose or ego results in an .....u ....-n....."''""MI
exaggeration of feeling and sensation. Torrential emotions, wild unsub
tiated fears and hysterical elations, phobias and imaginations may be a.tH<JJ
the intense and vivid mental experiences of this location. A life of THE MOON: WHY IS EVERYONE SO EMOTIONAL? mission, self-sacrifice and perhaps even humiliation and surrender to others'
needs could ensue.
The collective unconscious becomes all too accessible to you here, so that
~reams, myths and psychological inner re:;ilities may be everyday aspects of
life. Psychism and sensitivity are gready expanded, but practical and finantlnl matters may suffer. Relationships tend to involve intrigues that ensnare·
you, and the subsequent confinement and restriction, voluntary or otherwise, will probably leave you unhappy. For those willing to give up ego
and the comforts of the material life, the reward is a deepened .imagination
and a tendency towards a life of service that could lead you to find a
-pidtual guide. People may take advantage of you, though, and illusions
arc often a large part of the 'enlightenment' you feel is just around the
mmer. T0 survive in this· weird arid magical climate, you need to learn to
deal with the power of humanity's universal, mythological inner mind
hy assimilating successfully your own past and unconscious feelings and
rx.periences, and by forswearing the pleasures of the ego. The desire to
rcLurn to the womb may lie beneath your fascination with various
rttligions.
Since you are likely to be too sensitive to live easily or successfully in
lhc day-to-day world of reality, you may withdraw into an artificial reality.
l'his could be an institutional environment (which would include a job in
1large corporation along with the more obvious examples such as hospitals)
ur a pharmaceutical one - addictions and drug abus·e can be results 0f the
nervous sensitivity you experience here. Since imagination is strong, artists
Ul' any others who need to sense exacdy what the public needs at a given
n1oment may do well here. More often, though, you feel an insatiable thirst
lot sensation, and one which could lead to a phoney 'enlightenment' that
thinly masks a moralistic self-dislike. Public ignominy, confinement and
lhc repeated intrusions of the unknown, the far-out and the mystical are
likely to mark yout life here if you allow the negative tendencies of MoonNoptune too much sway. YOUR PLANETS AND THEIR 'LIN E S MO ON WI TH PLUTO The More You Wan~ the Less You Get
This location can be quite a problematical one, as a lack of awareness
your fundamental needs and physical desires a:lJ.ows them to build
unfulfilled until they have reached such intimidating proportions that
thteaten to overwhelm anyone who might tcy to satisfy them. This res'lil:
in an emotional life that moves to the negative extremes of .......-.vJ.J.w.
outbursts, alienation and isolation. As the aching, unfulfilled desire
could experience here is. largely unredeemable, detachment from the
is one lesson which you must learn, though often such a separation
difficult to accomplish without first going through &orne intense
personal problems, as well as dealing with insecurity, obsession with ch~
and perhaps a r<Dller-coastet ride of se;,mal desire and feeling. Here is urr..,.
a partnership with passion urges the butterfly of your innermost soul
emerge reluctantly from its cocoon. Major life changes such as u"''"'"
separations and tangles with the law, all conspire to keep you ..!"........
constantly processing emotions and feelings as you develop a stub ·
resistance to the flow of events around you.
You expect, and therefore are likely to attract, rejection; growth,
painful, is enforc~d by the powerful emotions and the intense sexual
that seem constant in this location. Though antisocial and rebellious
you resist persona:l change, preserving your isolation as proof that you
right and that society is all wrong. You may make a final and coJmJ1:tlt:
separation from faml1y and ro-o ts in this locale - permanent farewells s
so frequent that you come to expect them. Practical matters are in cor1sta
fl.ux as w.ell. Rejecting your human needs for comfort and intimacy,
feel superior to the material life and its soft bourgeois comforts. The
you want, the less you get, un1;il you accept both a. totally unique sense
self and a. need for constant change and rigorous inner honesty.
itself becomes a powerful symbol of change and growth here; a s
life's impermanence is a tonic, so you may be prone to take risks and
crave and seek out highly charged experiences. You are apt to be ant1soct
charismatic yet alienated, bored by ordinary society, and under ..,;vJ.J<>
emotional stress - all this perhaps as a way of acting out a tot:f!ott
vesentment against your mother or family. 10 Mercury: Taming Power
of the Small Mercury projects an influence that is easily assimilated and socially accepted
for the most part, so that few people will have problems under these lines
difficulties attend the more socially repressed planets, such as Saturn,
but almost everyone_engages in the intellectual and c0mmunicative activities
nf Mercury with ease. For those who find feelings and sensation threatenIng, however, Mercury may encoutage an exaggeration of the thinking
function, resulting in a scatterbrained changeability, a sarcastic and even
tynical oudook, or a heartless, manipulative cruelty. Mercury is democratic,
looking at all and sundry under a microscope focused by scientific, objective
ftJUality, so that people who like to feel they are superior by reason of
birth or accomplishment may not get the type of adtniration they seek
under a Mercury line. 1b.is locale is especially good for 'success in small
things', but'it may block more ambitious schemes with provincial thinking,
l!nexpected inconveniences and communicatiof). problems. In other words,
while this tnay be a proper locale for setting up agencies and mechanisms
lu carry out the details oflargeJ? projects, the projects themselves, including
the planning, would best be set up elsewhere. PSYCHOLOGICAL I N TERPR ETA TIO N
. OF MERCURY lnte/Ject - Your Kf! Áries to Success
Vour most powerful planet here, Mercury, symbolizes life's second most
Important function after pure being: the facility and capacity to eommuniAIC with the world. 1b.is is represented biologically by the twin activities
ul' breathing and digestion, the two means by which the chemical processes
11 life are refreshed. Less abstracdy, it stands for sensory perception and
~t·bal communication, along with the mind's information-processing • YOUR PLANETS AND ' THEIR LINES ability, all of which result in envitonmental awareness and colnp·rerle!llS·te>nt
In this zone, you will come to appreciate,. understand and perfe~t tll:e~S'c
life processes, as they increase in importance in your life.
Mercury is also a symbol of inner initiation, the recognition of ..,.,.,,
0wn nature, so the increased awareness you find in your interaction uTi+~
the environment will, by way of contrast, highlight and define your
identity. Thus you could become something of a lo·cal celebrity as
become publicly involved in various issues, and just as you can make
name for yourself, you may also find a name for yourself, in the sense
a literal change of name (or the way in which you spell or pronounce
old one) could accompany your stay here.. Any notoriety you gain is
the same as <real' fame, however, as Mercury tends to be a J.u <..a..u;.r.J.HJ
influence; rather than dealing with c0smic, grandly social or sut>et1::>ersotlQ
concerns of the sort that might gain you atteation in other parts of
world, your interests here lie in. the process of communication bernr~~
you and your neighbourhood and close relations. This outreach into
local environment, and the accompanying need to perfect sensory
standing and perception, is accomplished through detailing, classi
attaching labels atad inwrpl!eting reality. Mercury is not so creative as it
adept at reorganizing, redefining and adapting ideas to new needs
deeper understanding. In effect, you become reality's librarian.
Another basic Mercury function is utilization, ~o under thls lnt:te!ll€~
you may be able to identify and put to use the various personal ....~"·u•"
abilities and resources which have not yet been fully developed. You
find your resourcefulnes·s and innovativeness on the increase as you pert<!C
old talents. and recognize abilities that you may not have thought you
not to mention stimulating latent talents you notice in others. An -.~.... u·~'-'·
of acquisitiveness can also emerge in yqur nature, as you begin to feel
possessing more material things will give you a better capacity to use
own talents in a directed way. As your need to acquire possessions u· t\.Lc~:t~.c
so your need to find romance decreases, as your adult mind and expen<mc
ate guided by a youthful Mercury that is largely unaware of such need~
except.at a somewhat intelle<i:tuallev.el. ¥ ou may lose weight, seem YOlll11$?;C:
and generally project a somewhat sexually neutral charisma.
I.U ......'"' .. 1!. MERCURY: TAMING POWER OF THE SMALL STAGES AND MYTH OF MERCURY Stay Young by Staying Involved
Mercury was of course the messenger of the gods, an ever-yeung, imrnar
turely androgynous, quick-witted and adaptable character. In this location
you learn resourceful slcills that enable you better to link yourself to different activities ia the world around you, as well as to form meaningful
associations with people through the medilun of ideas. At a deeper level,
Mercury was mythologically one of the few beings able to exist in the
thtee separate worlds of the gods, mortals and H ades, and thus it symbolizes
a guide f0r ·the soul's journey. In this zone, people occasionally have visions
of past .and future, of past incarnations, life after death, feel they are in
touch with 'the Akashic Re<;ords' or find they can 'hear the silence'.
Mercury affects both sexes in much the same way, though its influence
expresses itself in different stages: the eariy stages of the Mercury experience
are characterized by a dilldlike e:uriosity, a need to ask questions about
everything and sometimes by; the arid, nervous intellectualism of the archetypal high-school science 'nerd'. From this develops a view of the world
as microcosm and macrocosm - the ability to see the whole reflected in
each of its parts - that is the basis of any real ahd useful knowledge. Using
models of t:l).e universe discerned in eyeryday objects and situations, the
mind grasps the usefulness and purpose of everythlng or everyone it
touches, becoming a guide for others in their quest for themselves, as well
as a valuable resource of knowledge and experience.
In .t he primitive stages of Mercury's expression, the problem of amorality
must often be dealt with. A. world seen purely in terms of information
and ideas is without feeling or values, and thus without soeial and personal
allegiances. As with a computer, complex questions of right and wrong
can reduce to matters of simple arithmetic, and it becomes much too
easy to find a co!'rvenient 11atiomilization for cunning, expedient behaviour.
Juvenile delinquency seems associated with Merwry:, as is the life of the
streets in general. E ven if you yourself do not fall into these modes of
behaviour, such matters could become personally relevant to you, perhaps
1\S a focus of professional involvement, while you live in this locale. YOUR PLANETS AND THEIR LINES THE PRACTICAL SIDE OF MERCURY Becoming by Doing • Mercury can help you come to grips with practical concerns of all A.l..l•"-"'
Your mind sharpens, leading to an improvement in communication .,..,._.,..,
with eloquent verbal expression becoming a notable characteristic in
conversation as wit, ingenuity and cleverness shine through to
listeners. These enhanced skills and a greater desire for Colnnmr:ucact:1frfj
with otluers could also show themselves through community involvenQ_e.n
and an interest in writing and publishing. Advancing your education is
much easier here than elsewhere, as your expressive and technical uu~~~.
seem to develop almost effortlessly. Your ability to work efficiently
improves greatly, and thus technical achievements such as inventions
innovations are apt to mark your stay under this line.
Work prospers, especially if it is involved with. mail order, ·
and transportation, books, informational systems, data processing, ae1;a
work of all kinds, a,gencies, the press, metchandising, libraries or cornti:ten:;e
If basic secretarial work is you£ job, you will find that you are better
to organize a:nd maintain efficient office procedures .. Ctiaftsmanship
manual skills are also emphasized so that those in most blue-collar j
should prosper here, including empl~yment related to repair, assembly,
construction or allied fields. Practical or vocational education, especially
meant to acquire new skills rather than polish olrl ones, also goes well ·
this locale. Finally, even your hobbies can be transformed into rennur1er:att-:v
occupations at this locality.
Mercury areas are usually good for physical health, if there are no otmt<ll
contradictory infiuen.ces, though the more sedate ·ao.d peace-loving pc:1:::;uJ
may at times feel exhausted by the constant changes and barrage of
stimuli to the nervous system. Nervous complaints often surface
along with allergies, hypetsensirivity to noise and other stimuli, and
problems. Smoking a,nd drug use ar.e not well-tolerated, and your
reacts strongly to adverse environmental influences such as toxins
pollution. When you're feeling down, quiet and security are the best
under a Mercury line.
Since Mercury's influence is easily accepted and assimilated by
people, projection of its qualities on to others is less common than in
case of other planets. Some (particularly women who have been ....
UJL..U.... 144 MERCURY: TAMING POWER OF THE SMALL to feel that thinking is a man's concern) may find themselves attracted to
brainy and intellectual types, though this is actually an indication that
your own capacity and inclination for Gerebral activ:ity are emerging into
consciot;1sness. Relationships are often taken up with younger people, perhaps Gemini or Virgo types, reflecting a more youthful attitude towards
self and life in general. MERCURY ON ASCEN D ANT How to Stay Forever Young
This position of Mercury will manifest most obviously and powerfully in
your self-definition and image. You'll clefine yourself thtough your mind
and/or your work, become known for your profession, mental abilities,
repartee, manual or conversational skills, craftsmanship, expressiveness,
versatility and adaptability. You seem younger here, gaining grace, motility
and coordinative ski1ls. If you suffer f-rom a physical handicap, this i;; a
better than average place for successful rehabilitation and therapy. Your
youthful image may 'rub off' on others as well, so that in this locale people
seem to respond to you by acting younger, move mo~ile and mG>re yersatile
when you are around. Your ideas become widely circulated, since you are
not only willing to say what you think, but can say it in an interesting,
unusual yet uncontroversial way.
Self-definition and self-understanding bl0om under Mercury rising, as
life experiences contribute to a growing awareness of self, and an appreciation of your talents ~d abilities. Your mind devotes itself to uncovering
the essential meaning of your li£~, and to solidifying youl' identity and
self-concept in a way that could well create a .new 'you' quite different
from the way you were elsewhere. Just as you are able to integrate the
various aspects of your mind and personality, your role in sodety·increas~
ingly is one of coordinator, facilitator and connecting medium for disparate
external forces and people. The problems you encounter may stem from
a tendency to postpone commitments and to look upon each experience
as only temporary until the ideal situation comes ai0ng. If you let yourself
become a perpetual student, you may never get around to graduating or
putting any of the knowledge and experience you gain under this influence
to long-term use or application.
Though you tend to say what you think under this influence, you always
145 YOUR PLANETS AND THEIR LINES reserve the right to change your miad. Outspoken, eloquent, yet always
bordering on being an intellectual dilettante, you demonstrate charm aa<d
charisma on the outside, while within yourself you attempt to discover th~
true form and meaning of your identity and purpose. MERCURY ON MIDHEA VEN Gamesmanship
Your career and your quest for status in society are the focus of .M(!rC1ll1'V,
under this line. Under most circumstances, you can find work easily, est>ee. Saturno ally in business, commerce and the other work areas mentioned ab
Any education you undertake usually has an ambitious purpose behind
and as you concentrate on creating a good public image for yourself through
advertising your new skills, you may become something of an intellectual
social climber. Literary work, teaching, educational concerns, crafts ""........
even hobbies all prosper here, with all of them serving your am...,...I.J,VUI'~
well. Your sense of competition is keen here, though somewhat impersonal,
and it leads you to pursue success as a sort of game. Your mind, yom
verbal powers and your newly developing social and diplomatic skills ar@
among your best tools with which to advance social success, and VOliLl!':
ability to express yourself could even lead to opportunities to pat:tlcJpa,t:eJ
in politics and community affairs. But writing is the most powerful of ~,r;,.,.,
emerging talents and abilities under this line, so publication {-and cet~tatrJllV
acceptance) of your ideas could well be a means by which you can att::an,
even greater success and social status. Books, articles and research succeed
here, especially if they promote· new ideas, new theories or just new ways
of thinking. With your name bandied about a lot, you are apt to
a growing sense of social responsibility mingled with a sense of .,....,........
gamesmanship that keeps you ever mindful of what you must do in order
to keep up with the Joneses. You quicldy learn the rules for success here,
and can play them with skill, despite a lack of attachment to the results.
You also watch the game from the sidelines as others play it, viewing
with cool, rational fascination. In the worlds of academia and emlpl<)ynne~lt
in particular, you soon learn how to get your name and ideas on to the
right people's desks and prosperity follows. MERCURY: TAMING POWER O·F THE SMALL MERCURY ON DESCENDANT fnteflectuaf Companionship
Mercury hete can sharpen your counselling skills to professional levels as
you gain the ability to urge. others to fulfil their potentials, acting as a
catalyst to help them recognize their own talents and aptitudes. Young
people are particularly drawn to you here, and you may succeed in guiding
them to personal fulfilment. Your mind and your knowledge expand
through being stimulated by the people and ideas you encountered under
this line. Flexibility and a more liberal OlJ.tlook result from meetings with
potential teachers, guides or intellectual mentors, so this zone is excellent
for education, teachim. Vênus or any-other·academic pursuits. Relationships, which
tend to be fluid and unstable here, are often with people younger than
you, and your contact with them easily shifts the focus of your rapidly
evolving self-definition. A situation in which you define yourself as some
other person's partner, student or protege would reflect these tendencies.
As this location is excellent for business, work requiring contracts or
partnerships, or debate and other verbal skills, will offer very good options
to consider. Self-promotion succeeds with relatively minot effort, though
your own enthusiasm for the same can make you prone to a carnival-like
hard sell of questionable ethicality. While sexual relationships may lose a
little of their intensity and passion here, communication is enhan<eerl in
any sort of partnership or connection. You may come to reflect prevailing
ideas more than is usual for you, moderating your opinions in the light of
others' input. This can indicate either flexibility or opportunism, and only
you can determine the difference by your own actions. Your business
skills improve, and careers in advertising, sales, journalism, publicity, career
counselling or publishing, or .as any kind of agent, should prosper under
this influence. MERCURY ON IMUM COELI Understanding the Past
Areas that concern the home, the family and your sense of personal roots
and origins are the focus of Mercurial energies under this line. The past
- your own, and that of yow; family, race, ethnicity or region - can become
147 YOUR Plutão L AN E TS AND THEIR L INES a means of self-identification and definition, sparking a fascination wit: Saturno research into genealogy, and other me~ns a.£ exploring the forgotten pas~.
This in turn leads to a renewed sense of your own identity. The inn~~
personal factors which relate to your family and heritage can be organize@
into a coherent personal myth here, one that serves to structure the minca
more efficiently as the mythology and symbolism inherent in the pa&t
allows~ you a m<:;>re thm;ough cotnptehension and utilization of the pr~~seJfiit: ,
You become sensitive to how the ~ast has conditioned you, especially
private study and introspection, and so are able to modify its effects. Tli€
'archaeology of self' is also plumbed, perhaps through psychoanalysis and
similar introspective modes of therapy.
Your personal allegi~nce to family, nation and religious tradition •uaw
deepen here, so that your identification with cllese things becomes a mo11e
integral part of your psyche. Moreover, what you do here may itself make
a matk in your family history. Because of your constant probing and
questioning of your family background, the home situation remains UUlel·
and flexible, and is perhaps unsettled much o£ the ti:me. Intuition als~
increases under this line in many instances, as your instinctive' a:warene·ss
of your past enables you to see the more universal patterns in it whi&.lil
can, in a sense, give you some knowledge of the future and a better insight
into the present. Seeing yourself and your family's past as a microcosm
that reflects a larger truth thus enhance.s your knowledge of the world aa€1
its future. Finally, you may undertake a quest through e~ucation or travel'"
or intellectual exploration that later in life distinguishes you and constitut&s
a fundamental part of the identity through which the world knows you. MERCURY WITH VENUS The Taming Power of the Small
Under this pleasant line, you are able to define and re-create the beauty
within by pursuing and perfecting art, creative writing and creative communication. This plaGe ean well be a11 atea of .social accomplishment fG>Ji
you, as it stimulates personal grace and the development of persuasiv£
skills that you can utilize in yow: work or profession. You find it natut!ai
to act as a peacemaker, diplomat and facilitator, and do so in a personall. Netuno pleasant and charming fashion that befriends former enemies and charms
those already your friends. Education, schoohlilg and childhood are happ¥ MERCURY: TAMING POWER OF- THE SMALL and pro'ductiive here; ~s you learn easil. Netuno , especially in attistic or crearive
fields. An automatic ease and delicacy of verbal expression lend themselves
well to efforts at creative writing, such as poetry or lyrical prose, but this can
also help you in more practically, descriptive technical writing, advertising or
translation.
Your instinctive appreciation of fine things, art and elegance is allied
with an ability to get along with almost at1yone. Work in education goes
well here, largely because of this. capacity to get along with most people,
no matter what their status relative to your own, and profit should accrue
to you through business or commerce ~ particularly craftsmanship, arts or
any profession that requires good spoken or written expression. Commercial art, graphics and hobbies in which elegant but useful articles are created
can be profitable under this influence. Since your mind is calin ahd clear
for the most part here, if you naturally tend to be hypersensitive you may
find your anxiety moderated somewhat. In fact, you may almost have to
work at .it in order to be depressed or ill here, pardy because of the
affectionate support of almost everyone you meet. A tactful,. diplomatic
role for you is indicated overall, because of the combination of your talents
in communication and your instincts for charity and kindness. But writing
is most apt to be your labout of lov:e, and if you decide to go ahead with
•
the Great American Novel here, you can make real progress in such a
creative endeavour, as a result of the inspiration you find from intellectual
companionship and the fond encouragement of friends.
• MERCURY W I TH MARS Trippingjy over Your Tongue
A chronic case of 'foot-in-mouth &sease' guarantees that life will rarely
be quiet in this locality and that the many changes in self-awareness you
experience here are the result of an ample number of lessons in the virtues
of silence. Controversy seetns ,t o accompany everything you say, though
introspection will reveal that people are only reacting to the chip you're
carrying on your shoulder and to an obvious, if not always intentional,
arrogance supported by boastful and provocative words that are anything
but diplomatic and tactful. Still, you .are able t0 attain yol!l:r goals by p utting
real muscle into ideas, proving over and over again that the pen is mightier
than the sword, at least so long as it is well-guided.
·149
..) YOUR PLANETS AND THE!~ LINES This is a good area in which to find and enjoy any form of active ~61
strenuous work, from simple manual lab0ur to competitive activity such
a.s sports. Even simple jobs can challenge you by being made into H erculean
tasks, and such physical exertion is also beneficial in dissipating some
the belligerence and irritability that you may feel here. Socially, though~
you could have quite a few problems, as these planets together can mak€
you present a rude, coarse, perhaps e;ven malicious demeanoar to athens~
· On the other hand, when their effects are internalized, you may be subjee.f
te nerves, allergies or repeated infection. Injuries caused by rash and precipitate action, particularly in driving, travel or the use of machinery, also ....,.,.,.,.
result from such bottled-up resentments. Your sensitivity at times can 1ua..n..~
you seem adolescent, awkward and painfully reactive, even though velrballv,·
you c;aa be quite formidab.te.
You can develop skill and dexterity in the manual arts, so if you aJ.:I.''-"'-'1\ Áries .
have sotne talent for carpentry, a craft or other skilled labour, this zon~
ean be more eonstructive than problematic for you. Your cotnp ,etltlv~
instincts are sharpened considerably, as yoa gain a: talent for shrewd sel'f£promotion and advertising, and you'll enjoy many opportunities to proi\re
yourself as long as you are careful not to alienate others by furthering vuLu
iaterests in an overheating way. On the down side, details tend to overwhelm you, which can lead to intolerance of critidsm if you don't find
more disciplined way to handle the situation. Sexual exploitation of ott1erl~,~
a tendency to overwork, and even the temptation to indulge in ................................1
are other problems that can manifest here, so· the· area is best avoided
those not already self-possessed and calm. While living here, cu11t1va
cautious, tolerant friends can act as a check on your impetuosity. For 1vomen onfy: You'll find this area particularly risky and challenging; men
won't much like your independence nor the sardonic way in which you
assert it. There is even an increased risk of attack, accident or u ................~
problems, though the area can be eongenial if you are willing to add
dash of aggression to the usual female roles and put up with a gn:at~~t.
number of personal confrontations than you might expect elsewhere.
For men onfy: This zone can be somewhat problematic as . a result of
repeated difficulties you experience with competition and exposure
accidents and to others'' ill will. However, it is a good place for su.......,
masculine occtlpations as those listed above, in addition to
I 50 MERCURY: TAMING POWER OF THE SMALL entrepteneurial activities, athletios and any stre·nuous vocation which can
act to channel the over-abundance of' energy present here. A little effott
at moderation will make you ambitious, shrewd and assertive rather than
opportunistic, manipulative and pushy. MERCURY WITH JUPIT ER The Big Power of Little Ideas
Culture, the exchange of information, an interest in language itself, communication in general and the o.rganilzaetion 0f people in order to meet
specific goals emerge as primary and important here. The depth and breadth
of your intellig€nce may actmally improve in a noticeable way, and you
acquire an a:ir of integrity, authority and experience that ensures your
acceptance while granting you a vital and important role in society. The
organization and planning that must accompany any activity ru:e yc::>ur fiorte;
clear, dependable judgement as well as a reasoned, liberal humanism propel
you into decision-making roles in work and community. Big ideas can be
put into operation, and business especially does well here, as do academic
concerns and promotions.
Occupations especially favoured under this line are those involving n;;tail
order, publishing, anything that deals with communication or ideas, importexport, ttavel, concerns with foreign countries, cultures or langua'ges, commerce, writing, advertising, media, administration, community work,
government and libraries. Even for people whose lives up to how have
been dominated by sense and physicality, this is an excellent area for
education and personal advancement, as you easily soak up whatever culture
and the arts have to offer, showing your new status with an ai:li of worldliness, humour and irreverence. You extend your personal reach by meeting
people of varied ideolGgies, ideas and backgrounds, many of whom may
come from abroad. Your ideas are sought after by others and can even
see publication i! you make the effort. In fact, this is probably the best
zone for writers or communicators of any sort, as well as f0r those involved
in commercial, academic or similar interests.
The dangers to be found in this mCii>stly positi:v:e Mercury-Jupiter include
tendencies to exaggerate, to oversimplify complicated problems or to
engage in inte11ectual arrogance. 'You may seem the absent-minded pro1fessor to some, so important and plentiful are the ideas that cross through YOUR PLANETS AND THEIR LINE S yout mind here., and you ~en<il towards a simple lifestyle which places a
higher value on ideas than on things. People for whom culture and ed'l!}cation have seemed inaccessible rise socially here, and work
. or business
interests can succeed spectacularly.
. MERCURY WITH SATURN
Th~ Alchemy of Drudgery Here you can refine, crystallize and reduce knowledge and self-concepts
to their essentials. What is illusion or what ·has been acquired from other
people in a more or less habitual way is separated quickly from
personal history and identity. Powers of concentration increase .as ur;..,.,,
mind turt:-s in upon itself, and the truths you slowly acquire here are
dependable and durable. You prefer unadorned meaning over meaningless
form, refusing to take on the patina of culture and dilettantism that others
may seek to acquire. Your studies· here tend to be tedious ·explorations
into the technical and the detailed; restrained organization and practicality
dominate, and as your surroundings may be rather uncongenial, work is
hard and your 'relationships often clouded with suspicion and doubt. Yoa
may fear that your own ab>ilities and intelligence are inadequate here, ancl!
thus compensate by working harder and by relying on the approval
authorities. You trust less in your senses than in accepted interpretations
0f reality, so knowledge ancl communication are restricted to dealing winp
the essential and the real.
Even though you tend to become bogged down in details, you can still
develop exacting craftsmanship as well as scientific and accounting skills.
Copious note-taking and painstaking research often pr0duce less than yo\'1:
hope for, at least in the short run, but patience and a willingness to cornmirt!
yourself over the long term can pay off. Imagination (both yours and those
around you) tends to be barren, so you are not likely to be highly creativ:e.
H0weve,r, suc<!ess can coine thr0ugh pet!severartce, .as well as from ,rathen
venal types of commerce or small-time wheeling and dealing. Your writing
and verbal expression tend to the inarticulate, sluggish or antiquated. People
who need strict routine may find it here, put the mental myopia and rigicl
adherence to·limited opinions of this loc.a:le make it teo dreary, ........... llCt,\iJ,IJ
and anxious for most. Health and mood may be depressed here, sma:ll
complaints can become chronic, and behind most difficulties lies a disbelief
u ... MERCURY~ TAMFNG P0WER OF THE s-MALL in your own powers - a belief which seems borne out by experience. Just
as the ancient alchemists tried over and over to convert lead into gold, so·
you labour at inner transformation here, and in fact yo_u can be transformed
by the self.:imposed rlgo.urs of nhe discipline of Mercury and Saturn. MERCURY W ITH URANUS Fidgets) Widgets and Social Dynamite
In this locality, your mind seems just slightly ahead of its time, drawn to
theories and social concepts that are yet to be un.derstood by the tnainstr~am of society. Individualistic ideas and perceptions, undistorted by what
(everybody knows', are social dynamite, so not surprisingly you and your
iconoclastic mentality that delights in exploding others' myths and illusions
with its brilliant logic and irreverent wit don't get along too well witl:'l
authorities. Your mind becomes articulate, innovative and inspirational,
and you find that you easily see~ through the sham of unquestio11ed social
beliefs. In no time at all you can find yourself at the forefront (and in fact
far ahead of the main body) of scientific opinion, espousing ideas as
unpopular as pure materialism, astrology, metaphysics or any highly individualistic world view. You demand freedom from stereotype, and see the
path to truth as personally unique and lonely. Eschewing a dualistic world
view, you are comfortable with ideas that others might see as paradoxical
or contradictoiy, but this only Saturno >ecause your sharp .mind is able to fotm
lightning-fast associations between seemingly disparate concepts. In the
face of the inevitable so-cial criticism that comes to Mercury-Uranus, you
remain clear, wilful, cool, decisive and superior. You are instinctively political in your rna:terialistic arialysis Df reality, but your vision is very personal
as well, forging a strong link between you and the ideals and political
ideologies of your milieu.
On less lofty levels, your occupation becomes the locus of much personal
change, inner turmoil and growth. Working for others is cdifficult under
this line, so self-employment may eventually be sought. You are clever,
innovative, handy and(!esistant to routine, qualities which seem to suit you
better for working for yourself than for others. Work situations ate likely
to change frequently, in part because they become intimately connected
to yout pdlitical awareness, the.t:eby t:r1aking ,f uem a source of conflict
between old and new. Your realistic view of things is unclouded by feelings 153 (aaGl others: m~ Netuno in fa.ct· se~ JQ:lil as coM)~ wJ:':ili:e}ii;.allows yoat: im.ciivi[dua:Ji.1iV: to em~rge clistin€i] Netuno ·ifl y0ut work; especially thtovgh non<;cmforming:,._ci;:a~~l~·"'
.mansMp: a:n:<il tecfu~~Pal cr@ativicy. Unusual -heilth pro!Dlems at trul;;lorcat~!i!O
(oftet'l: Catl'sed by:reactiens to. enrinoameatal agents, or influences) niay
con.v.entional attempts at diagnosis·. MERC.UR· Áries WITH .NE'PTUNE
' Dreqm-s-ayerior the Millions
Your mind ·can "take your little dahly eont:erns, arrd inflate them to· v,r,tm"D·
seem like cosmic levels in this lomcl:e. Áries out me(;)ds tel:rd to be erratic
your iaeas are spacy and easily itifluenced E?Jh>eit temporarily) hy ·
jnpJat. ltowe:ver, you are open toideali:sm a$' your vivid a:nd offbeat im:a.giJna~
tl{:l}I\ is v~ry sensithre t0 social rnooq_
s, s®meilifug whic);l indi<;;ates that ·"""""·'' ean affect .s.ociety in a.~sub.hle, ~ost uac0ns.ci0us, way throl!lgh you!.~.·~ill:'<!;
Writers of fantasy, artists, tho.se wh0 wotk ih instimtien:s andi "c·p_.,.,,
p:t0fessi0'ns - or i·m the ct.eati:en and distribution 0f social illusion, ,,:).\lll,!ll,
as adventig;ing, movies, graphics: and photegtaphy - all fitrdi··:ma: Vênus :irrft:1iii\ii€.'
inspiration hete.
Under such an i:nf.l.uence, however, it often is hard to keep Netuno £1>ur feet
the g_11ouna, ~nd Netuno ;o;ut relati<!>.flShlps ~ned car¢er t>1a;ns s.e em t-o exist mc)s·tm
in: the r.o·sy glow e£ :hepe. People tend to take ·adiV>~HJ:tage',of ye.u, aad 'V:(W1[!l~
m·ay ~xp:eriett:€e"'atldiction or·healtli crises' mti! Netuno ~n. Vênus t0 cdeal witk your n· ::C:::Ul<J!
ahlolilttiliis. 0 .ther:ailm.ents can.be c·aused b> Netuno : alletgies~ an iNc-reased ser1siti:v'i;li.V
to en.<Vll:ohtn:ental infhience., or drugs. Your clUnking processes :beGbiillf~l
eloudy, and J Our highly s~gge.stibl~, or eV.en neurotic, f.rame ef .tnlnd· ot.t~~J!l
attracts -what it {ears the 'most. Your tenden.€X to find your ev<~rv;cijQ.~
e.nvjtonments full \0£ intrigue ·a nd conspiracy cap cause society to ,intetJV>e!'Jfei
negatively and fret:tuently in yom ev:erydax life.
All in all, the reality around y0u-x.arely measures·up to fuzzy e~pectatfears
po1!n of an -inveterate idealism ·that keeps you forever comparing wb.aJ¥
t,o what ought to be. Escap·e on the' outs.ide '~ough running aw;ay fred!~
nes:pon~ibillty, or on the inside by waijcr~v;ing i n neurosis, can"in tare ll'_a;:>;~:Zt;
re-sUlt fr®~ the di·~organized lliinking p,r<D€~s.ses and e>Gcu1t or n.::1vsti'e:
ohsess:ioas commoh to those under ~eptune:s sway. For; all these dls.ad'v:a1lk'
tages, you actually may lead ~· kind ,o£ ch-armed life he-.re as y0ur imuitt€>1'1
gives you a ;view 0f the road ar0uhd the .next' eor.agr, and yoa ·
I 54 . MERCURY: TAMING POWER OF THE SMALL sidestep problems that might devastate one less tuned in than you. Conven,.
tional guidelines for life dissolve here, and the lines between imagination
and reality blur, while awareness of nuances and subtleties increases. It is
too easy for you to give in to a need to exemplify some social myth or
another, so be careful not to feed others' need for a scapegoat or martyr. MERCURY-PLUTO The World in a Grain of Sand
It is hard to imagine what the lighthearted messenger of the gods and the
darkling lord of the underworld have in common, and since mentality and
mortality are difficult wncepts to link, so this zone may indeed be 0fle of
conflicts. Life areas of career, health and day-to-day concerns in the community may feature continual intmsions of dark forces, so that if your
normal existence doesn't put you in ·touch with absolutes, with conflicts
and struggles over power, sex, life and death, it may be subject to drastic
changes. The most attuned and self-controlled can use this energy to see
the universe as a h_ologram, and by directing their attention to any part,
can receive knowledge of the whole. In this way, the family and cultural
patterns that govern you can be uncovered, grasped and redi~ected wHile
here. Esoterically, this suggests ac€:ess to the Akashic Records and a link
to universal knowledge which can give you great power and insight. In
the process of challengi~ Vênus these patterns, you e:x:perience contiJ;luous transformations of attitude·s and changes of ideals. The impossibility of compromise with critics and adversaries m'akes this an area where it is terribly
difficult to keep your life in order for very long.
Laaguage and speech difficulties c::an manifest here, for while you may
speak and hear well enough, it can at times seem impossible to get any
meaningful knowledge out of the information you take in. Sometimes a
fear of harsh reality underlies your inability to communicate meaningfully.
Your mind is attt'acted to forbiddingly technic;:al or socially disapproved
areas of thought, and fesearch into these may require a new symbolic
'
language, or the synthesis
of data in new and daring ways. You should
beware, ·however, of becoming immersed in interesting details that have
little to do with the whole, leav:ing you lost in blind alleys of research,
accomplishing little. Your ideas will not, in most cases, make you popular
despite their novelty, and you may even be persecuted for expressing them.
I 5 5 YOUR PLANETS AND TH<EIR LIN ES Your best talent is for extracting the universal kernel of truth that
beneath the trash heap of contradictions and confusion in any area wn1cn :
you choose to investigate. Here the seeds of total inner transtormactl®til
may be planted unobtrusively in your consciousness through the ac<}U1:51tl•on]
of some seemingly innocent bit of knowledge. .. ll Venus: Is There More to Life
Than Happiness? The idea of a Venus zone, with that planet's emphasis on pleasure, enjoyment and particularly romance, will have a lot of allure for most people.
All these things can be available ·to you under Venus, especially if no other
planets are involved and if the place Venus holds in your chart doesn't
unduly stress either its positive or negative qualities. On the other hand,
this place may tend to bore people who are strongly motivated, active
types or those who find the darker side of life and their own psyches
fascinating and important. Moreover, if you are already a rather lazy, unmotivated type, being in this zone may exacerbate those tendencies, leaving
you with little reason to grow beyond yourself. • For women on!J: This zone is an especially congenial one for you, as you
are likely to feel better about yourself and appear more attractive to others,
so that you can succeed in making relationships the centre of your life
here if that is what you're looking for. The darker side of Venus .at this
place is that by becoming another's wife, mother or symbol of beauty, you
may be giving up a true sense of yourself apart from someone else's needs
and evaluation. You tend to accumulate material possessions, excel in
domestic concerns such as sewing and baking, retain an inner beauty and
attractiveness, and get along well with other women, with whbm you can
develop special and deep bonds. Venus emphasizes the 'beautiful plaything'
image of woman, as opposed to the nurturing, maternal power of the
Moon (the capacity to attract and to seek security), so these parts of your
personality are magnified in this locale. ,"' For men on!J: Living here poses special problems for you. Men in our society
are not trained to think of themselves as . beautiful, and for them the
Venusian concepts of peace, harmony, love and beauty are supposed to
be sought outside of themselves, usually in women and in a romantic
I 57 \ s·etting. Wlille·thistneans that in this l'ocal'e yolil w.m be,presented with am;.~t€
opf>otfill1itie·s to 0njoy such pleasures, ~t is. uncom:fG>itable and ilir.eatening
a inale ego t~ d;ep~a~ qn external.~ for ~RiliJng. 'What starts with
intoxication pf :t:~:p]iflllte<;i cre!lit at the .;c~dy stere m~ Netuno end up fee'1inJ1!<..Ht<
you like an adciiction to' the _pursuit 0f a:li.festyJe that ,is go;vemecfmore
images than realities. It is ciitkal here that you try to internalize Venus,
to accept that there is beauty withiri yoursel£, riot just ih your mate, t!>e>:s~
sessions or bank account, each of which tu:ms out t0 be inadequate
reliable after you have COJ:I?.e to depend on it .for self-validation. But bef:0J1~
this internalization of y0ar own he~uty can oce~, the perfect. t~rru~~l
image. must be tecogmizecd, related tG and assimilated. PSY G HOLGGICA;L INTERPRETATI @N OF VENU$ The World Lat)es a Lover
The planet .of love, marriage, att, relatedn.ess at):d interdependenee ma*~·s
tl:ri,s zone sj;:toagly beneficial ,for :most pe0ple, as it is a pla:ee where th~&~
preasant matters will predominate in your life, e~perienee. A deepened
for peace, happiness·and harmony, and a nostalgia fofthe wonderful (oti:~i\l
associated with ch:ihdhoo€1), i.inpels ¥OU ts develop o/Our~elf into the ·
of y0ur ·desire. Worshipping this ped{ap.s un~tainabJe a~sth~tic ideal, Áries ,OU Strive to•petfect yourself ~1'1 line With itS. re<!JWtements, Áries ,.PU may S't:Yc~'l
cQme. to realize that much •o·£ the:.Jbeauty yb\1 have idealized in ·r.rm:
actually came. from within. MystitaUy, Vehus has _a life-giving force,.
under its influence Netuno ;ou breathe vitaliW into· Netuno .ew.:self, metivated by
lGmgings. of Etos. Your values .aml standards ev:ol:ve as you intlernalize
bealilty you see areund you, and Saturno becomes a part .ol~you,~ p.ow and
the fu:~;JI.re.
Bene~th ·RQ.meo and Jtiliees dreamy sentimentality lay a very sttong
firm commitment t.o what · they lo:ved. If you surrender to the ·.senses
th.ey did;-yGu should do so wi:th the Saturno .0pe of att:aining a better :un"<ic-:t-st:antl~i!
of the ideal valu·es that underlie· the re.a1i~, becayse it is these that
bring the most lasting hene.fit to you from li:virtg .um:der this line: By oo~~M Netuno ,:_our heatt aad your senses, ycm can aevelop, for example, teal taste
a de.si!;e f0t elegance. ana affection.. Th~ fondness f0r what is .refined.
pleasurab>Je can become an addiction., howev.el(, anidolatry <'9f..t he be~iuti[~ VENUS: IS THERE MORE TO LIFE THAN HAPPINESS? unless you work to develop the spiritual qualities hidden behind the veil
of Venus.
As you might guess, the key Venusian concepts of love and beauty have
another dimension b~yond their sweet story-book agreeableness. B alance
and harmony are ·.the· furr€lamental, underlyifl; Vênus .• atchetypes of Ven us, fot
beauty requites instirrcthr.e reeognition of what seems appropriate and pleasing in form and in harmony with its environment; and love is a feeling of
identification with such beauty in its simplest sense. The problem with
Venus (or with love, as anyone who has experienced it will testify) is that
even harmony must be balanced - love, beauty, sweetness and light, by
being inherently preferable to what is dark and foreboding, invite an overbalance in their favour - and so the psychological impulses towards the
less desirable possibilities are neglected and r.ep_ressed, only to erupt on
occasion with frightening force: the demons of possessiveness and jeal0usy
unleashed into the pastel world of Walt Disney. STAGES AND MYTH OF VENUS The Arrows if Love
The goddess Aphrodite, o.t Venus, ruled love and beauty, but she had a
darker side, too, an irrational vengefulness that unjustifiably and cruelly
punished mortals with little provocation. Aside from suggesting the painful
side of love, this facet of her personality also warns that residence in the
carefree, childlike realm of Venus must be paid for somewhere along the
line, at best with increased inner knowledge, or at worst by having to suffer
for not developing such knowledge. Narcissism, a cor:1suming love of self,
1s am0ng Venus' negative aspects, but s.u ch sdf-'containmem.t and sterile
self-regard is only possible when the outer w0tld is being more kindly,
supportive and pleasant than it ought to be.
The stages of perception for Venus are widely diverse, beginning with
a primitive, childish, frivolous, selfish possessiveness that grasps at pretty
things and people with unconscious single-mindedness. The inevitable balancing that results. leads to an awareness that fairness must be. learned
and that any relatiomship (including parenting) requires accommodation,
patience and effort. In the last stage you begin te accept and bec0ine
comfortable with self as you recognize that you atie as deserving a part of I 59 YOUR PLANETS AND THEIR LINES the univetse as any other; beauty is seen to stem from within and is naoon,
shared with others in an awareness that life is short wd that
of mortality can be found through love. Envy, which is usually d.lr,ectle<i:
at either inherited physical beauty or wealth, leads you to an aw:tte11e~~
that mortality makes all privilege and possessions meaningless· unless
are shared. A fully developed Venus consciousness is characterized by oo:tt
joy and sombreness, feelings born of the realization that pleasure, like
has boundaries. THE PRACTICAL SIDE OF VENUS Shop till You Drop
Now that you've been warned about all the things that might go wr<)1'
it is only fair to mention that the Venus zones like this one are us
some of the most congenial and successful places £or anyone. Friends
mercy, benevolence, children's concerns, conviviality, marriage, ror.nar.t~~
and often sex of a particularly pleasant V'ariety enter the life, and the oe<m14
whom you meet here (the most influential of whom may be women) coUI!L(
become lifelong friends. You develop a childlike trust in happy
.
and you increase in attractiveness, perhaps even becoming popular in
gossipy peer group that reminds you of your teen years . Of course, xuan:;~agl
and relationship become prime concerns, and this is a place where oat:tn4M
1
ships of any kind, along with you~ potential for conventional
(whatever that might be), are brought to the fore. Marriage is a ..,_,...,
possibility here, and all of your relationships serve to deepen your ao1o.tecJ
ation of yourself.
Money is also apt to be plentiful here, as are the nice things it buys,
you may develop a taste for the good life, becoming something o£
gourmet of sensations of all kinds. Some of these sensations are hur·cl
personal, including a need for domestic life, but others are more ~''"'~~"~<'·'<!'
sueh as a desire for good things to eat and for other things that you
taste with all the senses. Acquisitiveness is also likely to manifest, as
appreciation of pretty things, people and pets. This is a good place to c;,tr\1!1
wealth through making wise long-term investments, and often this .a.v-........,...,~
is one at which you produce income more easily than anywhere else.
You value things for their pure beauty, so that artistic abilities
appreciation can become central concerns in this zone. Religious u. u<~.~;<;;i x6o VENUS: IS THERE MORE 1'0 L1:FE THAN HAPPINESS? little dogs, flowers, jewdlery and adormments, mirrors, 'Souvetllt:s, pastels
and luxuries are among the items you might prize most, though your tastes
may d€epen to indude the most refined .areas in the axts and music. In
fact, you may notice things beginning to pile up around you, as it becomes
much easier for you to acquire things than to throw tllem away. Your artistic
abilities improve and you may even achieve recognition for them here.
Of course, many of these positive aspects can be pursued to excess,
which may contribute to a very uruealistic view·of the world on your part,
perhaps resulting in laxity, dependence and laziness when faced with the
realities of everyday life. Shallowness, vanity and a tendency to wait for
others to take care of things are real problems you may- have to contend
with, as Venus tends to take a passive role. This zone is generally good
for health, although being overweight can certainly become a p1ioblem (too
many good things to eat), as can other negative results of excess. If the
Venusian influence is entirely project~d on to others, you will find that
you are surrounded by beautiful people whose presence urges you to
perfect yourself. VENUS ON ASCENDANT If Thry Love Me) I Must Be Beautiful
This position of Venus stresses personal self-perfection most among all
the possible manifestations of this planet. You may actually become more
attractive as you take up activities which improve your physical appearance~
or you may perhaps learn to express yourself artistically. You easily conceptualize your ideal o£ phy~ical beauty and seek to emulate it, whether through
a greater sensitivity to fashion or by balancing and consciously working to
improve your personality by acquiring new abilities or perhaps by moderating excesses that have held you back in the past. In any case, i£ your efforts
can pay off, you will end up attracting the kind of people you have always
imagined inaccessible - and this in trurn will help you to redefine yourself
in a more kindly light.
This is the place at which you can learn, to be less hard on yourself,
though the life of laziness and self-indulgence that beckons might take_
you to the opposite extreme of being much too soft on yourself. Part of
your desired self-definition here may be of the order of 'Hollywood sex
kitten', pink bathtubs and all, or (in mote gender-neutral terms) you want
161 YOUR PLANETS AND THEIR LINES to be valu~d not for your brains, or even for your personality, but for
looks. Your health may improve (as long as you are aware of the ...,u~~"'
of weight gain) and your financial problems are more likely to be mc>s
that come from embarrassing excess rather than deficiency; 111'ires1tmc~n1rl
you make in v-aluable possessions and 'collectables' in this locale seem
have been. touched by Midas, and thus are quite likely to increas-e in
Relationships are important here, as they are in any Venus zone,
you will tend to define yourself by whom you are involved with, 1-'""'·u"~-';
aiming for relationships th~t others might envy - especially those '""~~
physically attractive people. You can deal with problems of possesst·veJiiles:
here by making an effort to integrate the personalities of those you
and admire into your own, which certainly is preferable to trying to
these people socially. You will generally have a pacifying influence on V(i).llil!l
environment, and often find yourself playing the role of peacemaker
diplomat, arbitrator·or mediator. People instinctively try to moderate
feelings in your presence. Artistic accomplishment is personally
here, and learning some form of artistic expression can prove a tur1run:
point in your life. It is a fun location, where pleasure and financial
abound, along with a sense of playfulness and beauty. VENUS ON MIDHEAVEN Zen and the Art of Consuming
Venus on the line that corresponds to your 1oth-house cusp in this ~v...au\.J.a.
tends to stress the monetary, social and 12ublic images associated with
planet. You come to be identified by society with what .you possess,
that earning and keepirig money can become a major preoccupation,
can the enjoyment of conspicuous consumption and the general ~'-"·'~-''"LL'J'"
to live beyond your means in order to create a favourable image for
world to see. If you can rein these tendencies in and make them work
you, rather than against you, you can find real success here, as this is
of the world's best locations for you to achieve recognition for your cre:att:vc
powers and abilities. With a minimum effort you can come to be seen
someone who has made it into the best circles with style.
Art or aesthetics is likely to £gure into your vocation in some
way. It might, for example, involve gardening, flowers and plants, . . . ..
ments, fashion or decoration, as well as finances or investment COJ:ln(~ctc~~
u 162 .• .., VENUS: IS THERE MORE TO LIFE THAN HAPPINESS? with 'collectables' of one kind or another. Things you acquire here tend
to appreciate in value, but this is no accident since you_ seem to have the
taste to know what is worthwhile and what is worthless. Your image in
society may be that e>f a rather fashionable, indulgent person who is adept
in the social graces. The 'beautiful people' who grace your home, or hang
out with you in trendy spots, have a hedonistic, self-indulgent aura about
them, which lends panache to yoar quest for enviable soeial advantage.
Some of the modes of behaviour you perfect now may be rather impractical,
but that doesn't mean they can't be profitable.
Other people see you as you like to see yourself, and you are known
by all for how you go ab<;>ut getting what you want. Lifestyle is important
to you here so you enjoy more, and enjoy it more often and more obviously
than most people. Relationship may also figure into your occupati0n ..... on
the one hand, you could be known as 'so-and-so's spouse', or alternatively
you might work in counselling, legal areas or mediation that directly involve
the relationships of others. If you do not enjoy luxury in a public fashion,
perhaps it will figure into your profession in some way. Some personalities
may here succumb to the temptations of indolence and laziness, however,
so that though you are 'known for your lifestyle' and your friendly relations
with large sums of cash, these things could be conspicuously absent or, if
present, flowing to you from other people. VENUS ON DESCENDANT The Marrying Maiden
The overriding concern accompanying a setting Venus is how best to come
to terms with self and how best to learn to experience your potential for
beauty, love and artistic creation. Here you are inclined to act out these
concerns through another person, particularly in a long-term relationship
or marriage. Though you are able to get in touch with your own inner
beauty, it will probably be through love and attachment to someone else,
whom you see as beautiful. , People with whom you deal here are often
either artistic types, dancers, painters, etc., or physically attractive people
who exemplify the themes of peace, art and beauty. It is probably the most
likely location for marriage, especially for women, though th0se whom you
attract tend to the beautiful-but-lazy type, and thus might not make the
best mates. Still, you are proud of your lovers and their appearance, and YOUR PLANETS AND THEIR LINES throt,1gh them may be willing to live out your own fantasies vicariouslx
Others respond to your Venusian demeanour by becoming more graLcte~l.llS-.
attractive, diplomatic and elegant.
As you acquire somewhat of a skill in human relations, you may suc<:e~<;t,
here as a counsellor, lawyer, negotiator, and should do well in any otl1e~
role in which social interaction is fostered and encouraged. Your soc:ta
skills and your charm also improve and you find they are more hlg;!XLJ
valued by others here than elsewhere. If you are the type who likes to
up at four in the morning ready to go fishing or hiking, you'll find tllat;
the life of action is quickly abandoned for one of ease and beauty.
pursuing life's pleasures tends to get you involved in other people,
may find that you're tempted to live through their experiences rather th~ff.l
have new ones of your own.
This generally should be a happy and pleasant zone, especially if
are content to live for others. You have a calming, harmonizing effect
your social milieu. You may end up willingly doing most of the work
holding together relationships and making them work, and you seem
dedve .a sense of identity and purpose from seeing other people nar:,mw~
Your personality, under the i11fluence of these relationships, becomes me>~€'
temperate, affable, languid, sensual and aesthetic, but your belief in
justice and fairness of the universe may be challenged from time to ti·~
as you are forced to recognize others' identities and conflicting needs. VENUS ON !MUM COELI Country Gardens
The position of Venus in this location s~esses the enje>yment and peJ~te<:t1(1J!~
of a nurturing home atmosphere either in actual, external terms or peJrhaops;
by making you feel more 'at home' with yourself, at peace with who
are and where you came from. Here, coming to terms with your eXf)etJLene\'1
of childhood is critical: you 'may attempt to relive it if it was happy,
perhaps create a more nurturing and supportive environment for Otr.ll€'.t-S:
and for yourself if it was not. Your attitude towards home, family, origj'hs
and background - your past 'karma' - is central to any self-pe:rte:ctlQl
activity you undertake in this locale. Whi.fe a striving for self-pe:necn<J1l
might well be acted out through childten (who take on more ImportaJrrc:;e
here for you than they might elsewhere), it also suggests a deep ret4::>tnil!;ll!. VENUS: IS THERE MORE TO LIFE THAN HAPPINESS? arion of your inner image, the result of which is a more moderate, harmonious and kindly feeling towards yourself. If you're not already a parent, this
is a good place in which to be(;ome one; and if you are already a parent,
the temptation to add to the litter comes with this territory. Children ((Are
all of these ours?'), pets, livestock, bric-a-brac and possessie>ns seem to
accumulate of their own accord around you, as your ~ppreciation and
affection for your family, youdov:im. Vênus friends and the place where you live
deepen from day to day.
You tend to be more interested in home improvement under this Venus
line, and will probably take the old saying, (a house is not a home', to
heart as you work to make your own place of abode a wonderful and
welcoming enyironment. You will probably be most satisfied ·living in a
rural area, or at least a place . Vênus rowing lushly with gardens full 0f colourful
flowers and attractive leafy plants. As you seek luxury and contentment in
your home environment, it can become something of a social centre, and
your domestic abilities flower as you find yourself more interested in
sewing, baking, decoration, gardening, even light farming. Bef0re you know
it, your home becomes your favourite place, the one in w:hich you look
best and feel most content. By surrounding yourself with beauty, you are
able to internalize it and to feel better about yourself, which is a marvellous
way of obtaining the peace and security you crave here. Though investments
in objects of art may pay offJn general under a Venus line, land bought
at this locale is very likely to increase in value. Investments in the heart
pay off, too, and if you have not already found it, you may experience
real, true, lasting love for the first time in this place, something which can
help to establish a feeling of contentment and _harmony that lasts you for
the rest of your life. VENUS WITH MARS WI.Jo Cares WI.Jat the Neighbours Think?
Your awareness of sexual polarities increases under this traditionally hot
and passionate combination, so you are likely to identify (and be identified
by others) more strongly with your gender, while at the same time the
environment you cultivate comes to symbolize the opposite of that identity
to an excessive degree. This fosters an awareness in you of the attributes
of the opposite sex that you find most alien and threatening. Sex itself is YOUR PLANETS AND THEIR LIN.ES seen in a new: light (and 011e that is not-~ways flatte1rio. Vênus ) as therfamily .·
romantic aspects of your relationships seem to recede in this ~...........,,
leaving your sexual interest as an openly honest, intense biological .......l<..'"'"
In this zone, conventiona). boy-meets..:girl attachments are more likely
lead to the bedroom than to the aitar, and in general you seem to . Saturno , Vênus ,1r.'e
little concern for propriety, what mother might say, or what the ne:tghbours
think. Indiscretion and impatience dominate, and you rely on trial
error, seeking endless variety in sexual matters and in other life coJ:lcerms
as well. This PJ.ay be a go<Dd locale for graceful sports such as -cl1r1m
or for athletic arts such as dance, as the preoccupation with
that sparks you sexually makes your body and its attractiveness of ...u,..;)
concern to you.
Not surprisingly, all the attention you feel ready to devote to sex:ua:t
matters bears results: high spirits inspire a constant pursuit of the ..,~.._,....,
of the flesh, and you may find yourself attracted to hyper-masculine
ultra-feminine types that might repel you somewhere else. Sensitivity is
key to climbing out of the morass of emotional wreckage and u· n·maltu1te
relationships this kind of life can create, but long before you develop ..........u;
you are likely to have ample opportunities to experiment, and your apJJet:m:~~
may invite yo u to eXiplore erotic areas you usual!¥ avoid ~cept in '"''' ·'·"
fantasy life. Abstractly, you can deal here with the binding of the spirit
the flesh, or to efforts at self-perfection, and the attributes you ae'lreJ.c>l!)
through doing this are those associated with sexuality, polarity and ger1ae:r~
Pru:entheod 1is accented here - quite possibly as a symbol of raising
opposite-sex' nature to consciousness and assimilating it into your life
awareness. Many seeds are sown under this combination, in wider
concerns as well as in biological areas - and all will mature, in time. VENUS WITH JUPITER Too Much Fun?
Culture and beauty become matters for you to study and to emulate,
you glorify art for style's sake, often within a wealthy, fashionable,'-'-"~"'-"'"''"
and bourgeois social milieu. You prize your friends most for their gr~tGej
their social skills or their refinement, but -it all seems a little like a soap oo·etra
heavy on concern for pedestrian feelings, emotionalism and "'"r"'run
prima-donna complexes. This location, one of plenty of money, 166 ~------------------------------~~~------------·---------------~ VENUS: IS TJ,JERE MORE Júpiter '0 LIFE THAN HAPPINESS? success, and far too much self-indulgence, could bore you if you are
naturilly creative, highly motivated- or ambitious, as you might begin to
feel a bit like a goose being plwnpe€1 up just before being ground into the
pate. Moreover, your expectations can become inflated out of all realistic
proportion, so that no matter how well things go for you (and they usually
clo go well), you will act the role of the na1ve swanger in paradise, gtut,nbling
with discontent amid plenty. Women .usually react to this zone better than
men, taking on the proper genteel air as they become the centre of lots
0f social activity. Imptessionability and self-indulgence are the flies in the
ointment here as you are 'i nclined to let yourself go, meaning that weight
gain (aggravated by an urge not to exercise), and a willingness to be imposed
upon are ever-present temptations.
Your motivation may at times be hard to sustain, 'as your need for
conspicuous consumption aims to show the Joneses how well you are
l~eeping up through a round of lavish parties and other social hobnobbing.
Your friends tend to be ~ealthy and indulgent, and marriage and friendship
are apt to be very advantageous and socially approved but somehow lacking
in passion or challenge. Still, all this popularity and exposut:e to pleasure
and success cah have positive resUlts, as the finaneial benefits of residing
under this influence are balanced by a new awareness of to what degree
consumption, materialistic status and your place in society really matter to
you. For the truly ihdulgent; this location is hog heaven, but most people
will eventually £nd themselves yearning for £t little stress and challenge. VENUS WITH SATURN Diamonds Are a Girl's Best Friend
In this zone, a fear that you are undesirable, needful and unattractive may
have some truth to it, if only because feeling this way on the inside often
has the effect ·of•making 1t diffieult for peopl€ t0 get to iknow you, .o r to
get closer to you. This can be a very challenging place for people who
depend heavily on their relationships, .as a pattern of rejection can develop
l:tete that only reinforces the insistemt feeli..m.gs that happiness and ·cOntentment in relationship may never be attained. In an attempt to overcompensate for these feelings of affectional difficulty, some fashion for themselves
n jaded and sophisticated mask or, just as frequently, pursue a highly
material course in life, a course often connected in some way with an YOUR PLANETS AND THEIR LINES important relationship. Ultimately, you might surrender any hopes
have that you can achieve love or security. Friends disappoint you,
love and social concerns do not measure up to expectations. Concept.s
femininity inside yourself and in the outside world are likely to be denigra
as well.
You may find yourself deeply involved with or attracted to people
situations that others find burdensome or disagreeable. This can ......""'L"''
elements of the 'low life', or even in extreme cases a taste for
More often, though, you simply sacrifice emotional fulElment to the
of duty and security, and, as is often the ·case in any zone influenced:
Saturn, even though you are aware of your own lack of satisfaction in
regard, it is difficult for you to leave or change, as you feel there
something virtuous in the suffering.
On the positive side, prudence, discipline and self-control can
developed here which makes the area a good one for learning and
detailed craftswork or other painstaking artistic practices, as well as
overcoming any of your bad habits. Older people (or sometimes
v;ery much younger than you) seem more attractive to you here
elsewhere, and you find yourself with a growing respect for age and exr>e
ence, along with a need and capacity to express your feelings and em10tl.01
in a: tangible form that compensates for the cool, unfulfilling emot1<)11
life which marks this zone. Through such difficulties, you always matii~
to take care of yourself, but still this zone is one of depressed uu·:u:~"'
opportunities, low self-esteem and relational problems. For Jvomen onfy: You may find this zone to be difficult, particularly if
rely on success in the art of relationship for much of your self-esteem
something that proceeds poorly in this locale. Venus symbolizes
attitude towards your own femininity, your attractiveness (not only nb.u!
cal), and your ability to relate, cooperate and experience happiness.
that planet is combined with Saturn, these concerns are liable to meet ·
much frustration and delay, with the result that you may be tempted
seek a 'sugar daddy' or to drive yourself mercilessly in order to
material success. Though you may be admired and envied, it doesn't
in, and only through deep introspection and honesty can you feel connto;
able with yourself here. For men onfy: This infl.uenGe will most likely manifest in the women VENUS: IS TliERE MORE TO LIFE THAN HAPPINESS? deal with, but it is far too easy for you to see your own problems in their
personalities. You may be drawn to a marriage of convenience, or perhaps
just give up on developing a relationship altogether, preferring the company
of other men and relating to· women only as sexual needs and emotional
or domestic inabilities require. However, in choosing and using women in
this way, you will tend to settle on those who bring out your deepest fe-ars
and inadequacies. Yet you are liable to take defeats in relationship easily,
if only because they confirm your fears about your undesirability. By giving
in to such fears, you run the risk of social isolation and alienation, possibly substituting insensate ambition or materialistic greed for personal
satisfaction. VENUS W ITH URANUS Fl01ver P01ver
In this zone, you seem to experience a continual conflict between your
need for independence, the pursuit of your outspoken idealistic and social
objectives, and your need for relationship, stability, harmony, happiness
and peace. The part of your life that centres around t:elationships is apt
to be unsettled, often as an expression of an ambivalent motivation; while
you greatly d~sire companionship and .a ttachment, you want at the same
time to preserve your career and experience full social independence. Your
social life in general moves along very quickly here; it is coloutful and
scintillating, with contrast; excitement and unconventionality. Your friends
tend to be of a Bohemian persuasion, and 'hippie' types, as the famous,
creative and unconventional come and go in your life .as if characters in a
stage play. You express yom rebelliousness and nonconformity in your
strange diet, quirky mannerisms, garish but stylish dress, choice of sometimes bizarre companions, and in your rejection of sexual and gender
stereotypes. Other people may see you as an interesting and offbeat person,
usually finding themselves either strongly attracted to you or repulsed
by you and the ideas you espouse. Your lifestyle becomes avant-garde,
anti-puritanical, eccentric and perhaps artistic. With your exciting and
unusual friends, you speak of the need for Utopian social reform of one
kind or. another, bas<ed on a philosophy that may also be expressed through
taking up life in a communitarian subculture.
Personal relationships tend to be particularly unconventional and • YOUR PLANETS AND THEIR LI·NES tumultuous here, as well as all too brief. Your erotic urges are strong,
they are ofte,n non-monogamous and polymorphous, as you may
unconventional mod!:!s of expressing your sexuality. By such means
are able to see yourself as the mirror of others' unfulfilled ideals,
this is really so or not. Whirlwind, once-in-a-lifetime storybook roina.Jnctl
enrapture you one after another, in rapid succession, and though
inc0nstanqr might be mainly the res,u lt of your unwillingness to c0ram
tro anything over a lopg term, you may feel it is caused by the u .....ru....... .~.....
and emotional coolness of others. Your ideals are projected on to
beloved, and thus you rebel when he or she demands recognition of
or her personality, apart from your demands and imaginings. VENUS WITH NEPTUNE The Impossible Dream
Dreaminess, romanticism and escapism mark your life and your J.<;;<;;~~J:!,'?
thts area; yolilr 1m.pulses t0 relationship and your potential for cot1ve:ntt~~
happiness and pleasure are defined by your illusions, your romantic ~-'"'......
of view and your deeply subjective orientation. You indulge in a po1Lgmat
nostalgia for what you remember as the. beauty, sensitivity and treea<)t
of childhood, and you may elevate the idea of achieving the impos
dream to the leveL of an unachievalDle obsession. You admire -and see:K<i.<!>l
glamour here, driven by intense feelings and a wistful sentimentality..
you are not absorbed in the goings-on of the celebrities who populate
supermarket tabloids, you could easily be living out the same sort
scandalous soap-opera intrigues in you.r own life. The subjective ob:sc1;1xc
the objective, mearung that your beliefs, illusions and imperfections
projected on the screen of reality and, while wishes may have a way
coming true, the wishes are usually for some sort of self-immolation
love sacrifice.
You tend to choose your relationships badly, perhaps leading to .......... .,.,.,~
with a series of disinterested, lax, weak or unreliable people who errcl:
disappointing or betraying. Or perhaps you will find yourself oec:om:U'J
involved with people whom you feel you can reform, only to wake up
the fact ·eventually that you chose them for their faults and not
virtues. The more troubled or mysterious the person, the more you
be. fascinated, so be particularly guarded against associating with anJ~€)1;
170 VENUS: IS THERE MORE TO LIFE '£HAN HAPPINESS? with social, drjnking or drug problems. The same type of pre>blem may.
also plague you, as the disappointing and unpleasant reality· of life is too
easily mitigated by escapism. Love affairs tend to be sordid, as you seem
to be attracted to the cocktoaches beneath the glitter and the unpleasant
reality beneath the glamour. Conflicts in loyalties ~ecotne impossibly complex, and your social life is often driven by gossip and intrigue. Your own
suffering defines the depth of love you are capable of unselfishly giving.
Artistic sensibilities and talents develop here, as you find you are able
to recognize nuan€es in form, colour and beaut)l - to all of which you
respond intensely. Your idealistic yearning for merging your identity with
an imagined external reality (or person) can best take artistic, poetic or
musical form here as an expression of your demands that life conform to
an ideal of beauty and hattnony. These demands raise others' consciousness
to potentials higher than their own liinited, earthbound lack of vision. VENUS WITH PLUTO Partnership with a Passion
In this zone, the normally pleasant, .happy and joyful life areas of love .a nd
relationship are gateways to discovering the mysteries of mortality, power
and sex, whether this is what you want them to be or not. Sexual neecls
tend to be intense and intrusive, always seeming to upset the equanimity
of otherwise healthy relationships, and your erqtic feelings may attract yG>u
to extreme or exotic forms of satisfaction. Your insatiable needs can lead
to passionate relationships that swirl your feelings around in a 'punk rock'
social life, perhaps leaving you time for little else. you have the desire to
r;:nerge entirely whh your loved one; but ambivalent feelings of love/hate, .
jealousy and sexual control make sure that any relationship is a scene of
constant upheaval driven by subconscious impulses you may be unaware
of. Every time you let someone get close to you, it opens up the cellar
rooms of the repressed past, at which point the monsters of possessiveness,
envy, jealousy, power and your potential to betray your own love must be
dealt with. The themes of love and destruction intertwine as you seek the
ideal mate with an almost tragic intensity, finding moderation in anything
cllfficult. There is a positive side to all this, however, as you can enjoy the
deepest levels of love in the merging of your identity with another, but
only if you are ruthlessly honest with yourself and your beloved, and allow YOUR PLANETS AND THEIR LINES room for periodic changes and rearrangements in your relationship.
less happy aspects of your love life in this zone can be alienation, ·
ment in prostitution, or a celibacy resulting from disillusionment.
The themes of intensity, rebirth and betrayal can also move into
financial arena, so that extraordinary gains or losses whipsaw your
account from one extreme to another. Partnerships involving money
be subject to exactly the same problems as romantic.liaisons, making thrgf!
difficult to manage. Again, honesty and directness are the only ways
prevent catastrophe. Your personal values also change, and they
emerge as more mature, tested and tempered. You both seek and fear ·
experiences in your life, as frequent explosions keep most of your sO'c:J:~
relationships honest and non-illusory. Your desire for 'sooner,
faster, more' in the end marries you to passion, as you learn some
facts about life (and death) which shatter your earlier naivety. 12 Mars: Mary Poppins,
Watch Out! Obviously, certain types of people will find an environment heated up by
Mars more difficult than others do; those who have adapted well to the
ties that bind society and family together, and who also value cooperation,
harmony and peace, will find this zone very perplexingt and problematic.
Also, people for whom sexual thoughts must be repressed because the
subject is considered sinful or is otherwise psychologically stressful, will
be disturbed to find it irrepressible, demancling and omnipresent. More
adventuresome, independent, pioneering and athletic types, at home with
their boclies and the biological functions that go with them, might find
this zone invigorating, eneigizing and one in which new approaches and
possibilities are discovered. For women onfy: You'll find tlus zone one of special pnoblems for you.
Women are not usually socialized to be comfortable with the aggressive,
assertive power they can command, and thus often tend instead to attach
themselves to men whose overt masculinity is usually in direct proportion
to the suppressi0n of their own. Any such tendency as this will be exaggerated in this locale, especially during the initial stages of the development
of Mars consciousness. l{opefully you will learn to take control of your
own masculine energy and will thus be able to feel more at home with anger,
sex, asserti0n and self-expression. You may }).ave to undertake integration of
your masculinity into your psyche in a di.t:~cted and conscious way, perhaps
through assertiveness training, martial arts or vigorous physical activity.
The result of such integration will be a wider, more mature personality,
increased personal power and th~ valuable gift of personal autonomy.
For men onfy: Obviously you are more apt to find this zone congenial than
tnost women would, especially if you are comfortable with your masculinity
and sexuality. A11y sporting or engineering abilities you have will be
173 YOUR PLANETS AND THEIR LINES accented, and if you are boastful of your scars, you will probably -:~rrn,,
quite a few more to brag about during your stay hete. You may
yourself hanging out in an exclusively male: society - perhaps sornetrul!,l
like the military, in which female influence is m.inimal - and you are
to enjoy the kind of camaraderie to be found in a locker room or at
construction site. The danger you must deal with here is that you
become prone to objectification - using and showing disrespect for
that is feminine. As yo1-1 reject it more and more in favour of the
side of yourself and of everything else, you will come to feel that you
alone among enemies. and competitors in a crud and
world; burn-out and paranoia are the extreme manifestations of too .......,
masculine energy. PSYCHOLOGICAL INTERPRETATION OF MARS It's Hard Work Being Invincible
Mars' nature assures that the dominant theme in this, your 'energy
is action .and the outward projection of stremgth, often in the s
some symbolically masculine cause or ideal. Mars' power is intense, so
should be respected and used with caution. Such raw, masculine energy
regulated and discouraged by modern society (despite the fact that it
idealized in Westerns and crime movies), so its expression often elicitS'l
hostile reaction. You, on the other hand, tend to think it appropriate
a world you see as peopled with dragons and princesses in need of res
and where your ego pushes you into the thick of every battle.
Your physical intelligence develops to a high degree here, and
through erotic stimulation or e>ther chaJ.lenge, in a sense you
man' (no matter what your sex), learning to take control of your own ·
and to be responsible for your own destiny - a battle of selfhood w.ttt~
will have to be fought over and over. The idea that all nature is
by fire, sex or war is in keeping with Mars, so you burn many bridges
in this locale and leave childhood and dependency behind for ever. lVla.ste!
ing the environment and defending oneself against harm are the two
obvious functions of Mars, inclining you to force yourself on to nrr~l1'1"
to keep yourself perpetually active and to destroy anything you ......u .u"
master.
Competition is a favoured mode of relating to others in this locale,
HJ\.. Sol ..l" 174 MARS: MARY ,. Plutão -O,PPINS, WAT<CH OUTI anyone you cannot dominate or master directly you will attempt to overcome covertly. While you are c@ntinu®usly testing yomrsetf, at the same
time you are constantly attempting to bridle your passions, and you make
deci,sions 'a nd take actions that commit you to the struggle for survival. It
may be very difficult to feel close to men especially. Since all are seen as
potential competitors, courageous, passionate and impulsive actions keep
you on constant guard, never able to relax. Every life activity seems directed
by domination and competition, so that virility, some cruelty and even
violence are expressed, as the exercise of power invigorates you, spurring
you on to hunt for action and adventure. You feel at home with pain and
danger, both of which are frequent experiences. STAGES AND MYTH OF MARS The Defensive Suroivalist
Mars~ myth, of course, identifies it as the god of war, and while w-av is an unpleasant human reality, it is in part a process of natural sele.:tion among
subgroups of the species, assuring a strong genetic stock. Mars purges and
bums away what is no l0nger needed, just as predators thin herds of deer.
On a personal level, in a Martian area you learn to fend for yourself,
perhaps under actual military conditions or in response to imagined dangers.
The result is a spat'e, impetuous, athletic, trimmed-down personality, unburdened of its more burden.some features and stimulated to healing and
growth by the abrupt removal of some of life's clutter on psychological
and material planes.
The early stages of Mars awareness are usually the most difficult, as
people who have ignored or repressed their capacities for sexuality, competition or aggressiveness may find themselves dealing with these aspects of
personality in quarrelsome, violent, sexually aggressive, irritating people
with whom involvement. seems inescapable. A lack of consciousness of
Mars' potentials in this zone can lead to injury through either accident or
attack. In later stages of awareness you may act out some of the least
desirable of Martian attributes, as you tend to be boisterous, crude, leering,
annoying and noisy. You act the obnoxi0us adolescent, cocky and pugnacious, perhaps to the point of losing friends and alienating almost everyone you know. Mote mature acceptance of your own Martian power,
however, brings a cool recognition of the necessity to do constant battle
175 YOUR PLANETS AND THEIR LINES with injustke, and, like a surge0n, 't0 learn how to do good hy, selec~twv;
destruction. The need to master the environment through taming
and the other chaotic forces of nature makes a useful place for Mars,
the really hard-edged Mars type often fits best into pioneering situa.t10n
at the edge of a-frontier, .far from the .diplomatic give and take of Ic:::l<:~~u~tl!l
ship in a complex society. Mars' power is such that society spends a
deal of energy in regulating it, so the closer you are to the urban bOillrQ·eo1
reality in which most people live, the less appropriate is the over-c:xiJI.c:::>::.li.:Jl
of its energy. THE PRACTICAL SIDE OF MARS Casey Jones, Paul Bunyan, john Henry
On m ore practical levels, temper, violence, passion, sex and other u1u•1v~o\..~
urges are in this zone mor.e powerful,,rp.uch the opposite of peace, 1.1~.uuv~·~;:
ot the desire for security. You tend to be opportUnistic, so that rel:att~;>.t
ships, even marriage, tend to be contentious rather than cooperative.
Mars is the planet of'machismo', you develop a tendency to daring,
adventuresomeness and risk-taking, though this is often accompaniecj:
a tendency towards pride and a sensitivity to insult. An eternal ci:'isc<mt,el
seems to drive you to explore, to test and to dominate every aspect of
world around you with zest and ene:t:gy. Though you can be p
spontaneous, limpulsiv.e and excitabl~, a coarser element to Mars can ,
bring out traits such as intolerance, crudeness and lustfulness.
Professions in which Mars excels are obvious: athletics, military, uv1.1u
work, meat-packing and butchery, heavy industry, construction, m~~talwo•rJ
use of tools, engineering, and jobs traditionally associated with men of these are good area·s in which to express Mars' creative energy
physicality. Such active occupations tend to vent the impetuous and u........ ~i
energy of this zone into healthy channels. Formalized competition can
helpful in doing the same if you do :not work in a_Martian occupation,
athletes can expect not only to excel here, but perhaps can even set life:titt:
records. On the intellectual side, your mind becomes more_
scientific and materialistic.
The danger of Mars to personal well-being comes from two
sources: injury and burn-out, both of which are the result of too m"EtO
energy spent without rest, of a lack of m oderation and a need to· go 176 MARS: MARY POPPINS, WATCH OUTI alone that rejects s0cial coopetation. Physical activity teqds to relieve the
tensions you experience here, and can help you in guiding the energy of
Mars in a useful way. MARS ON ASCENDANT Your Best Friends Won't Tell You
In this locale, Mars manifests most obviously in the hard edge it adds . to
your personality and the tendency of your relationships to move from the
equality of partnership as they become more structured and hierarchical.
Here you are apt to e4_counter quite a few proh>lems in dealing with people,
as your aggresshren~ss and belligerence, conseiously acknowledged or not,
surface repeatedly in social contexts. You project a macho image, as you
seek to compete with almost everyone you encounter, expressing yourself
in a more physital way. While often acting rashly, you can at times show
real courage in taking ·on situations ·that others w:on't touch. On the other
hand, undertaking risky endeavours means that while you will have some
spectacular successes, these will be matched by a high rate of failure. In
either case you may find it difficult to take on these tasks in concert with
others.
You often carry around a chip on your shoulder, and woe betide anyone
who volunteers to knock it off. When you turn that aggressive energy in
a positive direction, you can push yourself to th.e limit, especially in athleti<::
competition, where you demonstrate control and mastery of your physical
body. Your appetite for adventure and risk can earn you more than your
share of the bumps of life, but also more than your share of rewards.
Through daring, bra:v:e:ry an.d pushing the limits of pain .and endurance,
you attract attention. Because of an element of self-dislike that lurks within
the intense, unrelenting energy with which you drive yourself, you are able
to get wholly involved in what you do, and .others who dare to tread the
same path yol!l cl1oos€l usually have to be satis·fied with matehing their pa:Ge
to the footsteps you have laid down before them. You seek out and enjoy
engaging harsh, demanding and ~hallenging situations, and as soon as one
obstacle is overcome you are on. -to tackle the next.
Life is rarely dull under this llile, and yom "relationships in particl!lla~; are
the focus of much change, often marking your psyche through painful
learning experiences. Closer exaniination of your own behaviour, especially 177 YOUR PLANETS AND THEIR LINES with the guidance of a close friend (1£ such can be found under a _._......"''
line), will lead you to see how you invite cronfmntations by your .v ...
a.ttitude, even when you are sure that others are the ones being belllg1ere.n
and intractable. Health problems arising from over-exertion, stress
accidents can cause a lot of problems here, but if you can maste;. "......,~
and the other challenges that present themselves, you can begin to u.u,..v ..,
stand and accept the confrontive, sexual, assertive and angry cotnponen4i:
of your personality once and for all.
J ...... ...,...... MARS ON MIDHEA VEN Room at the Top
A powerful drive for suc~ess and social accomplishment urges
under this Mars line, a drive that should show itself particularly t. Saturno !OUJr!£
athletics and other occupations usually associated with Mars. Any -·"·"'"!-'U
line, antagonistic environment spurs you on to new heights of aU<UUJU'-J.l~
though (as you'd expect) you will not get where you are headed wt1no;u:
encountering the real danger of accidents and injury, or occasionally c.,.,,.""'~'
ing the consequences of rash, inconsiderate action and temper
As you pursue individual success and break new ground in the vu<.<>.a.u•
world, you may also experience changes in your own inner world, as,
example, you may discover· or e~perience your true sexual orientation
this place. In general, your image of yourself is somewhat more ...a ....u o..
here than elsewhere, and you'll be attracted to social atmospheres that
more coarse, masculine and unrefined than is usual for you, unless
have a strong Mars emphasis in your personal natal chart. Breaking
rules and rebelling against authority seem second nature for you, but
must understand that the most important lesson of this locale's ex~>ert
is that you should learn to establish how you can make personal prog~e;s.E
through being self-reliant, autonomous and independent of social in
actions. Your greatest success comes through initiative, courage and
taking, rather than through taking orders, or otherwise trying to fit
Athletes may find themselves stronger and better able to compete .,,.,J...
setting records as they demonstrate new skills and power acquired uuvu:~::.,
rigorous training.
You tend to overestimate yourself and your abilities, but the oc<:astoJ;l~
failure from doing this doesn't dampen your zeal and enthusiasm
u aJ, .... MARS: MARY POP-PINS, WATCH OtJTI the hard work and competition you thrive on. These ~failures can be the
consequence of conflicts with audioriti:es that lead t'O violent confrontations; iNjuries, and ac;:cidents, aU of which can be avoided if you can
add a dash of discipline to control your abundant energy. Overcoming
antagonisms that block you and meeting the competition head-on leads
you to a deeper se·nse of Netuno ~ursel'f and your abilities, as you leartl your true
power to exist and prosper in a hostile environment that demands taming.
Your social image is very much of the order of the quiet directness of a
Humphrey Bogart, and at times you may in fact feel that your life script
is playing itself out like one ef his movies. Sex, childbirth and marital issues
require a great deal of attention here, with the latter two needing discipline,
attention and restraint in order to prosper. Sex alone among these will
tend to go well without much urging, and you may even become known
socially in some way for your sexuality, perhaps through others seeing you
as something of a Casanova. MARS ON DESCENDANT It's All Their Fault
In this locale, yolJr relations with other people engage your attention, as
they tend to be intense, competitive and confrontational. The more negative
aspe·cts of Mars are apt to become evident here, as you tend to projeGt your
own violence and.antipathy outwards, especially if there is any self-dislike in
your make-up. You may see yourself as innocent and loving, and wonder
why so many around you are so belligerent. As you become more acclimatized to the energy of Mats, you may begin to-accept that you are pmbably
denying certain aspects of your own sexual or aggressive· identity and
unconsciously seeking them out ln others. Relationships go so poorly here
that you may be forced to rely on yourself, but it's not easy, as competitors
Instinctively go for your weak spots and take a lack of assertiveness on
your part as an invitation to aggression.
For obvious reasons, women particularly will ha.ve problems in this area,
and ·marriage is not apt to provide much assuranc,:e ®f safety, since your
celationship with your husband may well be a source of difficulty. This
can be overcome through adopting a vigorous and physical lifestyle that
will help to work off some of your personal tension, as you need to make
sure your energies are balanced before you ~ to understand, much less YOUR PLANETS AND THEIR LINES deal with, the situation. In this area, the ever-present dangers from . .....""'
of injury and accident can be accompanied by oppression, coercion
unwelcome sexual advances for all but the most self-assured and
honest. Neither investments nor partnerships seem very good orc•so<~·e
here, and litigation should be avoided at all costs.
Despite all this, your confidence in yourself develops, and if you
get in touch with your anger and sexuality, you may find a powerful
sense of your own ability. The hard sell dominates in an environment.
which the world seems (and perhaps is) hostile, putting constant pre:ss,,;J:t
on you. Any professions that deal with violence, fire, sexuality or tnt,erp~J
sonal conflict may act out some of the pressure; success comes only tnr<)ug
arduous and consistent effort. MARS ON !MUM COEL I Domestic Hostility .. Manipulative or competitive feelings towards your family, coupled
events and circumstances that change your attitude towards your rO(i5:t:
origins or home situation, could occupy your attention with this placerm:r
of Mars. The result of the red planet's intrusion into your life may
new attitude and a renewed relationship with your family and your
Marriage and long-standing family ties are often tested here, and wnemc
this comes from external problems or avoidable personality conflicts,
will eventually realize that the results are a new and more pertinent
nition of who you are and where you came from.
Family problems politely ignored in other localities will come raging
of the closet here, often resulting in a total change in your rel~auc>nsmlll
with home, family and property. Childbirth and pregnancy are
attended with challenge and trouble·as well. You may .find yourself
extra time to nursing family members back from physical or erntotl.Olill
injury, discover that neighbours ~re harshly obnoxious or even learn
your actual dwelling is unsuitable, perhaps being more subject to Júpiter '-\-J.u•~
0r fire than you had realized. Your home life could also be affected
your home changed in some manner by the military.
The result of all this activity is a reformation of your inner concept
yourself on the deepest levels, as you come to a new definition of 18o MARS: MAR: Áries POPP,,I NS., WATCH OUT! you are and how that relates to your roots through confrontations with
the past. For the first time, perhaps, you assimilate the idea of your o~n
possibly latent belligerent and sexual nature, as your sex image becomes
your self-image in some sense. If you want a clue to what is lacking in
your understanding of yourself, look to what angers you the most. This is
an ideal locale to pioneer a home, carving it out of the wilderness, if
only figuratively, as you seek to subj:ect yourself to harsh and demanding
environments under Mars on the IC. Though centred on such conquest,
force and challenge, you fear that the constant tension it brings can tire
you out. All this awareness of the passionate and intense side of your roots
and family life serves to gromd you in. your capacity to change the rest
of the world as you discover your heritage 'Of power, albeit sometimes in
surprising and importunate ways. MARS WITH JUPITER Might Makes Right • This locale is especially good for athletic accomplishment and physical
culture, as your competitive namre is sharpened, and your strength and
virility expand. This new rush of physical and mental energy is evidenced
by a delight in sports, hard outdoor work, contests, adventure and power.
There is a military theme played out here along with the athletic one, so
you may find yourself commanding or organizing the energy and skills of
others .. Áries our over-confidence and your tendertcy to take risks are the pitfalls
in such pursuits, but despite this, military success or a symbolic equivalent
comes for some in this area.
You may imprudently grasp for power, taking 'arms against a sea of
ttoubles'; only to find that most of them were created by your own dogma- .
tism and the moral myopia often characteristic of this location. Always in
a hurry (certainly a source of some imprudence), you expand and evolve
all masculine and militant life concerns within your reach, forging ahead
with your plans so hastily at times that you have to learn from a great deal
of trial and even more error. A satirical and biting wit, a lack of moderation
in your pursuit of sensory pleasure, strong sexual needs and monetary
extravagance define you in -this place as a colourful personality who seems
to have money to burn, as well as the ability to reptenish the large sums 181 . liO·U.R PL,ANETS AND' THEIR LYNES thoughtlessly spent- others' as well as your own. It seems_impossible
save but easy to borrow, and people instinctively believe in your o
potent ability to create wealth and energy.
A kind of James Bond, Hemingwayesque he-man image manifests
...
in one way or another (no matter wh.~t yol:lJ sex) - a gallantry .and co(;:>.Llil'es
in the face of danger, along with a lovable coarseness, and a not-s
opportunism springing from an expedient set of morals. Your pel:smla.lil
and life concerns may turn towards foreign and exotic places or saran--~
adventures as your courage increases, along-with an imperialis·tic, aU1thC•il.t11'
respecting, militant and vigorous charisma. Your greatest dilemma. co:me
ftom trying to decide what values and s0cial tealities deserve y01.u: enc:~r~e:1ll;
allegiance, as morally you tend to see even complex matters in \..U.JJL"'-l»,
black-and-white terms. You even may become something of a
imposing your controversial ideas of the universe on the infidels,
imperialistic, militant, unquestioning narrow-mindedness. At worst,
may evince as a zealous self-righteousness masked under religious
crisy or self-serving sophistry. Daring, adventuresome and
you make or lose fortunes with equanimity and a thirst for life
adventure. MARS WITH SA TURN Basic Training
This is not for most a desirable place to live, as harsh conditions, a ter1cte:n~
to reject what is supportive and nurturing, and a blockage of ma.sctllli)
energy that leaves you open to victimization and violence all unite to .........
survival here a day-to-day problem. Physical needs never s.e em to gyt lia~,CJ
care of, and your attempts to pursue a particular goal with intense dedica ·
and concentration are often unproductive, fmstrating and barren.
problems of your own ·or in someone close to you may require con ....u....
self-sacrifice. Unconscious memory or fear of vict:.imization can tie yol.ll:
dependent persons in such situations and thus restrict you in a way
seems to make it possible for· you tq advance.
Conditions in general are more difficult for you here than in most ~-~~.......~
and the fac;t that your 'basic training' in survival at this locality seerns
go on forever may wear you down in time. Violence, cruelty or sadism
the worst manifestations of this combination, but more often your
182 MARS: MAR: Áries POPPINS, WATCH OUT! plaint is likely to be that your days are endlessly dreary and depressing.
Crowds, high places and over-exertion can pose physical threats, and injuries that come from any of these sources may lead to chronic problems.
Yet, for all these difficulties, this can be an area in which you learn that,
through tenacity and bru;re force, insurmountable obstacles can be overcome. It is a good place for those who engage in the roughest sort of
livelihood - miners, lab!8)'urers and steelw:o11kers, for example. Anything
feminine, gentle, artistic or sympathetic is notably absent from this locale,
and sexual opportunities are strangely abuncdant, b"~Jt 0ni. Netuno so long as sex
remains anonymous and without feeling. Having come through the ehallen.ges that mark a Mars-Satur.n attea, y0u should emerge with the faith that
you can survive any conditions - and so you can. For women on!J: You will probably find this area quite unpleasant as you
are apt to attract a rathet brutal, coarse and unsympathetic mate or begin
to act such a role yourself, especially through an opinionated attitude, a
brittle fas;ade, and even cowardice. Withholding of sex can become a means
of asserting your power over those attracted to you, and relationships often
evolve into a contest of wills. Still, you feel pride in overcoming the
obstacles life throws in your path, triumphing over oppression and coercion
(often by just waiting it out), and in seeing that males need you. Your
father may hide somewhere at the root of these psychological problems,
so you may be able to handle this zone better if you can come to terms
with your relationship with him. For men on!J: You will find this area particularly troublesome. Though you
may become sensitive and vulnerable around issues of your maleness, pride,
autonomy and sexual self-image,_these are often challenged by overwhelm~
ing forces. The result is either a hangdog defeatism or, just as often, a
vengeful bitterness that takes out your suppressed rage 0n those weaker
than yourself. Macho posturing is hard to avoid, and a blind obedience to
authority leads you to expect the same from those beneath you in station,
just as would be the case if you were in the military. Love and sexual_
performance are ateas.of acute Sensitivity for you heve, but you may attempt
to disguise this by overcompensating to the point of exhaustion. You have
the oppo:rturiity to unders·tand 1ssues ·<Df will, power over others, social
control and your own male image, but it is hard for you to disentangle
yourself from your own problems l0ng enough tG> learn. YOUR PLAN ETS AND THEIR LINES MARS WITH URANUS Don't Tread on Me
In this location, you may undertake the definition, articulation or implementation of your independence, demanding freedom from coercion and confinement. You cannot be made to do anything that you do not wish
to do, but your rebellious and devil-may-care attitude can have peJruous:
consequences, though this probably won't discourage you in the least. Áries QU
delight in the role of the daredevil and are something of a loner,
masculinity, independence and power eithe.r with an extremely individualistic lifestyle or with open rebellion against societal norms. You will u"'''"'~~''l-'
what you see as your rights to the end, expressing little warmth or
in the p.rocess, all of which will leave you operating well outside soc:1aJt:
support groups. Your sexual needs are apt to be intense and may ........"""
tmconventional forms since you seem to have no respectfor others' orc>tD._.
erty or prerogatives, nor for others' concepts of modesty or propriety.
Inventiveness is accented in this place, so engineers, surgeons, .uuJ.u......~.~
scienti~ts and tli0se working in technological areas may find their cr.eativeness enhanced. Though you live for day-to-day thrills in the ad'v-erltu.Jre-;
some climate you find here, you face considerable danger of injury,
accidents in the use of guns Gr machinery, or in driving or transp
are probable. Shipwreck, aircraft failures, fires, lightning strikes and
such sudden, violent disasters are more likely here than in other locales,
though they will by no means affect everyone. Despite the danger
constant exposure to unforeseen upheaval, you become daring, ins
and disdainful of perils, purposely seeking out areas where angels fear
tread - and surviving despite the long odds. Athletes, mercenary or one>-:
fessional soldiers, explorers, stuntpersons and heroes may find this cl1rna1:e:
to their liking, but few others will prove hardy enough to relish the naJ~rO''N
escapes, restlessness, ir.dtability, insomnia, frequent broken bones and COJ!l'-1
tusions, and functional health problems that seem to be the daily fare here.
Partnerships and human relationships in general tend towards
and unpredictability as well, and an extremely masculine climate r.rp•u-:~1
bringing you little sympathy, understanding or cooperation in the midst
such troubles. Yet for those who need constant adrenalin to add c-:~'UAiit'
to life, and who ef1joy testing and combative situations, this is a
and exciting locality. MARS: MARY l'OPPINS, WATCH OUT! MARS WITH NEPTUNE Sex, Drugs . . . and People W'i.Jo Like Them
A positive, down-to-earth attitude towards masculinity and sex are critical
here, for without them this zone can be a real crazy quilt of possibilities
and impossibilities. Ideally, like a hippie, you can manage to live out a more
archaic masculine archetype, one in tune with natw:al and mystical forces
and respondent to intuition and inspiration. You will rarely be cqntent to
let ambitions and career concerns follow along in commonplace ,ruts, as
you must have some mystery, singularity and magic in which to be interested. In some cases you are able to bring such fantasy into reality through
wishing and visualization, as well as to influence people (almost against
their will) through charisma. Your power over others is implicitly sexual,
resulting in an ability to play the role of everyone's sexual fantasy or,
alternatively, to see everyone as yours. In either case, extremes of indulgence or asceticism result. In fact, this is probably the most sexually bizarre
zone possible, and just about everything erotic you've ever heard of may
present weird or unpleasant options to you. You may find yourself
enthralled by people you don't really like, and you can revel in unusual
practices.
On a more mundane level, you may exhibit unusual imagination amd
intuition in business and particularly in arts involving motion and energy
- dance, gymnastics, ballet, etc. - but usually your aspirations are all out
of proportion with reality. The lone exception is likely to be that rare case
in which you actually become a symbol for beauty and sex, as TV stars,
media athletes and models occasionally succeed spectacularly here. For
those uncomfortable with the masculine archetype (which includes most
members of modern society), this location can be fantastically unpleasant:
illnesses (including venereal ones), unprovoked attacks from strangers,
allergies, victimization by society or its lower elements, problems with
parasites (the two- or six-legged varieties), drug habituation, sexual problems, paranoia and neurosis are some of the less glamorous aspects of this
zone. These present you with the evidence for ,what seel]ls an indefinably
hostile environment, in which the forces that attack you are invisible, covert
or unconscious, often stemming from within. At best, this area may see
you d~fending the underdog through non-violent means and Gandhian
ingenuity, but for the most part you can't count on your allies. Humiliation, • YOUR PLANET S AND THEIR LINES defeat and victimization are too often the result of your effort to tmlDiemen
your ideals. MARS W I TH PLUTO Duelling in the Dark
Personal power - its use, abuse, and the effects it has in relationships
is a major concern in this part of the world, where you may enco1u.n1te:
extreme situations involving domination and submission that could
you on either end. Anything to do with Mars - sexuality, energy, athletle~
force, self-projection, mastery of the environment - cannot be acc:mn
plished easily, but involves the deepest and most sensitive areas of ·u"'n
personality in a battle for supremacy over powers which at times
almost superhuman in nature. Everything becomes a contest, and a coJnP'lJ.
sive concern with the masculine image and glorification of the
ideal reflects a subtle suppression of the sexual nature and its sub~;eom~t
transmutation irtto a dangerously inflated quest for power. This
antisocial location, one in which major life changes occur and new d1tc~e
tions are taken, usually as the result of the collapse of previously reuea -oJ
structures and relationships. Moral values are seen as superfluous (by
or, often, those around you with whom you have to deal), so the IJV;).;)!Ull~_u,
of involvement with criminality is a real one, with you as either the v1·c:Utl
or the perpetrator. Vengeance, passion or the e~tablishment of power
another are the driving forces behind this.
Sexuality, if not suppressed altogether, may take some pretty bizarn
forms at this place, so passion, when allowed to surface, can b e ·extJloslvl
and cathartic. D ramatic altetation in life's directions often acc:ornpan1e
the sexual discoveries or first experiences you find in this area. -..,.,w.~
and reproductive concerns are fraught with difficulty, and you focus
cern on excretory functions, decomposition and similar matters as
of a death-and-rebirth theme.
In this intense, competitive climate, violence may seem to be the
to every problem, as you become somewhat m ore coarse, uncouth,
and indomitable, something which stlits you for martial arts or
demanding situations in which rough-and-ready competitiveness is
advantage. The military and intensely demanding athletics are career <LLI,l;~
which can focus this otherwise unmanageable energy productively. Áries r86 MARS: MARY PO PPINS, WATCH OUTI are a 'man among men' ~even if you're a woman), and obsession with
power and proving yourself assures you of an arduous time in this gloomy,
testing and contentious zone. As a result, you learn to stand on your own
and make great strides towards independence and autonomy. 13
Jupiter: Does More
Really Mean Better? People who value society and its rewards and who aspire to the roles
valued by society will be content in a location where Jupiter is prominent.
Jupiter zones are less favourable for strong individualists, as well as .
truly creative and independent - those who enjoy the challenge of · ·
themselves against authority and the odds, and who espouse their ,....,,,.,.
morality and values. If you have a taste for caviare and your eyes light
when a limousine passes by, this is probably the place for you. You'll
it if you feel you are going somewhere in society and if you have
vision and commitment to culture, religion, law, education or the other
professions. It could be unfulfilling, however, if you are not typical of
class or family background, consider yourself self-made, or find the
one sees in TV sitcoms dreadfully boring. For 1vomen onfy: In this zone, you may aspire to political, personal and soc:1a1
power, though you will have a temptation to project these opportunities
on to Netuno ~ur mate or partners, providing opportunities for them to ......,...,
socially because you feel inadequate to pursue these on your own .........vUJ•n• •
In other words, beware of playing the role of the woman behind the matl,•
unless you are willing to accept it, for your own powers here are extrac>rfi!J~~~
nary and can lead to very substantial accomplishment in the highest '""'"~''"
of society: religion, academia, the arts, sports and politics.
For men on!J: You will probably react to this zone's opportunities for social
advancement and improvement of status by making the most of me:Ifit
furthering your education and technical skills and raising your ~xpecta ....v •..•"''
of yourself a notch or two. The big problem you are likely to eXf)etJ.enc~e
here is overconfidence, perhaps brought on by a life of intolerant excess.es.
You tend to slide by without doing your homework thoroughly,
too much on connections and the power of credentials, and you gratvlta:te
188 JUPITER: DOES MORE REALLY MEAN BETTER? towards situations in which you can get by on appearances and favouritism.
These dangers aside, this can be a very beneficial zone where success
comes to you in sport, profession, career and social attainments, and where
you feel good about yourself and what you can do. PSYCHOLOGICAL INTERPRETATION OF JUPITER The Taming Power of the Great
Jupiter's power assures that the central theme of this area is growth through
expansion or accretion, so that evolution, deeper participation in experience
and cultural outrea~ Saturno are likely through bt0adening contact with the world
and through asseciating with a better class of people while you reside here.
You feel that you are protected by forces or deities favourable to you, and
your belief in this favouritism gives you an optimistic outlook that encoll;fages you to dare the impossible, often exceeding the normal limits of your
abilities as you ascend personally and socially. This is where 'wishing makes
it so', as hope and faith expand; you come to feel deserving of special
treatment by the cosmos which, because you expect it, occurs, particulatly
in the form of extraordinary good luck and social or financial advancement,
not to mention sponsorship and protection by authorities. Bourgeois values
and positive self-evaluation become a notable feature of your character
here, as you fed yourself distinguished from the mass of humanity. On
the negative side, you can become somewhat righteous, self-satisfied, complacent or self-important in a way that puts some people off.
The issue of class is very Jupiterian, and you engage in a competition
of decency, trying to outdo the Joneses (or· maybe the Rockefellers),
impressing the world with your attainments, credentials, diplomas and
possessions. The 'right' people (especially those in the professions, such
as doctors or lawyers) are not to be questioned, and one rises in society
through a series of steps up in a very structured and traditional hierarchy.
A kind of snobbery inherent in this viewpoint is marked' by a contradictory
need to feel unique, coupled with an unquestioning addition to fashion
and public opinion. People in academic, bureaua:atic, administrative and
professional circles ri~e quickly here, though the attendant temptation to
fulfilment of ambition is the abandonment of life's meanings, values and
goals in favour of complacent self-satisfaction. YOUR PLANETS AND THEIR LINES STAGES AND MYTH OF JUPITER The Omnipotent Executive
Jupiter's myth is, of course, connected to the god who was chief administrator (chairman of the board?) of Mount Olympus. Jupiter, or Zeus, was
symbolized as justice, light and intellect, as opposed to the dark earth god,
Saturn, or the god of the underworld, Hades. The problems of this zone
all are echoed in this mythology, as they stem from Jupiter's inherent
superiority, which is demonstrated perse.nally· as an imperialistic privilege
to ride roughshod over the rights of others. Positively, Jupiter's insight
grants foresight, psychic powers, innate leadership, superiority and understanding of the patterns and structures of the universe; negatively, it breeds
blind fundamentalism, intolerance, self-righteousness, superstition, bigotry,
xenophobia and a barren morality that condemns what it does ·not
understand.
In its immature stages, Jupiter consciousness is usually marked by some
of the above-mentioned excesses - since you have found the 'truth' yoursdf, any other reality or person must accept your higher vision or be seen
as an infidel to be forcefully converted. A bragging, boastful bullying coulct
be the result, along with an arrogant, itnperialistic self-centredness, and
feeling that you have the right to dominate anyone else by mere .reason
of who, and how important, you are. This belief is underlaid by an infantile.
expectation that the world is created by your needs· in order to fu.Yffi:L
them. Greater matut:ity, however, finds you dominating through kindness,
becoming ilie philanthropist, the humanitarian or the liberal who magnanimously wishes all others to have the opportunity to attain the heights 0:£'
social acceptance and success that you have attained and who seeks to
offer such opportunities to others freely.
Wisdom, exuberance and humour are the mark-of Jupiter in full flowet
- he11e is the generous, benevolent, divinely inspired philosopher-king, able
to guide the community and humanity as a whole to a realization of its
highest visions. The moral guardians rof the state - judges, academics,
artists, musicians and religious and charitable leaders - embody this most
perfected image of the potentials of this zone and, under its most positive
influence, the fotmulation of ideas and concepts that constitute humanity's
cultural heritage and knowledge of the past. This ability to comprehend JUPITER: DOES MORE REALLY ME~N BETTER? the future can be grasped and understood, putting you ln a powerful s0dal
role as leader and guide. THE PRAGTIC:AL S I DE OF J UPITER Living in the Winner's Circle
The con'Ventional interpretation of good luck centres on the acquisition
of an abundance of material goods or social status withol.!l;t expending
much effort. If this is what you want in life, then this is certainly the right
place to be. Prosperity, success, credibility, h0nour, .academic achievement
and accomplishment are furthered here as your life proceeds almost effortlessly: you move up· sodally, and find that leisure, -:non-productive activity
and bo1;1rgeois conformity are frequent rewards of that status. This zone
accents humour, education, religion, quality, integrity, prizes and mental
and cultural accomplishments, so it shouldn't be too surprising that you
are more optimistic, extroverted and relaxed here. Health improves (except
where you experience problems with over-indulgence or sluggish activity),
as do magical and healing abilities. In addition to this being a place where
you can heal others, any sort of bl}.siness prospers and succeeds here, as
do self-improvement and creativity. Your mind aspires to the lofty, as you
try to create patterns that explain the universe. You cultivate the ability to
see things in general rather than in a particular context, so that you grasp
wholes more easily than details or parts. Music, sports, religion, publishing,
media, broadcasting, advertising, promotion, business, import-export, education, the law, finance, medicine, languages, foreign concerns and travel
are all professions that do very well under this infl.uence.
Gambling and speculation are likely to be very successful here, as this
zone is one in which you can win (and sometimes lose) large sums of ·
money in such acti;vities. You might want to try your luck at s.peculation
here, or perhaps you could invest in companies whose head offices lie
within this zone. But beware of blind optimism or eXltravagance, o.r of
going into debt simply to impress others; these things, along with overgenerosity and snobbishness, are all dangers of this area. Resist comparing
yourself too much with others, as you could become caught up ln a whirl
of totally non-essen1!ial, fashionable activity that contains little enduring
value. Notwithstanding these potential hazards, this is one of the most YOUR PLANETS AND THEIR LINES optimistic, successful and fortunate zones possible, especially for any
of business or material pursuits. JUPITER ON ASCENDANT The Big Frog • This location emphasizes the sometimes superficial acting out for
of a personal role of success, authority and power. Or, you may act as
agent to activate these potentials in others' lives, as does a teacher
mentor who guides .people to self-fulfilment. Your face or personality ~"''""' 1 '
easily become famous here, and people are likely to emulate you or e.vf~n
to follow you as a leader or guru, thanks to your personal .,....J..L-"''"'1H1U'-'"~"'~
and the organizational powers you display. Faith, hope and optimism
outwardly apparent, having effects on those who deal with you, most
whom will feel elevated, ennobled or inspired by your presence. A · ·
example of the power of positive thinking, you can even work miracles
faith in the lives of others. 'Many who have lost direction in li,fe
strongly attracted to you, creating a danger if you take all this a
and preferment too seriously. You could, after all, end up as a pomf)Otl.s:
self-important, big frog in a small pond.
Spiritual evolution can be attained here, since your mind grasps
principles easily. You rapidly emerge as .a person of consequence,
essence of establishment values, a pillar of the community, and are l.L"'-'"'"
by people for the joy and exuberance with which you live your life,
generosity, your kindness and your obvious concern for others' place
the 'ladder of spiritual evolution. As a teacher, spiritual guide or no:unc1a:
resource, you can contribute to the expansion and development of J.J!l\,.U'
viduals and the community, though some extreme individualists and .·"',.._.....
ists may £nd the unthinking adulation a little irritating. This is a very ~w.'~"
zone in which to improve your own health (unless your main problem
caused by an excess of some sort, such as overweight), and here you
feel relief, freedom and much less stress than usual; you may be ........u._.~...,
with some religious group or practice and may seek membership in
organization that enables you to improve your self-image and
confidence. On the negative side, overconfidence can lead to restlessrtesE
conceit, procrastination, pretentiousness or fanaticism, so
needs to be embraced along with the basic good fortune of this zone. jUPlTER: DOES MORE .REt.A:LLY MEAN BETTER? JUPITER ON MIDHEA VEN Meetings with Remarkable People
Socially, this is one of the bes;t places for almost anyone to be: you easily
make contact with rich, powerful and remarkable people, and you are
preferred in work situations. Tending- to rise socially, you also find this
the optimal location for most business and financial matters. Your personal
status increases, and along with it the numb.er of people who admire you.
You could end up in public office, or at least in a position of power and
influence in your own corner of the world. Publicity comes almost too
easily to you, so most of your accomplishments receive a lot of very
heartening attention and support. Your life's outstanding social triumphs
may take place in this location, as you acquire academic degrees, enjoy
business accomplishments and generally gain credentials that make you
more sought after wherever you may go.
Success here comes from playing within the system, so you should find
it most often in situations in which it is the reward for others' admiration
and approval. This zone is also positive for success in music and in the
helpin, Lua professions, especially any branch of medicine or counselling, as
you exhibit a benevolent care for others. You develop personal quality,
but also might tend to be a little ostentatious, flaunting your superiority
and bourgeois acceptability. You feel a need to belong to all the right clubs and
profess+?nal societies or even to organize one yourself, and you may find
yourself receiving a 'citizen of the year' award for such activities. The
problems you experience here are those of success, as you may become
insulated and protected from the realities of life and thus lose touch with
the majority of humanity; such excesses of pride would usually foreshadow
a fall. While this is the best zone for progress in legal, musical, religious,
medical, social, business or publicity concerns, there is always a danger of
selling out and abandoning the principles of self-determination, as life here
is almost too easy. The s.oda.lly immature may have to le~rn some hard
lessons in how society is really managed. YOUR PLANETS AND THEIR LINES JUPITER O N DESCENDANT How to Win Friends and Influence People
In this location, the position ofJupiter manifests particularly through
people and through relationships of all kinds. Personal salvation for unn ..
comes from your teachers, guides, mentors, bosses or other religious,
professional or social authorities. From them you come to understand the
potentials open to you and are furnished with an opportunity for me~r .
fullest realization. Often this happens nearly unwillingly, as you might ·Eee:t.'
the tiniest bit 'kept' in this zone. You may not mind much, though,
yqur surroundings tend to be opulent and the opportunities furnished
your benefactors help you to establish credentials and abilities that
benefit you later on in life. You seem to attract effortlessly the influer1ce.
and assistance of persons in high places, and any time you find V011lrsenj
in difficulty, whether psychological or material, others come to your aid.
Among your biggest 'benefactors may be your spouse, as here you
marry the pillar of the community or find business and social ootlon
opened up through such an important relationship on every level. J..A:;~;u:
concerns, business and dealings with the publie prosper, since this ZQtrte
is ideal for self-improvement and for marketing of your reputation. You
get wide public support and sympathy for every undertaking, but pmrttc
larly for those involved with business, sales, promotion, the law~ eOIUCaLUOa.:
or the counselling professions. While there is danger of over-reliance
mates and partners here, it remains a very positive area in which ror~~es,
beyond your control seem determined that you will have a fairly easy u·me ~
of it. Problems arise mainly when you try to do things for yourself, s0
those who by nature or occupation are already powerfully aut:onorrtou
and independent will find this area boring and confining. Strong individuals
may rebel against the polite, conforming hierarchies that form here.
those who value the usual rewards that society offers will feel aac!qu.atelv
compensated for the subtle loss of self-determinism that usually manifest-s
in this climate. JUPITER: DOE'S MORE REALLY MEAN BETTER? JUPITER ON IMUM COELI Improving Your Fami!J
This zone particularly emphasizes personal evolution and expansion
through commitrnent to ym:tr location, family or ethnic identity. Moreover,
your family and past, and your concept of your background, may 'improve'
- that is, you could elevate your social station through marriage or other
family interactions or increase your own estimation of your family and
background through becoming acquainted with previously unknown
aspects of your past, roots, heritage o:r financial background. Your family
develops a tradition, grows a family tree, and learns pride in its traditions
and heritage. From this growth of an inner sense of tradition and belonging,
you develop a greater sense of inner worth and self-esteem which extends
itself eventually into other life areas, with resultant good fortune and
expansion of career, personal and social options. Your true inner self is
identified by genealogy and a constant centring of self in the past and
tradition; others react to this by gravitating to the security you seem heir
to, and to your sense of purpose.
· This is an especially satisfying place to reside or retire, as your family
life prospers here as nowhere else. You can hope for a secure and respected
old age as you become matriarch or patriarch, pillar of society, and perhaps
a successful, thbugh usually conservative, politician. Real estate you.acquire
increas.es
,, in value here, and you can make things grow, live off the land,
or become a landlord. This is your place on earth, in which the seeds of
your potential development find fertilization, and your good fortune enables
you to care for less fortunate persons. Founding a sort of extended family
is your own way of demonstrating that the order of the universe is reproduced in microcosm in the family. Here in your personal Garden of Eden
you cease to struggle with the outer world as you build inner worth, sharing
your success with those closest to you and pursuing your own religious
and social fulfilment. Even short-term residence here can have these effects,
changing for ever your concept of where you came from and thus where
you are gomg. YOUR PLANE11S .A\ND Tl-l£IR LIN E$ JUPITER WITH SATURN Th.e Middle Path
In this zone, moderationr social attainment and a slow but steady rise to
status and accomplishment result from an environment that forces progress
on us with both the cat1:ot and the stick; the stick may be first and most
obvious, while it may take time (perhaps until after the age of twenty-nine)
for the carrot's presence to be felt. You feel a mecessi:ty and urgency that
operate quite apart from real concerns - a sense that time is quickLy
rnnning out demands the creation 0f seclJI!ity, soqial accomplishment an€!
perseverance towards objectives that seem inadequate as quickly as they
are attained. You feel that you must formulate a material, plililosophica!l
and social basis for your life, and that status and success are major requirements. Your surroundings tend to reinforce an orderly, cohsoientious~
ambitious life, and middle-class values, so that events take on an uninspired>
practiGal, purposeful and balanced nature. Impelled by an orth0dox ancl
honourable sense of dignity, you have to work hard for what you get, and
while opportunities ' offer themselves unexpectedly from time to time, y0u
rately pin all your hopes on them, as jn your mind true success comes
from plodding routine, duty and justified advancement.
You work for every scrap of money or advantage you get here, and
your savings accrue steadily and predictably. Life may tend to tumble a.lon: Vênus in a rut, but it does so only after.you exploit some remarkable opportunities,
often centring on productive meetings with powerful people, leaders, politicians and others who establish direction for society. To your surprise,
these people find you interesting and possessed of resources they feel they
need. Though at times you may work long hours for low pay,, most jobs
likely to interest you are relatively secure, such as civil service or corporate
positions linked to retirement plans intended to make your golden years
secure. Time is your greatest ally here, so while you may tend to greet new
possibilities with anxiety and uncertainty, fearful that, any change may
constitute loss, your perseverance nearly always ensures that you can take
contrdl of new situations, albeit slowly. You don't get away with any Urano .io.d
of backsliding or corner cutting, but neither will you lose what is righdy
yours if you happen to come up short in one situation or anothef. A lov.e
of stability, careful organization, orthodoxy, sobriety and narrow-minded
materialism echo your concern for your place in society. The more JUPITER: DOES MORE R',EALLY M E .A:N BETTER? feach for this boutgeois .success., however, the more you might fear that
you have missed something. J UP I TER WITH URANUS Kites in the Thunderstorm
In this location, growth, evolution and personal success are linked to what
is unorthodox, politically unusual, and in the avant-garde of social or
personal reality. Intellectually, this is perhaps the most exciting possible
climate, and you willlea.un to judge for youtself, fe>rmulate Netuno .om own molial
, and ethical principles, and appear very much the free thinker, liberal or
Bohemian, at least to' other people. Offbeat or foreign types of'knowledge
are the most direct route to great personal fulfilment and will be fruitful
areas for employment and financial gain. Astrology, the occult, telepathy,
as well as highly technical computer science, or anything that is new and
in the intellectual or exp·erimental vanguard attract your interest and can
help you to be successful in advancing your prosperity and personal growth.
Practitioners of unusual therapies may find ,this the·most congenial possible
locale for healing and metaphys-ics. Se.eking to define yourself not by category or type, but as a conceptually unique ehtity, your relationship to the
universe is seen clearly and as totally individual. Your oratorical skills
develop to a high degree, your daring ideas often work (much ·to the
surprise of others), and you become the scoffer among the godly, criticizing
orthodoxy and inventing your own ideas of universal purpose. It is only
in the most abstract, airy and intellectual tealms that you· find it possible
to hold common ground with others, though in the process you often
neglect material comcerns? feelings at1d humane concerns.
Here, wishing can make it so, as it is a very lucky zone in which you
might, for example, be rescued £rom money problems by unexpected good
fortune. You handle more money than is your custom, and perhaps may
defy the odds if you speeulate, either through investments or gambling.
You learn to think on a broad scale, seeing each part in singular relationship
to the whole, an ab>ility which fits yoa :well for aa e>rganizatk>nal role in
business, though you may not easily endure bureaucrats. Self-employment
is attractive and profitable here, and, despite the creative geniHs, artistic
capacity and extraordinary good luck of this zone, its deficiencies lie in
repressed feelings, impracticality, constant change, shifting idealism and
197 YOUR PLANE'TS ANJJ> THEIR L IN ES impossibility of commitment. You may neglect the material side of life as
your personality becomes cerebral and somewhat sterile, like a balloon set
free from earth. Middle age .c an be particularly trying here, as you emphasize
youth and new ideas, but security, sense of purpose, belonging and continuity seem to be elusive. JUPITER WITH NEPTUNE The Musi6 of the Spheres
In this location, growth, evolution and personal success are linked to
concepts of religion, self-sacrifice for ideals and humanity's spiritual and
communitarian· longings. You have a sense that self:sacrifice and sharing
of the pain of living are the most meaningful of your humanity, so you
may seek a career in a religious or helping profession, or, just as often, in
music. Ironically, you can do well by doing good here, since you may be
sustained effortlessly and comfortably by the government or some institution, organization or intellectual establishment in return for your vows
of self-sacrifice: Interpretive musicians can act as 'channels' here, finding
success through materializing collective yearnings. In rare ~ases, you could
become a symbol of some cause or ideal, perhaps sacrificing a lot of your
personal and private life in order to act out other people's longings fo~
spiritual and idealistic perfection. More often, you are involved in a profession like medicine, nursing, counselling or w.elfare adrn.injstration, and
see service to the disinherited as a true vocation. Ideals and social realities
mix well in this locale, and you may find yourself attracted to a community,
spiritual leader or mystical system that reflects this. Monastic life, philosophy, intuition, psychism and humanism reflect a mind universal in scope,
at ease with abstract sociological, historical and spiritual dimensions though reluctant to face life's cruel realities sceptically.
You will probably tend towards the non-violent in your social and
politieal beliefs, as your kind and genenous demeanour attracts pets, humble
people and dependants - though you could just as easily attract parasites.
Meditation, prayer, psychedelic experience and· contemplation are rewarded,
though there is danger of becoming a 'gourmet of consciousness', caught
up in passing fads and hysterical group delusions. Ego must be sacrificed
here for ideals and social position, and success only comes from renunciatiiDn and service. Morality and hnw other people view yours can interfere JUPITER: POES MORE REALLY MEAN BETTER? with your search for higher truth, so material scandals may be caused by
your general disregard of life's 'earthy' side, embroiling you in unending
battles over the trivial, material concerns you tried so hard to avoid, or
leave you gullible, open to fra.ud and deceit. Tliis is a 'hippie' zone, where
a:n archaic idealism, political niivety, and tribal consciousness link 'people
by spiritual rather than material ties. JUPITER WITH PLUTO The Miracle Worker
Life in this location can bring growth, ev:olution and personal success,
especially when you pursue your dream in opposition to establishment
values and link it to concepts of regeneration, rebellion, destruction and
rebirth. God, ethics and world view are created in your own image, and
constant change and renewal are linked to your identity of yourself and
your values. This can be a tremendously successful locale in which complete
life transformations occur, usually for the better. You could find yourself
dealing with large sums of money for people who reside here. You can
become famous overnight and find, win o:r inherit wealth. You seem
protected by guardian angels in times of trial, times which are more frequent
than you might desire.
Still, becoming a law unto yourself and creating your own code of
ethics may transform you into a lonely individualist, outside the pale of
conventional society. As a charismatic leader, priest or politician, you have
the power to stir up feelings in others, and may come to symbolize the idea
of growth through des.truction and renewal. Your presence may occasion
miraculous conversions in others, as you tap mythologies and deep human
passions with your intellect, communicating their archetypal mysteries to
society as a whole. Faith healing could be central to what you do here, as
may any sort of prayer and magic, since your_ideas and presence have a
catalysing effect on others' lives. Though your circumstances are frequendy
violendy upset, you advance your position in such times of chaos and find
yourself able to gain ground when others retire, move away or otherwise
leave openings for you.
The personal magnetism you display here fits you well for a role as
teacher, priest or politician. It also promis.es success in publishing, advertising, mass media and finance, all of which could utilize your instinctive grasp
1 99 YOUR Plutão L ANETS AND THEIR LINES of future popular trends and your ability to embody universal, mythological
conceptualizations in your career and daily work. This influence is so
powerful that events which at times seem to border on actual magic calil
occur in this zone, either to you or, with your conscious recognition of
your power, with you as its centre. Pluto symbolizes the essence of life
itself, so you can see the birth of a totally new self with unthought-of
potentials and opportunities. 200 I4
Saturn: Tough to Know When
You Need Discipline This zone can be particularly difficult for those who tend to value imagination, who want happiness and pleasure alone from life, whose relationships
are important to them, or who continually delegate the power to run their
own lives to others. Saturn is not kind to those with such qualities, or
indeed to anyone who takes a relaxed and open view of life, as this planet
continually demands a deeper awareness by imposing discipline, posing
problems and generally signalling that there is more depth to life than we
might like to think. Conversely, those who demand autonomy and power
over their own lives, and are fascinated with politics, government and
authority, may find this zone almost congenial, though never easy. For tvomen on( Netuno : Your experience here could harken back to, or in some
way attempt to resolve, your relationship with your father, which may be
experienced over and over with males with whom you deal. Society does
not much encourage an awareness of political and personal power in
women, so women in Saturn zones like this one frequently attract powerful
men or partners to them and act out (and thereby hopefully learn) their
own power potential through relationships. Of course, this leaves you open
to a victimization which can occur again and again until you recognize
your own capacity for power. Tradition, poor health, family and otl1er
responsibilities may assume the role of tyrant in yout life, but be assured
that every challenge you experience here points to a need for you to take
control of your own destiny.
For men onfy: A man -in this zone often finds himself in a battl<; with
established authority, a struggle which may hark back in some symbolic
way to his early relationship with his father. Goaded on by insult or
indignity, you may undertake to perfect your own powers to overcome
external coercion. The whole Saturnian problem of the oppressed becoming
20I '
YOUR PLANETS AND THEIR LINES the oppressor is particularly relevant in your case, so you should be warned
that those who seize power from others will not rest easily, knowing tha'tl
there will be others as dedicated as they. PSYCHOLOGICAL INTERP R ETAT ION OF SATURN Nose to the Grindstone • This zone works best for those for whom happiness is not enough. Ne
one has better described the experience of this planet of limitation anel
power than Liz Gree11e, in her epochal book, Saturn, New Look at an Old
Devil: 'Human beings do not earn free will except through self-discovery,
and they do not attempt self-discovery until things have become so pairrfut
that they have no other choice.' Accordingly, though in this location you
will be tested by frustration, from this testing you emerge with knowledge
of both your limitations and your actual powers. Conscious beings utilize
defeat and restriction as propulsion towards self-development and greater
awareness, so that every difficulty you encounter (and there are apt to he
many) should be seen. as prefiguring an emerging part of your personaliuy
that will eventually require exploration and assimilation. Saturn represents
the Shadow, the repressed parts of self, memory and personality which
you must come to terms with in order for wholeness to be accomplisheel.
No one can utilize his or her potential for power in the world without
first assimilating this darker side of the self, since its repression requires
tremendous psychic energy which, when liberated, can be directed towards
creativity.
The spirit is essentially unlimited - anything is imaginable, but materim
reality (and human bodies) are bound by time and strict physical laws tf.l~t
establish the limits of possibility. Residence in this zone makes you aware
of such limitations, in both abstract and specific contexts, and as such
confinements are usually the result of either health or economic strictures~
it is these concerns that most often become problems. Constant concentration upon ijmited material reality in turn gives rise to an attitude o£
essential conservatism- life is seen as a.limited quantity, to be economize€!
and frugally stored up. Weak parts of the self are transformed into streflgths
through this type of lonely toil and dedication, which is motivated by
remembrance of insult or insufficiency. Patience and wisdom come after
long self-searching, and what is gained here is yours and yours alone, an " 202 . SATURN": TOUGH TO KNOW WHEN YOU NEED DISCIPLINE inner fibre that less afflicted personalities will never appreciate. Disciplined
power, constructive material values, realism, resourcefulness, seriousness,
self-denial and control are perfected here, and others are expected to share
or confirm your puritanical, melancholy point of view. STAG ES AND MYT H OF SATURN The God W'i.Jo Took No Chances
Saturn was a dark, archaic earth god, and so symbolizes our attachment
to matter and the earth, something quite out of fashion in our modern,
cerebral, technological, information society. Here, where his influence is
strong, you may seek religious or material roots, and experience a more
direct, primitive level of being. Saturn was also the god of time, so protective of his own power that he ate his children rather than see them grow
to overthrow him, and as such symbolizes the negative aspects of this
zone: power lust, entrenchment of authority (you may have to deal with
frustrating, unresponsive people who hold unassailable, paternal power
over you), blind conservatism and institutional dehumanization.
Saturn, in its earliest and least developed phase, represents this blind
power in both its poles:· the absolute autocrat, who is authoritarian, intolerant, tyrannical and cruel; and the victim, who is powerless and constantly
under assault. Experience at one pole usually creates its opposite, as young
people victimized by harsh and unresponsive parents will themselves grow
to be authoritarian and 'narrow-minded. Both power and powerlessness
corrupt with either tyranny or a defeatist expectation of failure. After longer
experience with Saturn, you realize how Time is an ally - tyrants will age,
and water wears away the stone. This capacity to use Time must come, ef
course, with maturity. If you come close to mastering Saturn, you will
shine with its positive qualities: dependability, material success, wisdom,
ambition, perseverance, responsibility, prudence, realism and wry, ironic
humour. You know life is not easy, but in recognizing its limitations and
its inherent materiality you are guided to an appreciation of the here and
now, the possible and attainable.
Saturn zones seem to have a telescoping effect on time: days,, full of
toil and often frustration as well, seem long, but decades pass unresisting.
Instinctively recognizing that Time is the key to understanding this locale
and the problem it poses, you plan years in advance and never question YOUR PLANETS AND THEIR LINES your ability to develop ambitions that require lifelong application.
ally tiring of the continual frustration and slow, painful progress, you matV!
plan for years to leave this zone, yet stay on anyway, deriving coJmp,ensatot; Netuno ;
satisfaction from seeing Time's plan unfold and learning the power
efficacy of determination, tenacity and resoluteness. PRACTICAL CONCERNS OF SATURN WJ.Jere Pleasure Seems Trivial
The practical, immediate effects of living in this zone centre on ov1ercomlim~
obstacles and acquiring direction and purpose in life. You will learn
hard way what is lacking in your make-up, and periods of hardship, pentutw,
privation, enforced idleness, hunger, delay, miserliness, disappointment
loneliness can serve to single out your weaknesses and the repressed oo1:err"
tials which must be come to terms with here. Personal power, health
vitality seem at their lowest ebb, and since other people seem to have
the things you want, you may envy and dislike them. You choose a mc>ru:.lsn
or Spartan existence, seem older than your years, and find responsi...,. . . . .. 1
and duty (often to the elderly or family members) burdensome and over
whelming. Despite all this, you learn to fend for yourself and learn
recognize and compensate for your limitations realistically, whether tnev
be physical, mental ot social. You enjoy hard work and acquire
frugality and orderliness, taking life a day at a time, and thinking less
pleasure or reward than of humility and doing a good job. Your moo<ils
are apt to be depressed, and your thoughts tend to centre on weJl?;0.1"i'ff
subjects: death, materialism, determinism or fate. As well as a need
self-protection, you may have a desire to delve into the occult or ul<~."-~
arts leading from your fascination with the forbidden. Dirt, decay and
uncleanliness are often themes in this area, though you can feel an ltOJntC·
sense of freedom as well. Pleasures here are made all the sweeter by their
rarity and, like carnival or Mardi Gras, attractive because they pr<!cecte~
deprivations.
In Saturn zones, because your health weaknesses surface, among · .
lessons is the inescapable fact that the mind's enchainment to the pnys11:::at)
body has pain and debilitation as its ultimate end. Bones, joints, skin ai1H1:
sense organs frequently deteriorate here, and every ache or pain added
the list of deficiencies makes you feel another decade or two older,
204 SATURN: TOUGH TO K.NOW WHEN YOU NEED DISCIPLINE matter what your actual age. Your relationships are apt to be based on
unequal power, and thus are the seat of much struggle and contest. People
are seen essentially as competitors, so your personal ambition leaves little
room for cooperation. Work goes best for you in 'earthy' fields and in
occupations where self-motivation cot;mts. Farming is a good choice here,
though you will succeed only with considerable toil; mining, or occupations
dealing with crystals, lead, gems, cement, death, mathematics, property,
coal, refrigeration or allied subjects are linked to Saturn and may bring you
success if you are willing to undertake long preparation and last through
the drudgery. SATURN ON ASCENDANT You Become 'What You Fear Most
The position Saturn occupies in this location tends to stress your own rise
to personal power over your life through taking control of personal habits
and affairs. You will seem older and more powerful to others here, and
they unquestioningly acknowledge your authority. Responsibilities, especially those attached to property, money or physical possessions, seem to
proliferate, and your life is one long schedule of things to be done. If you
are lacking in purpose and direction in life, you will usually find them in
this locale, though often only after dealing with hardship and unwanted
burdens. The constant ambition, stress and fear of losing status can cause
you to age quickly here, and you may secretly feel unequal to the tasks
before you, anxious that you are ugly and unwanted into the bargain.
Hypochondria may manifest, as well as weight loss, poor health and a
tendency to wear dark colours or to dress more conservatively. Still, this
is the 'ugly duckling' locale, so you can in time turn such handicaps into
personal advantages, like the great orator Demosthenes, who overcame his
stutter by shouting above the surf. Others come to fear the dignity and
power that you instinctively develop here, but you may care little for their
sentiments> answering all criticism with assertions that you did it your way.
Past failures and skeletons in your closet are rarely forgotten here, so
while you can triumph over them by indulging your strict and cold obsession with success, others tnay ,still not credit you with much, leaving you
to feel unappreciated and unfairly ignored. You may also tend to assume
the role of victim here, and you think somehow you are doing others YOUR Plutão L,.:A, NETS A_N D THEI R IJ) N :6-S a f3;vour by letting them take advantage of you. Acute sensltlvlty
self-consciousness may iracli.ne you to freeze into.introverted silence am~
strangers, but beneath the personal Victorianism and self-denial, you ·
wounds to pride that motivate you to control yout own fears and
lives. Though you have good reason to hate the role of authority, somte€)1~~
has to do it, and eventually you realize that no one is more· qualified th'~~
you. SA T U RN ON M ID HEAVEN Nowhere to Go but Up
Your relationship with society, authority and your cru.:eet become nru;a.;
mount at this location, as your needs to seek power and control. of
sort are directed outwards. This leads you to seek fulfilment of pe1:so·
and political ambition, and in order to do this you are more than n•·•·m
to· p>ay the price exacted: hard work and the surrender of opportunities
pleasure and relaxation. Others may think of you as the loner or m15.;('
but, motivated by buried ll,lferiority fears or the experience of soci~l uu...,~c
ority, you strive to 'make Wby ~ny means avail~ble- means not ne<:ess;a:
limited to the ethical. 'You feel that you must c,o ntroLa:ll aspects of ."·"'.......
life and environment, so it is impossible to work for others except in
loosest of structures. While this is not an easy place to be; the success
comes after years. of toil is all yours.
As· raw nerves it;tflamed by your feeling of powerlessness are exp
to others' advantages ·and superiority, yQu are rarely able to forget
humiliations and rejections you experienced on the way. Hults <10t1e1~
you by others are usually repaid, even if Netuno :ou must wait for years t 0 <10 U
You:·should take very seriously the warning that powerlessness and pdltv.~l!
both corrupt, since you will likely have opportunities to experience
Your personal limitations must be understood here, though you may
to learn them through suffering the consequenGes of over-extending
ambition. A fall from pqwer-is possible if you allow: yourself to . be_c:$i)~re
the hated tyrant you f~ar s.o m.ueh; Netuno .our fate may be harsh ind~ed wfiii~ll
your turn comes. On the other hand, if ¥OU learn to control the ·ucu,N.b"J
and lower strata of Saturn by imposing on Netuno :ourself strict and :Sp:a;n:e;~
deprivations, you will be able to rise under,your own power, owing
to anyone, and thus perhaps remain at the top. Although you are .apt
\N w· 206 :!.1• SATURN: TOU<TH TO KNOW WHEN YOU NEED DISCIPLINE make much of independence and autonomy, you secretly relish the idea
of established power, and find, oddly, that the powerful and rulers of the
world are attracted to you - either as oppressors or .as those who offer
you opportunities to rule. Society may see you as a symbol of all that is
old, respectable and honourable, or all that is. to be feared as dangeroq.sly
reactionary; in either case, while this is not an easy place to live, it agrees
with those for whom ordinary life and success are not enough. SA TURN ON DESCENDANT
Fair but Cold
In working out your relationship with others and with the public, you
seem to find yourself attracted constantly to social situations in which
power is an issue, and you are often subject to unfair oppression and
victimization. Still, such difficulties serve to develop inner strength and,
since most people you rely upon tend either to let you down or take
advantage of you, you learn to rely on yourself. Misfortune usually comes
when cooperation is attempted, especially if you are not on your guard at
all times when dealing with partners. Legal concerns should be avoided
here at all costs, as they tend to be prolonged and burdensome in the .
extreme. Marriage is a dutiful, responsible and practical life option at this
locality, as you mostly deal with other people for material reasons rather
than for affection. You can become the power behind the throne, and one
who is rather selective, snobbish and unpopular at that. Thus, this is a
difficult place to develop any kind of public image for yourself, unless it
is that of someone who wields authority and power with no apologies.
You should look within to plumb insecurities that you use as excuses to
attract uncongenial people and to accept poor treatment from them. Weakness and hatred that you bear for parts of yourself are inescapable in this
locale, as people who symbolize these traits all too well will always intrude
in your life in one way or another.
As in any Saturn area, things tend to improve with time, and relationships
that survive this locale will be made of tough stuff indeed. You can also
develop a sense of judiciousness, impartiality ancl honesty, though you may
feel that these are unappteciated more often than not. In career matters,
you are likely to find yourself dealing with the dispossessed - the infirm,
elderly or impecunious - and in any case you are constantly reminded of YOUR PLANETS AND THEIR LINES the material extremes existent in society. Beware of cultivating a neJ:;.ttLve
attitude which leads you to find fault with every litde thing in your so<:lat
environment, as though it is easy to clislike the people who surround
you may actually be rejecting a part of yourself. Happiness of any
depends on acc€pting .and understanding the Raws and traits you tend
deplore and denigrate in others. SA TURN ON IMUM CO ELI The Inner Desert
This placement of Saturn tends to stress your relationship with your ..............)
and with the psychological concepts underlying your origins, your 'ro
and your inmost self-definition. You may find yourself tied unwillingly
the past, your family or its traditions (for example, through being torcec
to take on the burden of caring for an ageing relative), but through .,u,,.L
assumption of responsibility you symbolically come to terms with
define the character of your own declining years. Finding yourself tied
such weighty matters connected to your family and your past, ..~Lv.L,
or ownership of property is likely here; though it could take more than
toll on you in effort and drudgery. You can have a sense of bitterness
awareness regarding what you have missed .in life, but, on the po:31tL,ve
side, this area is one in which you can centre and focus yourself, uu\.U.I.lJ:i
.inexhaustible reserves of inner power from which you can create a :sen·
image that can weather any storm. A close and small circle of truly .........a..,•u
friends or relatives constitutes the foundatis::>n of a sense of security
acceptance for you under this line. Aside from this small group, ·howevel!,
you could find yourself withdrawing from society and even
something of a hermit.
The image of the desert is a relevant symbol to keep .in .mind 'nr•Pn
living here, as it doesn't rain much anywhere under this line (figurati
speaking) while you're around. Agriculture is not a good occupation
choose here, but you could experience success .in minerals and
and the value of land that you choose to invest in or live on could
.increase. Like a biblical hermit, you can excel in self-denial, -'"''"-'-U"'-·".....,.,...
(often for the sake of others) and .contemplation, as you cultivate an ..._.....,,.."'-"'
self-mastery. More abstractly, this area is one in which your religion
world view put you in touch with an archaic Earth-centred tradition,
...... 208 .
you may feel greater a.ttad;rment t@., j!>tim.al, twibaLm.G>cles of spci:il existence.
Isolation seems ~an important pa:rt e>f your horne environment,"Which .. may
be cut off. from the usual -forms of social accessibility. .Stagnation,
reclusiveness, ill health an.d loneliness way hav:e to be dealt with, but such
privations work to help you id€ntffy the limits whieh you can endure. This
is not a particUlarly go0d place in which t€? :tetire, unless au~onol}ly and
isolation appeal ·to- yoq, unless. the ·ictea of a place tl:lliquely your own
Oargely because no one else. wants· it) can spur you to self-mastery and
empowerment. SATURN WITH URANUS The Paradox of Compulsive Idealism
In this locale, you may find yourself uncomfortably in the forefront of
public crisis, as you act out your own version of the conflict between the
individual and the social. Áries OlJ:f own princ~ples may invoLve you in an
adversarial role with society, or you may find yourself constantly living in
a cross-fire between warring factions. On.a more persanallevel, you experience conflicts between habits and principles, and .only ti.min: Vênus and a good
measuv.e of wit can manage to save you from the consequences of a defi.at<J.t
attitude; extreme. individualism :and destructive· anger. If you ·seek only
trivial pleasures from life, you may find this area a little intense, since your
charisma gets you involved with l~bour movements, revolts atld future
sho·ck. You must learn and strive for coqperation, .as ycm may· find yourself
struggling to attain by foul means what cGmld have been had by fair, and
rarely allowing yourself rest or time off for any .reason.
Secretiveness, subtlety, suspicion and your virtuous self;;image tend to
alienate those whos.e alliance could advance your goals. Rather anti:_
authoritarian·and anti-sentimental, you will likely be',misundetstood or even
ostracized by many whq-might otherw~se be able to help you. Over-reacting
against authority is a self-defeating mode of behav-iour, born of an attitude
of self-destructive inflexibility. Pioneering instinct and €Ons,tant dissatisfaction -impel you to struggle .against any form of <£Oetcion from the -established order, to which you pose, a very real-threat. Eascinated by the ohscure,
the· antique and the heterodox, you skilfully blend the best from future
and past, appearing ·boJh radical and censervative, though probably
rejecting alliance. with those at both ends oHhe political spectrum. Reaching YGUR PLANETS ANID 1'HEilt LI'NES goals yo1;1 have .s et f9r yourself can actually beeome a problem, ~s ..,,~~..!!\
the· time comes to change Netuno .ou will tend to want to hold on to your
Learning just exactly how long to hold on, and when to let go, is lmJ:>Utta'ilibti~
Your major impulse in this locale is to give your ideals a real, coJ:tct~~l'e
fotm; you will be required to work rather hard to put your beliefs ·
action in. order to avoid the ,anxiety and stress you will feel if you
do this. Any appropriate expressio1;'1 q£ your principles is apt to be
organized and carefUlly thought out, and will usually embodypolitical . . u "<lj
- .often thos·e pertaining to social objectives or partisan causes in SQF,!!le
way. SATURN WITH NEP·TDNE A Voice Crying in,. the Wilderness
This is rarely a congenial locale, as ghosts from the past must be
with, and your darkest secrets eventually wotk their way out into the .onf~m
where they receive public scrutiny. Pessimistic introversion, lou....~.u""
solitude and mindless obsession with inconsequentiality are moods
may experienee here, and while this area may possibly pe congenial
monks, hermits and others seeking solitude and contemplatio.n; it "'eefm
mostly negative €or at the very least greatly ehallenging) for almost
seeking an active, productive life. Career progress i's apt to be slow am[t
often made through subterfuge (though this· usually is discovered); reai&~
and imagination seem to become confu.sed, with a ·resultant tendency
paranoia, illusions, ·perseeution feelings and wild vision~ of apocalyps,e.
despite ·Such inclinations, Netuno ,ou yourself may tend to have an almost Saturno :vtJn~!):~~
power over others. Rigmous spiritual discipline is one pursuit f0r wht~
this zone is good, however, an.d you can advance in spiritual matters1
or make innovations in musical theory, yoga or complex social ideas.
Unfortunately, the ideal and the real qrely function well together tf€)1~.'
and the friction between.the two may lead you to overwork and ens:w [. Vênus :
periods of ill health, fatigue; addiction, imprisonm€nt OJ: asceticism.
experiences may le~d you to appredate your link to the whole
by underscoring the commonality of suffering to which the flesh is 11
· ~lii.;
Your illusions are constantly pierced, and you may be the victim (or
perpetrator, if personal circumstances are trying) of fraud 1 deceit or o
crimes. In.volveme.nt with institutions is hatd to avoid, and unl~ss
210 SATURN: TOUGH TO KNOW WHEN YOU NEED DISCIPLINE involve s0me service career (such as nurse, prison worker, social worker·,
etc.), they could be involuntary. Self-sacrifice (without even the rewards
of others' appreciation) is the one pursuit that is encouraged by this planetary pair, but you may emerge from it with a feeling that it served little
purpose beyond the pain of self-denial. Your ego seems powerful here, so
only those who can forswear its attachments and pleasures will be able to
enjoy this locale. Despite all this, you retain a basi€ feeling of your own
self-worth, or are forced to forge such a feeling, perhaps for the first time.
The underlying challenge of this area is to learn to deal with the irrepressible need to act out Utopian idealism in the material world and to try to
bring your romantic and unrealistic expectations into being in a realistic
way. You may be attracted to small community groups in an effort to
explore these needs, but ye>ur messiani<i: impulses often lead you far beyond
these small venues in a world where chaos and disillusion await on one
side while promise and a place in posterity wait on the other. SATURN WITH PLUTO Reluctant Metamorphosis
This is a rather lugubrious locale, so your experiences here will tend to be
serious, responsible and concerned with death, duty and mortality. You
respect anything you see as unassailable authority and revere any body of
knowledge or tradition, though your conservative ideas may serve to close
off varied options. Finality is an attribute of this locale, so that decisions
made here may be more far-reaching than you can conceive. Individualism,
dignity and quiet resistance to injustice are the positive sides of this zone,
while the negative contains the possibility of a very real experience of
death or mortality, fascination with the morbid and gloomy, mourning,
unwanted burdens, suspension of growth and the enforced recognition of
personal powerlessness in the face of tyrannical forces or fate. Here you
weigh your own soul and make decisions for the rest of your life, and
there the past closes behind you firmly and for good. Dependants and the
elde~ly who have been waning may pass away while you are here, and you
are humbled by forces beyond your control in the face of your own frailty
and humanity.
Destruction and transformation are important themes in this z0ne, so
that endings will always contain within themselves the seeds of new
21! YOUR PLANETS AND THEIR LINES beginnings. You have a tremendous power in this locale that stems from
your intuitive awareness that concepts of death, transformation and mor:tality must be incorporated into society for its own good. Often seek1.11g!
to overthrow some established institution or to transform it to one mc>re;
'
responsive to change and growth,
here you exhibit profound .......,...,U:ILu\.c:.-~L'~~
coercion, and constant inner personal turmoiL Fascination with
ology, the past, history or geology motivates long hours of research -~~
investigation, as the past (as symbol of deep, primitive instincts and
social forms) must be incorporated into your daily life somehow. JJI:5Cl~J1IrJie ,
and compulsion are in conflict here, and phobias and generalized fean.s
seem to pervade your consciousness at times. You may feel un'cotnt<)rt:ab"lie ~
in crowds and thus generally seek isolation and withdrawal. This is
necessary atmosphere for your slow inner alchemical transformation. 212 I 5 Uranus: Can Anyone
Change the World? The surprising planet Uranus hits you like a tornado, and it can either
blow you away to the Oz of a whole new consciousness or, if you try to
resist its force, tear you to pieces. Obviously, people akin to its idealistic,
cerebral and non-emotional nature adjust more easily to its changes;
strongly materialistic, conforming, social types who depend on their possessiOJ:?.S, stability, family and other permanent life structures may suffer
most from its influence and thus will find this locale the least congenial.
If your eyes light up when you see hippies or punk rockers, if you are
fascinated with astrology and New Age thought, if you're used to fighting
City Hall (fr0m either a zealously liberal or stodgily conservative point of
view). then this zone will prove exhilarating, stimulating and full of colour,
contrast and excitement. On the other hand, if you like the Home Shopping
Channel on TV (or its equivalent in other countries), belong to the mainstream and see your main accomplishment as security, then this zone will
probably be upsetting and uncomfortable, often in the extreme, with much
of the security and many of the possessions you rely on proving to be of
short duration and durability~ leaving you naked and more aware in the
world. For 1vomen on!J: Many women don't take easily to Uranus zones, as they
feel threatened by the lack of material security and continuity often present
here. As an actual or potential mother, there is a bit too much change and
upheaval to assure children of the security of a place to raise them with
the routine and stability that they need. Health upsets, encounters with
aggressive males, and family problems may combine to make this place
just a little too exciting for you. The exception is, of course, those who
are strong feminists, or others desirous of taking on the system in order
to create and exemplify a new way of life. Often the first woman to achieve YOUR PLANETS AND THEIR LINES a 'first' in some traditionally male area, or to break ground in some ,..,'"........'
way, does so in a Uranus zone. For men onfy: You are apt to find this zone more congenial than most
women would, especially if you are the independent, mental and 10ea..:o
motivated type described above. The main danger for you is l'clt:DIU v·u.uo
so strongly with the gypsy-like existence that emerges in this area that
miss out on the pleasures of committed relationship, home and property.
You could remain an eternal adolescent, always about to find a job
settle down,. and discover that when youth has passed you are left ,......,,,._n-.·r_·
handed and disillusioned. PSYCHOLOGICAL INTERPRETATION OF URANUS Living Out Idealism
In this zone, you are under the influence of Uranus, planet of e1e1::tr11
change and transformation. Discovered in relatively modern times (17
this planet symbolizes the growth of individuality, since prior to its
covery people essentially defined themselves by their social function,
positions in various hierarchies, their family or their nationality. w·
Uranus, social complexity has evolved to a point at which ideas oec::ornc
important and consequently governments have changed along with
so they now rule through ideals and abstractions rather than through
power of one person. Residence in this zone, then, sparks the growth
your inner power and enlarges the conceptual framework of ideas 1"1:><11'
underlies it. Life and self are perceived with non-sentimental
and, with few illusions, you fear nothing, except perhaps enchainment
the material, the monotonous and the ordinary.
You admire diversity and democracy as your personal pride, -..u."'w,,......,
and daring are enhanced; you develop a Promethean iconoclasm, conSLal'JLuy
challenging accepted truths both within yourself and in your society
large, a predilection that usually does not endear you to its leaders, otr
others who are set in their ways. The emphasis on ideas, spirituality
opposed to materiality) and anarchistic self-determination makes you sorne~
what intolerant, rebellious and nonconforming, however, and
unreliability and aloofness often betray a deep selfishness disguised
idealism. Still, you see your way clear to do exactly as you please.
21~ URANUS: CAN ANYONE CHANGE THE WORLD? youthful and uncommitted, yet strongly principled and idealistic, you seem
to fit into no categories or social patterns, and thus must create your own.
You usually identify someone or something as an enemy here, and while
it may be the establishment, a political party or some other entrenched
force, the real root of your .dislike probably lies in your own attachment
to the physical world and to the dark, earthy, primal forces of sexuality
and materiality which intrude intolerably into your brilliant, airy visions
and ideals. You identify materiality and the environment as a whole with
the commonplace and you rebel against it with the fervour of an adolescent,
but what you lack in practicality you can make up for with charisma and
the ability to rally others to your causes. Your only identification may be
with strongly antisocial groups or ideals. Society can act through you as
well, identifying you, perhaps unwillingly on your part, as the symbol of
some idea, social force, minority opinion or nationality. A dissatisfied soul
in perpetual pursuit of impossible answers, you seem to be on a constant
quest to raise others' consciousness, a task not often rewarded or appreciated by those who are the objects of your attention. Magical coincidences
are commonplace here, and change is constant. STAGES AND MYTH OF URANUS Rebel without a Cause
The Greek god Uranus was a sky god, and his repulsion to earthy materiality
was expressed in his intolerance of his own children, whom he confined
to an underground hell. He symbolizes both the human capacity to transform the world through vision and idealism, and the cold, brutal intolerance
of the pure ideologue, who, in the interests of his .idealistic vision of the
future, will destroy all those who get in his way. Uranus was rendered
impotent, symbolizing the barrenness of pure spirit divorced completely
from the material. Instead of children, the Uranian person has ideas, and
these channel his or her creative force into tran~forming social movements.
The earliest stages of Uranian awareness will, of course, see .its problematic aspects dominate: underneath the adolescent rebel-without-a-cause
superiority, the intolerance and the rejection of any form of social cohesiveness, lies a computer-like coldness and lack of sentimentality. Militant
action against an imagined enemy, or membership in an anarchistic or
radical fringe group may simply be a way of overcoming an essentially YOUR PLANETS .NND ~HEI,R LINES weak will and a lack of a sense of individuality: A little .more uld.·li.~~
brings sorne recognition of the necessity to temper ideals with reaLllsJ:n:.:Jl'~
compromise: technology is the result, in whiCh ideas are put to pr~LG
use, hope(ully with betterment of life a:s a consequence. Again,
the· pure idealism of Uranu.s can here symbolize 'pur.~' and amoral sotii~!ll!
of 'the sort that created the atomic bomb.
In the final stages of Uranian awareness, a humanistic maturity rh""""'
in the conseioasness that demands opportunities for everyone to de~-"~1~
his or her fullest potential~ humap.itarianism, philantht!=>PY and L'-'-.LU.J.V"-"'
improvemen~ of the human cQndi.tion can resultJ p~rsonified in the ·
wh,o creat.es a .s.ociety of self-determination and democratic principle~~
At any of these stages, however, it is difficult to acknowledge the ·lJ.'~
forming power as your own. Thus, most people will ·become involv~~
a social movement, either by themselves (as scapego-ats or refo.rme.rs~
as group leaders; Ignorant of the sour~e of power, it is -easy for you t®
manipulated by it and difficult for you to keep such primeval and nf"'·, u/#
energies in check. Appreciation of the .power of ideas when they are
on .by groups of humanity is the essential experience of this
energy and its zone. THE PRACTICAL SIDE OF URANUS Putting, Ideals to Work
In this. z.o ne, freshness and novelty are certain to prevail, but U....'!!!'~~
.has innumera:ble manifestations. Though its keynote is individualism
extremism, within that there are as many expressions as there are
viduals. Still, if you are bored with life and would give up anything
change, you are in the right place here. You can become a new pet~®~
change your name or redefine yourself and your individuality.
unexpected. liberation from past patterns and tired old habits happero.fSl
Uranian winds blow throug~ your p:sycble like refreshing arctic ai.t in A ··
and mediocrity and humdrum monotony are replaced with stormy ex~~~j
ment and emancipation. Life is full of prismatic cont:rast and interest,
of exploration, adventure and wanderlq$t. You do things in ex1treJ~e:
delighting in violating b.ourgeois attitudes and morality as you fotge
.
identity almost as a contrast to prevailing so.cial opinions. You s-..v•1•'"'"''
people who are as. outrageously e:x~pressive as you are and ma, Netuno find v:mruse
' t URANUS: CAN ANYONE CHANGE THE WORLD? most at home in a communalliv~ Vênus situation that .support$'. expressions of
your unusual ideas. The establishment thinks you dangerous, and your
mere existence offends and threatens authorities of any kind, with predictable results. It's hard not to fight City Hall here, but you can win, at least
in the long ~. for your ideas, while heterodox, are ahead of your time
and thus ·represent the wave of the future.
Your finances fluctuate wildly at this locale, and their total unpredictability only adds to the general atmosphere of insecurity. You are forced
to look within yourself to find the calm eye at the centre of the storm that
rages around, as this is where painful growth occurs as your unquestioned
assumptions of old are discarded in the face of the naked reality of the
here and now. Technology is one area to which your iconoclastic creativity
can be positively directed, espe~ially anything involving electronics or
media. Astrology, New Age healing arts and unusual therapies are also
Uranian, as well as aeronautics, invention, labour relations, some community setvice positions and radical politics in general.
Relationships in this area are apt to be tempestuous, a:s you attract
wilful and unusual persons. Occasionally, instead of acting out the intense,
unpredictable influences of this zone, you repeatedly attach yourself to
people who are themselves capricious and unstable. Your health is not
likely to be too good in this zone, -as your energy patterns and your living
situation are too erratic. It's hard to sleep, 'and nervous fatigue is always
one step behind you. Accidents, especially affecting the legs, tend to be
frequent. Your self-concept and life will change here, and though there
may be some feeling of loss as the past closes behind you, the excitement
and stimulations of this place, along with its promise of freed om from
tradition and social coercion, agitate and animate you to heights you never
dreamed possible. You become aware of cycles, cosmic consciousness and
transcendent possibilities all emerging from within yourself. UR,A.NUS ON ASCENDANT Disruption's Advocate
In this area, the planet Uranus is likely to manifest most particularly in
your health, personal image and ihri.er journey. Although it is really your
own self-concept that is undergoing change, it is easy to let other people
identify you with some ideal, or use you as a catalyst to galvanize them
2 17 YOUR PLANETS AND THEIR LINES into action on their own behalf. You stand out as the epitome of ....'"'"'
ality, able to slip through the cracks and do whatever you please. Áries influence can inspire people around you to rebellion and resistance a~;<>.LU<J.
an injustice that was quietly tolerated before you came on the scene,
those who deal with you closely are never the same again, seeing me~m~;el'~~€
perhaps for the first time, as individuals, rather than focusing
behaviour and thinking on adherence to norms and standards.
people's opinions of the ideals and causes with which you associate yo1Lirsel
will be strongly influenced by your personality and your ideals in Pn••f'i
area of life. You break rules with such a nonchalance that others
come to assume you have some special right to do so, and thus
existence at some point begins to challenge the need for rules at all.
Cool, somewhat aloof and non-materially unemotional, you refuse to
needed, shying away from committed, clinging relationships. Under
line, you can alter your body, appearance, name, personality, ideals or
path every few years without even being aware to any great degree
you are doing so; the only thing about you that never changes is ~.........,
itself. You want others to notice you, and thus may adopt an
name, costume or mannerisms, secretly delighting in their dismay at
little outrages, and rarely caring whether they approve or not. Ltl.ce'>Vl.S.c
though your presence may kindle others' idealism and commitment
predictably usher in a period of change and social upheaval, you uv.u ;
often participate yourself. For you, 'Truth is a pathless land. Man " ........
come to it through any organization, through any creed, through
dogma, priest, ritual, nor through any philosophical knowledge or ns,,cno
logical technique' (Krishnamurti). Identity becomes your own and otr1er:
way of deviating from the paths chosen by the majority. URANUS ON MIDHEA VEN The Loneliness of the Runner in Circles
The position of Uranus at this location tends to stress your J.\..i.aU.\.Ju"-'·~~
with authorities and government or in your career. Social standing, sta
power in society and your vocation may change and fluctuate .....~..u~"W!
and you could go from obscurity to fame (or infamy) and back again.
authority presumed by either person~ or institutions is ignored here,
you cast yourself into the role of the social rebel and rescuer, prc>ffilsm:
218 URANUS: CAN ANYONE CHANGE THE WORLD? to save any and all from unfair oppression, something which inextricably
interweaves the fabric of your life with theirs. Everybody seems to talk
about you here, either admiring or hating you as you cultivate something
of a pompous messiah complex, figuring you have all the answers. No one
is neutral, it seems, as you become the symbol of a cause, movement or
ideal or express and embody your own ethnic or national background in
a particularly striking way. You have a lot of power to reform or to innovate
politically, but you may get bogged down in the ramifications of what you
have done, with your personal ambition eclipsed by the causes to which it
has attached itself. You remain unaffected by the ·society whose changes ypu
seek to catalyse, but yorir personal battle for ideals will almost definitely affect
the lives of qthers in one way or another. Accepting personal r€sponsibility
for yout society and its ms, you may find yourself repeatedly contending for
the underprivileged against entrenched power and authority. You become a
tnilitant minority of one, seeking peers to support your battle, and you
alone are willing to take on Goliath if allies do not materialize.
The career areas mentioned above may be quite successful here, especially if your jdb requires innovation, creativity and mental skill. Technology
is, of course, indicated in this zone, but also any other occup ation that
has a future orientation, complexity or radical artistic basis. As the pioneer
of a new idea at this location, you meet with the resistance of the status
quo or organized authority. Your bravado and your willingness to take
personal risks increases here, as you live spectacularly, unafraid of the
consequences of all you stir up. URANUS ON DES CEN DANT The On!J (Normal' Person Here
The general influence of Uranus here is apt to manifest most particularly
in your personal relationships, in which you feel detached and unable to
relate to others for anything but short periods. Often, this inability to relate
is what distinguishes you from 'normal' people, and you may feel strangely
cursed when everyone whom you attract turns out to be some sort of
kook, genius, eccentric or social rebel. Part of the problem lies in the
tendency you exhibit to demand all the power in relationships and yet to
reject clinging, dependent people or commitments that impinge on your
freedom. You can come to recognize your own power, especially as your Áries -OUR PLANETS .AND THEIR LINES relationships seem to fall into the same patterns again and again, and,
you may not at first see the responsibility you hold for influencing tlr~!S
changes, eventually you will be forced to acknowledge it.
Sexuality may dominate your relationships, perhaps often in the fcittn
of what you see as others' unreasonable demands on you, though in
it is you who are asking for what it is hardest for them to give. In a sefts
this means you end up acting as a catalyst for their own growth and ch:lL!il~
but you may get a little tired of hearing people thar:1k you for Saturno ..r_.",.;.~
them with a learning experience as tl1ey head for the door with their
Obviously, this zone might be a good place for you to work as a
especially to those undergoing life transitions and changes - since you
doing this anyway, you might as well get paid for it! If you are
by nature, this place is .apt to present you with real problems: acc1d~O-t
or extraordinary, miraculous and unexpected events become daily fare,
freakish phenomena happen so often it seems as if you're in a
Rationalization and analysis do you little good in handling this, as s
where deep within you is a streak of negative feelings about yourself
is lighting all the fireworks. Until ~ou deal with it, life under Uranus · .
is rarely stable, pleasant or peaceful, though after you have all the
Uranian urges tamed, you can be a guide and avatar to those seeking
self-insight, and personal growth from the deepest part of their own .u· u.u\J~
selves. URANUS ON IMUM COELI Even Black Sheep Have Fun
In this area, the planet Uranus is likely to manifest inwardly rather
outwardly. Some of the more radical and obvious potentials of this
may be muted for you, but they will still affect you anyway, gradually, fr..e~tt
within, and perhaps in the context of your family. The direct rejection
the norms of your family, your racial or ethnic heritage or your
traditions is likely. This could occur by your creating a role for
never before attempted in your own family or personal environment succeeding in it. You are free from attachment to anything other
ideas, so home, personal possessions and property all seem irrelevant
distant to you, mere things that change continually as you lead your
from one minute to the next, with only the present important. As yon
220 URANUS: CAN ANYONE CHANGE THE WORLD? likely to be a catalyst to personal change in others, disruption seems to
follow you around, affecting those with whom you come into contact, and
forcing them to grow out of outmoded patterns of living.
It is particularly difficult fbr you to take root here, as any efforts at
settling down seem not to work, meaning that you may be constantly on
the move from one living arrangement to another. Such upset impels you
to seek the true self within, and you become the universal citizen, no less
at hotne in foreign places than in familiar ones, and no more. New life is
injected into old forms, especially family ones, and though you may be
called the black sheep for your pains, at least everyone has an opinion
about you. While the scenery on the stage is constantly shifting, there is such
ferment within that eventually you may leave the supporting environment
altogether, forging an identity for yourself which defines you by how you
differ from others and from your background. In rare cases, being in this
place could permanently deflect your life path into a totally new and
unexpected direction, as you form within yourself a crystal of indestructible
selfhood immune to criticism, coercion and social pressure. Nevertheless,
you may get tired of sleeping on the floor (on the rare occasions that you
sleep at all) and living out others' dt:eams of self-realization. URANUS W I TH NEPTUNE The Woodstock Generation
ln this locale, you may find yourself possessed by the fantasy of a social
Utopia that fulfils your need for inner development and individuality
through the outet world. Your idealism is likely to be very strong here,
encouraged by the irrepressible hope that somehow society can lead the
individual to perfect himself or herself. This type of idealism is founded
on a philosophy which believes that humans can free themselves from
material aggrandizement, greed and avarice. As you open yourself to universal visions and ideals here, illumination can occur, and you do best to rely
on your own inner voice and avoid the answers it might provide to your
questions. In this area you may seek congenial communal situations or
find yourself deeply involved in community concerns. Intuition and your
instinctive understanding of the arcane improve here, as you find yourself
by taking yourself beyond the bounds of ego through meditation and
organized mystical disciplines.
221 YOUR PLANETS AND THEIR LINES You may desperately seek someone to symbolize or embody your
such as a 'perfect' relationship, but you can find it only after you've
up hope. Issues of liberty and human dignity come to the fore, and
personal relationship to society tends to reflect important struggles
on in the macrocosm. Earlier value systems are scrapped in favoiwr
Utopian consciousness, but it's hard to deal with practical matters
distant, other-worldly personality and world view, so you remain dis
and perplexed as the material side of your life deteriorates. To a very
true guiding genius and enlightenment can manifest under these u'"'"':
especially after a sense of loss and futility has been plumbed. You oeoot
a vehicle for social, cosmic or religious forces, perhaps even those
kind that can change the world, as you see yourself reflected in the
scheme of your experience, able to manipulate the whole through .
own small part of it. Freedom from conscience and the past allows
cosmic insights or warns against letting yourself fall into either cr1m1:nal
or nonconformity so extreme that it becomes unproductive and ...,v.•uw'"" URANUS WITH PLU.TO The One-person Revolution
If you idealize the social awareness and activism of the 1 96os and
for the opportunity to become a one-person movement in yourself,
this zone will seem quite congenial. Here, you have the option to
your milieu by remaining outside it and to become an example of
idealistically motivated rebel who works to ttansform outmoded forms
traditions. This kind of consciousness shows little interest in reform per
but rather concentrates on clearing the slate altogether by ex~>oSJl111.1?;;·
hypocrisy and materialistic sham of the present order so that a new, 'nOJBC
·o rder may emerge. Your life can take on an almost miraculous turn
this locale, as blasts of sudden illumination or conversion can wipe
preconceptions ·of self and relationships, leaving room for a whole
personality to emerge. You might retreat into an imagined tribal
order, one in which you presume values were more earthy and sexua.u
more open; you'd like to see the delicate complexity of social t:el~ttae
blown apart by the dark powers of ancient, pre-social humanity.
On a personal level, you should not· expect the new self you seek to
born without considerable pain. The past must be left behind for
222 URANUS: CAN ANYONE CHANGE THE :WORLD? so attachments may be severed in a particularly traumatic manner. This
can be for gooq or ill, however, as there is always the prospect of your
becoming an outlaw through severing not just personal ties, but also the
bonds that keep most of us committed to and focused on a goal that has
some meaning to society at large. Following the absolute law of self can
present you with a true, unadorned experience of yourself as you exist
apart from the matrix of social attitudes and involvement around you.
Since the only way to change the world is to change yourself, you do this
repeatedly. Death may be an important player in the drama you act out
here, and the social convention that inclines all of us to view ourselves as
itnmortal is thrown aside, perhaps as a 1:esult of the direct experience or
the loss of loved ones. You try to shock others, love what is spectacular
and drastic, feel lonely, notorious and isolated, but through your personal
journey at this location you can emerge with a self-reliance and depth that
mark you for life as a potent, unique individual. N eptune: Materialists, Beware! Those who delight in self-sacrifice, recognize a higher power that ,
their lives and perhaps see themselves as a channel for divine or cos;n:
energy, may find this zone a perfect one in which to develop such awa.renc
along with their psychic, artistic and intuitive gifts. Musicians seem pa:t1ti(
larly able to benefit from Neptune, as they are really conduits for
interpreters of the very sort of 'vibrations' to which this locality attlcu
one's sensitivity. On the other hand, people who have to be Str•OnJ~iy,
control of their lives and environment clearly will find this zone the
difficult of all. If you are ambitious, masculine, materialistic and pos
of a strong sense of self, and tend to see the world in objective, scH~n~
or causal terms, this zone will present the most challenging problems
your entire life, as all your criteria for evaluating experience will be1:0I
undependable, deceiving you while inexplicable, weird events leave
doubting your sanity. For women onfy: You stand a slighdy better chance to turri these m·npu
to good account, especially if you study or perform in any of the arts.
relationships with men are apt to be problematic, as those men may ·
act out a dominant and/or parasitical role or, conversely, first worshi_w
and then become disillusioned when your humanity shows through.
have almost magical or enchanting powers of persuasion here, but you
them against yourself all too easily: reality constandy intrudes, and you
it hard to manage the practical side of your life. For men onfy: You will obviously have some problems with this zone,
our society trains men to be in control, to master external reality, and
think logically and objectively, none of which is easy here. To survive,
will have to learn a whole new way of feeling and relying on inner
as well as accommodate yourself to being rather invisible, and sornev~t
2.24 NEPTUNE: MATERIAI:;JSTS, "l3EW~REI unconl)ected tp those things and people· you would ffiQSt like. 'tO infl.u¢t;J.Ce;
Moreover, since many men .c annot adrnowledge this Neptunian energy in
their own personalities, they instead choose a. partner :vho a€ts out these
chaotic, deceptive, dreamy, unrealistic attribut~s. Any use of drugs or intoxicants will most assurediy end up badly here. PSYCHOLOGICALINTERfRETATION
OJ' NEPTUNE
Plugged into the. Co.Ymic Circuit
You!S may find it really difficult to live your life under· a Neptune line on
a superficial, happy-g0-lucky, day-to-day level, as y0u are constantly moved
by forces originating so deep within that you have no immediate way to
control or und€rstand ·them. There exists a strange cohesion among social
animals: at times they build pyramids and at other times computers. While
government may have a limit~d role in determining these directions, there
is also a deeper current that carries us. all along, as invisible to us as the
water is to the fish. Neptune is the...main eomponen.t in this current, and
·it communicates to each of us from ben~ath the waves th.tio"Qgh cul1;Ural
'expressions like music, fashion, fads and political movement.s. Residence
in this zone plugs you in, for good or ill, to these inexplicable vibrations.
Our communication with matters Neptunian is never conscious, bypassing
the ego altogether, so being influenced directly by it often proves dangerous
and p~rhaps destructive to personality, at least as it is i~ealized in modem
society. Living l;ler.e, you yearn to experience anew the total merging with
an exterior, p.rptective and totally absqrp.tive whole that is felt in ,t he womb.
This ego~ an:n.ili.ilating commitment to ,rediscovering, Par~clise Lost hints at
the difficulty of retaining a cohe-sive identity in the pres~nce of the ecstasy
of the surrender of ego to something both larger and totally ·unlike the· 'self.
Of course; there qm be advantages to being s_o plugged in to, the current~
and mystical patterns that m:tide humankind: in l>usiness, yo1,1 can intuit
·the coming trends and fashions far b~fore .most others are aware of them;
in music1 or .other performing arts, you can put your audience in touch
with the cosmos, and then bring them sa£ely home again; and in mysticism
and religion, you seem to Saturno ave a direct channel to the tr.niversal. .But in
many cases you may act out ·the tragedy of the martyr, saerifieing the YOUR PLANE'rS AND THEIR LINES integration of your ego for an illusion of sacrificing it to a greater
only to find that your beneficiaries eith_er crucify you or distort your J·-.L~=..~,
into materialistic and banal forms. Acting out society's unconscious, you
likely to be exploited and harassed, and seen as a dangerous,
anarchic force; or, occasionally, you may be worshipped as a ~•;r... Pr-- Saturno ''"'''~H
ideal - the expression of some collective yearning - like a 1 94os ..,....,..,.,
star.
. Life comes to be lived almost vicariously, as you seem invisible, ""'-JSo·"'·
nected in any relevant fashion to the real world. Your romantic ..·,"'"'~
self-fictionalizations and vivid, imaginative <might-have-beens' come
stitute for real relationships. Existing relationships, on the other hand,
be marked with paranoid and neurotic fears, as they become cloude<!l!
projections - your own unconscious acted 011t by your partner. You . ·
attract the things you fear the most, and vulnerable and psychically sens·m'
as you are, your moods swing in wild excesses of elation and despair.
for those few who manage to act as channels for the Neptunian cw:rer
without getting their egos involved, or for those who thrive "'"~hr,...,.,;
sense of ego or identity, this zone can be one in which the heights
spiritual awareness are reached, where you wander in the bardos, and
division between the self and the not-self dissolves. STAGES AND MYTH OF NEPTUNE Reality? W'l.Jat Is Reality?
It is :fitting that the god Neptune ruled the sea, as this symbol of · .
origins stands also for sleep, dreams and the human unconscious. Neotllilt
was also associated wid1 earthquakes, and the loss of self and ma;ueml
sustenance that earthquakes occasion seem fitting symbols for this JJ.t«:u'
of the not-self. All life evolved from the sea, symbolically linking it
a primordial consciousness and a past we all share. The consciousness
sea creatures does one litde good on land, however, where hard,
reality must be dealt with.
Awareness of Neptune does not seem to follow a set
pattern as much as with other planets. Despite this, in time people
to adapt to its vagueness, inspiration and lack of selfhood and u:...:ta.
abandon the more destructive and injurious manifestations. A hystenca
wild intoxication often predominates when one first encounters NeptiUfll
2.2.6 NEPTUNE: M .A:TE R:IALIQTS, B'E'W ARE ! art ecstatic surrender .of selfhood to merge.·with some imagined whole, that
later can lead its· viCtims into paranoia, delusion, inflation of the ego; and
perhaps insanity or 'addiction. While ali this.is.going on within, deterioration
besets the real world without~ poverty, confusion, pe.rple~ty, victimization,
invalidism.and powerlessness are common. With more maturity or perhaps
with the right.s ort of personality, these exces.ses.are avoided, 'and Neptune's
Intuition .and mysticism enabie artistic accomplishment and spiritual evor.
ution of the highest sort. The problem is in telling one .stage fmm another,
in distinguishing' between self·deception and 'xeal' mspiration, a's there are
no objective criteria in Neptune's reali:n, arid one's perceptions. often are
no m<:>re real than one's imagination. THE PRACTICAL SI:DE OF NEPTUNE Caught Up in Something You Don}t Unders-tand In daily, prosaic matters, Neptune poses its most difficult challenges: on
a personal level, imagination aqd inspiration at;e enhanced, so that spiritual
pursuits, psychism and intuition improve. But this is balanced with an
inclination to abuse drugs, an'd a dreamy, fool's-paradise escapism bas.e d
on an addiction to a glam0ut and romanticism of the sort that real life
tarely supplies, The-line between dreams and reality blurs. You get caught
up in something you don't understand, and when you finally wake up you
may have lost your possessibns, your identity, your position in s.ociety, or
even your reason. This zone exudes a vague, depressive, grey atmosphere.
On social levels, you end up too often the patsy; society sees in you
something dangerous and chaotic, so victimization by the law, surveillance
or arrest :c an befall· you despite non-violent, communitarian idealism. A
milder manifestation might be involvement with institutions, in which you
are faceless and probably unappreciated, labouting for noble principles.
Caring for society's disirihetited and rejected is .among the few positive
applications of this influence, but you eventually tire of 'rescuing'. A desire
to be taken care of can often involve :you with Utopian visions of ·a
nurturing, ·all-knowing social structure - notwithstanding t he 'p oor records
such visions have had in practice. This need to be cared for has a sinister
side as well: this zone can see you dealing with hospitals, priso£s, asylums
or other institutions - hopefully in the provision of services or idea:listic
administration. YOUR Plutão "l.ANE'I'S AND THEIR LINES As mentioned above, there are some professions that seemingly oea1
from Neptune's influence: music, the arts, movies, dance,
television work and any bus4Iess that requires a knowledge and .....
· .........
of fashion and public trends. Glamour, the creation of illusions of l:)e:a~
and desirability, religion (or demagoguery), professions dealing with '-u""'
cals, anaesthetics, petroleum or drugs can all direct some of the u·.naJ~.a1
and hypnotic energy of Neptune constructively. You probably need a
of tim~ alone to handle the subtle, intuitive and ·sensitive capacities
develop under Neptune- this might be well, as relationships go
poorly here, with other people either taking advantage of you and
you or 1idealizing you and thus ignoring who you really are....People \..J.vo
to you appear so vague, haphazard and disorganized that lt is 1mpo~5s1~
to relate to them. In matters of health, this area is far from ideal: ....... "'~
infections, mysterious. ailments, psychosomatic disorders and
of the immul'le system leave. you open to a host of maladies.
low and resistance to environmental contaminants poor. Intense re~tctllO
to drugs occur, often with long-range consequences. NEPTUNE ON ASCENDANT Confusion Profusion
This is an excellent location for salespeople, since ·because others may
recogniz€ you for who Netuno €)u really are, you can thus come to stand in
minds for some ideal, some unreachable goal or impossible dream. ..,.,.,..,.,
project their fondest and most unrealistic wishes on to you, assuring
ephemeral popularity. Seen as fascinating, beautiful and mysterious,
are actually only holding a mirror up to everyone's incompleteness.
self-image is confused with other people's, and you collude in this
all too willingly, since your own idea of who you are is amorphoas,
gible and constantly in flux. The confusion invites a retreat from the '"r'~
isolating you, since when you are among people you feel a need fotr
and complete immersion in the personality of some 'other', sotnet:ruJ
which often makes your relationships dependent, masochistic, ad1:l1ctlv~:: ,
decidedly unequal in the distribution of power. If you do make it
worldly sense, you likely will do so as a media image, while the perso!il
really a.Fe remains invisible beneath the make-up and hype. This presents
acceptable compromise, as you cannot stand scrutiny here; one ettc~Ctl: 228 NEPTUNE: MATERIALISTS, BEW A REI way to deal with everyone's attention is to distract them with a false
personality. You may acquire a wild love of luxury ala Hollywood, another
way of expressing the fact that you really have -a hard time knowing who
you are or where you are going while in this locale.
Your arrival in a social situation (or in someone's life) often signals a
period of confusion and relationship to dark inner realities: people feel
inspired, propelled by unconscious winds of feeling, and in tune with the
cosmic when you're ru;ound, but this does litde to provide you with any
sense of relationship or stability. You may seem to others like a free-form
broadcaster of confusion (or occasionally inspiration) and the most logical
and in-control types particularly find your presence baffling and disturbing.
Health is apt to be poor here, and vety subject to influence from drugs
or environmental allergems. You.m:ay be psy~hic, imaginative and hypersensitive, and success comes best through music .or some other profession
that allows universal, cosmic and superpersonal rhythms and impulses to
'
use you as their instrument. NEPTUNE ON MIDHEA VEN Messiahs and Marryrs Need Not App! Netuno In this locale, the general influence of Neptune is most apt to manifest in
your relationships with society. You will be strongly inclined tQ follow a
career in a large corporation or serving profes·sion, where you can either
lose yourself, sQ to speak, or sacrifice your time to the needs of others.
You should be especially aware of the dangers of being socially victimized
by being cast into one of society's many self-defeating roles. Ending up a
scapegoat is all too possible here, as are arrests,, martyrdom or scandal.
Your appraisal of social trends and patterns is contaminated by wishfulness
and illusion, though a possibility is that a genius-like intuition or devotion
to some_ social ideal can bring you a glittering notoriety of the sort one
finds in Hollywood and other glamour capitals. But you should remember
that in Hollywood there are ten thousand lost souls selling out for every
one who makes it to the top, so your wishes for the impossible dream
may incline you to waste much of your life in the idle pursuit of unrealizable
objectives. You may be gossiped about in the sensational manner of supermarket tabloids, suggesting that you appeal to people out of touch with
their own unconscious, who see in you some larger-than-life figure who .
YOUR PLAN ETS AND THEIR LINES magnifies their own faults and unfulfilled dreams to mythologicru ,
Your relationship with society as a whole poses the most uu.'""
dilemma for you in this locale, however, as you tend to see yours
either Messiah or martyr in relation to the world around you, when in
you may not command much serious attention at all. Feelings of oor~ro~>'l~
imprisonment, dependency and victimization dominate, leaving you
uncertainty and a challenged identity. On the other hand, artistic vo,ca.tLO
may proceed well, as you are able to tune into others' needs for the taJJJl·~·
and furnish them with glimpses of worlds that seem far better thaJiJJ
everyday one they are familiar with. Your commitment may fluctuate ':l t'nn•
various social philosophies, especially non-violent ones, so that your 10eJr1t
in society often will be seen through your willingness to sacrifice
personal privacy and life goals for some abstract ideal. Through ~t
society does not see you for what you really are, and while some will
able to pull the wool over the eyes of the world in this zone, the joke
usually be on them. NEPTUNE ON DESCENDANT Can You Get Used to Being Ignored?
Your personal relationships are the pcime focus of Neptune in this
though it is a rather fuzzy focus at that. Relationships seem to hold pr<)J:n
of the realization of long-held dreams and fantasies here, but ra.tely<
they ·ful@ your dramatic expectations, remaining amorphous, tt'tsoJnerltj
and little resembling the all-encompassing partnership you seek. Marna
or legal concerns are areas in which you may be taken advantage of
others, but you are drawn into them nevertheless, as they repre~e..m.t
yearning, incomplete part of yourself projected outwards. Beneath
problems, which are always too easy to blame on others, lies a lack
commitment on your part. Your instinctive feeling that relationship can~
exist in any .real sense .reflects your lack of a concrete and crystallized
of identity, so your entanglements become a means to grant
substantiality in your life that you are lacking in other areas. As a
it's hard to connect with anyone in a real way, which leaves you w1ttlll
feeling of lonely frustration. Just when you think you have found a:
issue to grasp in order to put your relationship on a firm footing, you
yourself in a struggle that's much like fighting under water. NEPTUNE: MATERIALISTS, BEW AREI In marriage and other close relationships, you resist seeing your partners
as they really are, preferring to project your own ideals on to them, and
you may be drawn to people who fear the truth and prefer to support
fallacies. Alcoholism, addiction or illness may strike you or your mate,
deepening the dangerous tendency to, mutual dependency. Your relationships will only succeed when you learn to leave plenty of room for your
mate to come and go and to be who he or she really is, and thus avoid
becoming entangled in the clinging web of co-dependency.
Professionally you may find yourself often dealing with society's underprivileged, perhaps as counsellor or therapist. Your clients' incompleteness
again reflects your own irrability to define and objectify your own life path,
so, while helping them, you can help yourself. Health problems seem to
occur to many in this zone, as long-term, chronic problems fail to resp:orrd
to treatment, often because they are externally caused by allergens or
environmental influences, though identification of such causes is elusive.
Relocation may be one means of ameliorating such problems. You need
to find a like-minded group of supportive peers to sustain your identity
against the barrage of negativity to which it is sometimes subjected. NEPTUNE ON IMUM COELI In the Harbour 1vithout an Anchor
Here Neptune is apt to manifest most directly in your living situation,
home environment and relationships within your family. you may experiment with various Utopian, monastic or communitarian living arrangements
under this zone, perhaps even feeling that you have found your guru, but
pothing materially teliable is apt to emerge from these experiences. Realestate matters don't go well here, and attempts to settle down and relate
to some environment as your real home may be continually frustrated.
There is a lot of idealism connected to living here, as you see the social
structures and ethnic or regional peculiarities of this locale as simpler,
romantic and somehow more pure than what you have experienced elsewhere. Some may fantasize an ideal childhood while here, a state of dependency more like a mythical Eden than any real.place. Behind these fantasies
is ·a desire to be taken care of and reliev;ed of the responsibility for your
own maintenance, the better to pursue unhindered your need for intense
inner visions and transfiguring psychic experiences.
2.3J YQUR PLANETS AND>THEIR LINE.$ Yom parthers or other eompaniorrs in living .a rrangements may u.H'"'''
'a confusing and disturbing influence; and fot them you tend to co~<S
stand for all that is incomprehensible, uncon~rollable and a.ssociateGt•"':W
the ·unconscious, ev~m though they' may not be able to say exlrctllv;lltwl'<l
People seem to surrend~r their wills when you are ·aronnd, inviting· vr..~w
rescue them from themselves -a job that will he thankless and un:suc:eti~~sft
for the most part. Whatever is bUilt here is likely to have foundation:$
sand, except., perhaps, for a deep, spiritual and inner wisdom w.hid11
take root in the flux and turmoil of your personal life. It wilL be hall~
assess. the ttue value of any projects undertaken until you have m~~v;e
elsewhere; until then your attempts to groun.d yourself somewhere,
your psychic. roots, v.?Jl be. subject to the whimsical winds of talii~
unrealistic expectations, and an almost magical, supernatural \..VJeu.~,<>.Lw
Bomestic concerns are .apt to become so problematic that you feel fG'j!,~e
to. eschew any identification With location, fanilly, .home or anjc~~~~
environment and instead come to .see yourself as a 'Citizen of the W0.1iJ.<
united with all beings equally on the deepest level of inner experience. NEPTUNE WITH PLUTO You Mean Life Doesn't Have a Happy Ending?
In this locale, the ideals and illusions of life a.t e burned away like m<):t:Ji1'tro
fog, and much of the phone¥ order of the logical mind upset, wiitJlli.
resultant higher and dearer, though frightening and alienating, visi0n.
you feel embittered by having been through the worst, and having
an immature world view (perhaps on€ too much the product of
media faHtasy or a protected childhood) violently and permanently
tered. Any part of your ·v ision or belief system that survives after
expe.tiences of this stormy locale can be,counted on to be real and enct.a:mtl1(J
Belief itself is seen as a type .of neuro_sis, and self may emerge as th€:;{0)\lll
anchor in a sea of othetwise shifting and unreliable values. Senl5ltl\~r~
diminishes in the face of anxiety; fears and attacks of conscience
the spiritual house-deaning that is apt to go on here, leaving a feelitJ:gf
exhaustion, loss of faith, despair and ·cynicism, though these will in
be replaced with deeply felt values and a spiritual .reality more va:Jlti~fi>.l
than the old, outmoded illusions ever could have heen.
After this period of purging, you may feel there is .little or nothing. NEPTUNE: MATER:IALI.ST.S, BEWARE! to believe in, and it is only. at this pdint that you will be able to find 't he
power ·to see ·a cosmic, mystical vision of the world through discovery of
your intens:e inne.t-ba-s.e d strength. During earlier stages of thi~ process,
ennui, .boredom and· a feeling that everything is. hollow may pervade your
psyche, demanding that attention be directed towards an inner voice as
exteJm'al realities and- their meanings dim. You may come to realize the
existence of more than one level of consciousness, a tremendous·diseovery
granting you the tool by which the subjective and mrier beliefs can co.o.trol
and change the outside, objective worl& Drugs or meditation can evoke
changes in life, and when you experience what to others is madness, the
definition of sanity is expanded amd, along with it,. the wotld that it defines.
Of course, tampering with reality' has its perils, and the stakes are high
whenever you attempt to g1:ow into eonsciousness so far beyond that of
your milieu. Practicalities are often neglected here in favour of this iMer
transformation, as you de;al daily with mythic.al spirits and demons, along
with other often unwelcome guests from the unconscious, until the idea
of sanity its,elf is transcended. Change may some~times occur here slowly,
without your 'being aware of it, but it will come none. the less.
' 2.33 17
Pluto: The Intensity Addict It takes a special sort of person to enjoy and prosper in this tterls~ ·:·~:
powerful zone. But it is not easy to know who will or won't, as am~on
is apt to change radically here - perhaps even transforming from the
who always runs from a crisis into a person who readily confronts
intensity offered by Pluto. Of coutse, the process of transformation
be more painful if you're the type who normally shies away from
darker side of experience, a'nd generally wants life to be pleasant,
superficial, social and stable. If the power of sexuality frightens you,
changes or upheaval ~licit more fear than anticipation, then this zone
be particularly trying for you, but the depth with which your exr>erJen<
is rewarded may be all the more needed. People attached to their
sessions,. who feel that money constitutes security, also have problems,
the experiences of this zone force acknowledgement of the ,·.,nn . . . ...........,.~...
of material reality and how it is underlain by the more powerful laws
energy exchange and equilibrium.
u:· For u;omen on!J: Your close understanding of the birth process u·nrrmn~·~e:
you from some of the more intense and dangerous aspects of this zo11c
but that doesn't mean you don't experience some of the same ""'"''",.
struggles, intensity and life changes that men do. They simply surprise
less. There is also the possibility that you relate to men who typify all
more negative aspects of this zone, complete with social alienation, '"'"'""""'"''
obsessive sexuality and dominance. This is not a good area for childbe~ct.rn
and the fact that you are equipped to handle some of the issues
doesn't mal<e them any more pleasant. For men on!J: Yout tendency may be to relate to the separative nature
the intensity of this zone with a brutal competitiveness, a rebellious outla
mentality, perhaps becoming resentful and alienated from society as a .t;i~S'\!l.
2. 34 PLUJ:O: THE INTENSITY ADDICT of some real or imagip.ed injustice to which you have been subjected. Often
you find yourself in isolation from women or have a tendency tp objectify
relationships into the purely sexual. Femininity seems alien and absent or
can take threatening forms, such as one might find in designing and treacherous relationships.; this may extend as well to the bro~der concepts of
cooperation, community and society, which you tend to deny yourself.
Relationships of all kinds centre around power, money and possessions as
you learn, rather unwillingly, a new respect for your limits in an unequal
society. PSYCHOLOGICA L INTER Plutão RETAT I ON OF PLUTO The First Chapter of the Rest of Your Life
If you are tired of three-dimensional reality, of the laws of physics, of
cause and effect and of society, then this zone may be congenial for you,
as here the odds are continu.ally defied, firsts and lasts in life are encountered, and actual miracles can happen. Most people would rather not think
much about death - we live as if we were immortal and feel that death is
something that happens to other people, hopefully those we don't know.
But awareness of mortality is an important motivation for the quality and
energy of life; philosophers have counselled us to live each day as if it
were our last, and the power and intensity of the sexual experience sterns
from its relation to death, as through reproduction the individual is born
anew.
Death is the opposite pole from birth, and sex the bridge between the
two. Residence in this zone will immerse you in expedences somehow allied
to these peak-intensity realities, and images of rebirth, renewal, destruction,
eroticism, alienation, rape and leave-taking are apt to prevail. Exposure to
such universal truths poses problems., as much of the world's day-to-day
operation (often centred around concepts of property and privilege) is
predicated on ideas of immortality and continuity. In touch with absolutes,
you tend to see yourself and others as one small speck among five billion
or so on the planet, truly equal in mortality, and exposure to (or awareness
of) death changes your perspectives on life, leaving you to see it with
greater depth and clarity.
The theme of social alienation is prominent here, and you will probably
do something to isolate yourself from normal, day-to-day, superficial and
2 35 YOUR PLANETS AND THEIR LINES trivial social intercourse, then complain about this self-imposed
lamenting your image of oudaw or social pariah. you should have rnr.,
of that when you made yourself a focus of social forces. Total .u..u.''"'
transformation of the kind stimulated by this zone demands totaltsolatt.®J
and an awareness of the unique and lonely position of the individaal!
focus of the whole; it's impossible to communicate your s
position .in infinity and fate. Withdrawal from family and other
tioned alliances underlies a war with anything that tries to define or .._v•u..u.•~jjj
you. Such total personal transformation is rarely pleasant, as ferment
death of parts of self must precede new gro':Vth. The fields must be
fot new planting. STAGES AND MY'TH OF PLUTO Steps along the Road to Nothing
Pluto was, of course, the god of the underworld and lord of dead "v"·'""
His kidnap of Persephone in the myth adds to the concepts of u•v.............
and finality, those of rebirth, loss of virginity, the imprisoned tetrlal~
abduction and bitth, and suggests that within the female (and her cap:aCJ:t1
for childbirth) lies the potential to trans<::end death, to return from H::~mli'~
There is also implication of renewal through peak experience and the ,...r'""
as well as symbolic association with resurrection motifs. Through all
trauma, identity is purged, and a new self emerges, enlarged by the mt:en:s11;1
and greater depth it has experienced.
The earlier stages of consciousness of Pluto are apt to centre on los
as it is only through this that the new can be given room to grow. A
one may l~ave your life; childhood may be lost through a traumatic
epochal experience, with a resultant resentment against family; · · .
and innocence may be lost, creating a resentment against sexuality
perhaps the opposite sex. Social position or status may be lost, with a
resultant feeling of alienation and oudaw consciousness - you alone tJJ·,......""
against everyone else. This stage sees a wounded pride and an 'I'll
even' mentality that can run the gamut from self-destructive despair
firearms fetishism, with the emphasis on how much you have
wronged.
A more mature outlook centres on acceptance and begins to adapt
the new situation. Depression and pessimism are internalized and ,..,,•.,,_ less eviclently ·at the 'Outer petS01'l.'alit}1, OUt there is a feeling that· life will
never be the s~me. Finally; in stages of mature, conscious awar.eness ef
the power ahd narute of this zbrie, you ate ahlle tG>. see the immortality
that is aff0rde.d py old forms penshirfg and being te.plactd. With rlre·•hew.
Ufe's limitatiofl~. are seen as its: motivations, ancl its, losses .are _seen ·~s a
necessary part of the equation o£ existence. In this stage, true magic :is
possib.le; as. this ·alchemy of mortality is Natu:tre?s secret of ereation~ when
urrders:tood on inner psychological planes, it allo:ws me transcen.denc.e of
physitc:al laws, along with sentimentality, ilhasions, e:vefl blind hope and
faith. The butterfly emerges rtom the cocoon and, just when: nope was
abandoned, a miracle :occms; reclii:eoti:n: Vênus life·;With a singleness and putpose
ooly dreamed .of bef0re. For 'thQse who. g1..¥e.up, the plea~_ures of the trivial,
nature awards the absolute.
• THE PRACTICAL SIDE' OF PLUTO Flies, Woivesj Dogs and Monry
On more immediate and praeti<S;allevels,. while in this m:ea you may come
into doser conta:ct that?. before·with the central themes of death and rebirth;
partnerships may undergo traflsformation, relationships hecome intensely
comr,etlitiv:e? or people .d ose t0 you might pass away, leaving you with a
more intimate .and painful grasp of this universal reality. Sex is also apt to.
become more pi:omihe.ht in your life, and firsts in erotic experience ate
often encountered here. Socially, power struggle seems· the key concept in
this. zone, and ~om relationshir> with s0eiety 11'l:ilTCef!tre. on oppres:sion 0r
·pers¢eution, :with a resultant increase in s.elf-reliance a:nd resentment against
authority and 'norrnaky?.. If you do not experi'ence these 11ealities ditecdy,
they may come to you through ether people, and outlaW-s, -ofimina1s, underworld types, ana the extreindy pew.erful.and unprincipled rna: Netuno enter yout
'life. You may eyen .in some circumst:&ces-open youtself t0 the danger of
bec.on::llng the. victim o.f ·violent erime - though thi,s js most often the case
only when peopk:liepress !lhe o.ther, less extrem'€ .e~pressions of'this .energy;,
leaving it n0 way to 'lmi:nifest o1:1t:Wardly e~eep:t' in a way :that is beyond
your conttol. All these iricommucica:ble experiences •a:nd traumas ·serve- to
assure that the rest of .your life will 'be -•s h0rh of sdme bf the illusi0ns· that
most of us Jive in, and this hdghtened awareness of .re~lity '.o;1akes Netuno <q,u
somewhat unwelcome, n~t unlike a concev&atie>.n camp. s:Urv.i¥or at a YOUR PLANETS AND THEIR LINES cocktail party, as you force others to recognize issues that most ""''.,
rather forget.
You may also experience obsessions of various kinds here, and wn1et1
the pressure and stress they place you under has eased, you will wc1nd:e!
at the power they held over you. In this zone, you are stripped to Netuno ,u.•~
essence, and in learning a weighty lesson, you acquire a sensual depth,
magnetic charisma that requires you to live in a world more real than mc>st;
Your work may deal with these vital issues in some way, as, for <;;A<uu 1~.~,c;,,
counselling the recently traumatized or bereaved. Flies, wolves or dogs are
among the symbols of death and decay which may surface frequently
signs of the change going on within. Money, itself a potent symbol of uv,w
material reality. can acquire a life of its own, will often become a pre:oe~Dl!l,-'!
pation or obsession in this area. The acquisition of depth is the ov1errJLtut:lg
purpose of what happens to you here, and any attempts to forestall
will only up the ante. Better to make a study of mortality and to se<:lK
understanding of the extremes of human possibility. PLUTO ON THE ASCENDANT Indomitable, and Tired of Proving It
The position of Pluto tends powerfully to evolve your self-concept,
peak-experience and mortality themes work clu:ough your own sense
identity, changing and transforming it inexorably. You feel 1-'=·".Lvu"''·'-.l''
about what moves you, and generally are committed, intensely cornpeutlv
and easily affronted, particularly by those in authority. Others see you
hypnotically charismatic, memorable, somehow dangerous, and may ass;oeJL~:
ate you with things and ideas they'd rather forget. So yo1:1 spend a 1ot
time alone, which alienation has the effect of intensifying sexual nee:t;ts,•
You may come to identify yourself with the process of transformation,
leading you to enlist in an endless progression of self-improvement
in the desire to transmute yourself into something entirely different. You
yourself will often act as catalyst for change in the lives of others who come under your influence may have just survived, or are just AIJ\!1\.Lili
to enter, periods of their lives where great upheaval and chaos occur.
For your own part, you want privacy and isolation, spend a great <!l:eat
of yout time alone, hide some aspect of yourself from others, and see1rn
more private, enigmatic and mysterious than usual. People seem to
... PLU'FO: THE IN T~ENSITY AD.:O.i-C:T you instinctivdy either as a leader or a...tnetJ.ace, and the hidden power
within you brings to consciousness represseu rebellion, challenge, rejection
of ·a uthority and a c;lesii:e for change in th0se you ·<;leal with. There is danger
here, especially for people.who prefer to igno,re harsh realities; conversioN.
experienees;-n ear-death encounters, social ostracism.and becomi!). Vênus a.scapegoat all are unfor:tunate possibilities. Phobias ·a nd fears . develop, especially
social ones, and you are aU too aware of society's incliriatiori to blame its
problems on those who are different.
Intense experiences involving supernatural or archetypal forces ·challtmge
you hetre, yet when all se.e ms lost, yeu seem to have a miraculous ability
to turn the situation around andsave the day. The total person~ transformation yo.u undergo in this zone may be very physical, and c0uld include
changes in appearance through matters as. simple as ·a change in your style
of dress, or as complete as alterations of your physique and face via plastic
surgery. Issues of possessiveness, jealousy, domination, money and sexuality
become central concerns to you, .making it hard to have a simple, pleasant,
friendly relationship with anyone. You are indomitable, but.may get a little
tired of proving it. PLUTO ON MIDHEAVEN Looking Out for Number Onf!
The position of Pluto in this. locale tends to s.t ress your rela1:i.onship with
sodety and your milieu. Alienation fr0m society calls forth a power hunger
which·-is usually expressed through an intense battle for personal .a utonomy
and freedom from ·c oercion. You resent most authority, yet at the same
time you crave it for yol}tself, thus leaving you always in .danger of becoming
a model of·the very ty_rants you rebel against. Pot much the same reason
you could find yourself engaging in hero worship, flirting with despotism,
exploring the extremes of antisocial behaviGJut, and.generally doing things
that create an image of you in everyone'·s mind that is latger than life, as
you constantly remind others of uncomfortable realities. Your identity
(perhaps 1n the press) may come to stand for some popular or unpopular
ideal, as you strive tQ beat the system or find yourself crushed by it. A
magical charisma and hypnotic·pn:wer assure that you will be talked abcmt
and noticed, ac.ting as a. focal point of group consciousness, but you mus,t
constantly keep in mind the .c ruelty with which society usually often relates 239 YOUR PLANETS AND THEIR LINES to the things you focus its attention on - black-and-white, all-or-notmn
symbols like sex, money or death.
People in power may tty to oppress you, but usually only after
have provoked them by championing some popular ideal or
challenging the system. You may be successful and be lavished with !J.L<u.,,.
or you may fail in a spectacular way and be heaped with calumny, but ·
unlikely you'll be ignored. You're totally unique in the eyes of many,
because of this you may find your status in society changes consi.AIJ,..._Y.
Issues of war, crime, assassination, espionage, politics or ga11~:tet1S1l
intrude here, as you play for mortally high stakes in your battle for "'-.u.av•J~oo
against alien, hostile social forces. Unfair victimization by organized ~cmo:
or mobs are often experienced in thi.s type of zone. You learn nr~;l-J:.t.anl
the meaning of the cliche ~power corrupts', as either victim or pe1cpettatrc
(or both), and a batde of selfhood fought in the public arena leaves
changed for life, with new values, a different life direction, and an ldeJntlt:
transformed in the fires of conflict. Money, sex··a nd mortality are u vJlJ.Io.U.•..,.1
symbols, and terrific batdes for self-preservation can be initiated
them under this Pluto line. PLUTO ON DESCENDANT It's a Jungle out There.
This position of Plutão luto tends to stress relationships and your public u·,•H·~·
both of which are apt to be scenes. of great change, upheava~ and
discovery. You can experience many conflicts here, as you feel that
world, hostile and contentious, almost seems intent on extinguishing ~"~1•1 ·
You must do battle with the very things and peoP.le closest to you, wmu•
the outer world withdraws and leaves you alone to defend yourself agams.
the crises, all of which seem to demand some measure of personal ch~Ln~
and transformation. Driven by the desperation and fear of being ....."'~""'
you are drawn to people with whom you form relationships that are eltlt1e:l:
intensely combative or sexual. If you can manage to come out on top
such struggles, you are likely to be free from dependency for the .nest
your life, though the marriage or relationship in question may never
the same again. Power needs, competitiveness and hostility mark theDe!nll
ning of your evolution here. Experiences that renew you almost to
point that you feel reborn in some sense follow encounters in which PLUTO: THE INTENSITY ADD IC T identity, will and reasQn are subject to intense pressure. There is considerable danger of injury here, or even· of experiences that bring you close to
death, the purpose of such experiences being to direct your attention ap.d
will inwards; much strife can be avoided if you accept a more inwardlooking life and do not strive so hard to control and direct the people and
situations you encounter. Alienation and destruction in relationships may
be the first chapter of the rest of your life, but they may seem at the time
like the last.
If you truly tap the potential Pluto offers you here, there is some
possibility that you can change world opinion, perhaps by laying your life
on the line fqr some heroic objective; but there is, all in all, too much
personal danger lurking in this zone to make it suitable for prolonged
residence. You may have to deal directly and ·e ven forcefully with issues
of violence, including coming to terms with the fact that any human is a
potential killer. The ultimate battle of selfhood can be fought here with
those closest to you, and when you finally break away it will be to establish
a new self-concept that is far more integrated, whole and complete within
itself. This is not accomplished without stress and contention, but the
result can be well worth the effort. PLUTO ON IM UM COELI You Love Your Fami!JJ but Can't Like Them
Pluto at this position tends to stress your need to define and in some
sense control your relationship with your family, your roots and your
origins. The past, your family tradition and perhaps your ethnic identity
become involved in a battle in which you must establish who you ate apart
from these often restrictive influences. Your family identity and past can
easily be left behind, but a new life apart from them is hard to build, since
you must define your own place in the world based on your own concept
of self and personaL identity. Money, sex, competition and issues of freedom
and individuality are pitted against what tradition expects of you, resulting
in continual upheaval and perpetual cataclysm in home, property, real estate
and family concerns. Death often makes its presence known in your life
here, though through its force you can come to a new sense of personal
meaning as you increase the depth and breadth of your life experience.
The ultimate stand you make in the battle of selfhood in this zone is most YOUR PLANETS AND THEIR LINES likely to be fought with your parents, but can also be directed at
the symbol of some authority or hitherto unquestioned set of values
traditions. Beneath the outer problems you face lies the need for s
purification, a purging of the past and a settling of ancient karmic acc:ouJ!l!ts:
and outmoded relationships. Forgotten family history may conceal
pattern your life is following.
.A personal view of yourself that you cling to, but which in fact has
been outgrown and no longer seems relevant, cannot endure here, so a
curious loyalty you seem to feel for the past actually disguises a real need
to leave it behind for ever. Obsessed with genealogy as part of this process,
you try to find some roots to which you can relate, and subsequently maay
firsts and lasts in life are here associated with concepts of family, continuity
and inheritance. Motivating much of the introspection that catalyses
life changes you face are resources and abilities that may have remained
dormant in other places. These latent powers, talents, abilities and pe1rso.natl!l~·
ties make themselves felt in this zone in an almost urgent way, as soJtnetrung,
in your subconscious urges you to get on with the elimination of
traditional strictures that bind you. Your family and cultural heritage
see~ very clearly here, but that can also mean dealing with ac<:urnulatc~(!l
family guilt, inherited diseases or the oppressive attitudes of some ranmy
members. PART THREE Transits and Progressions:
Cyclo*Carto*Gtaphy Introduction:
Location is the I<.ey An ACG map can be viewed dynamically through the use of transits and
progressions, just as with any standard horoscope. When using that standard chart, any aspect between a transiting or progressed planet and a natal
planet occurs when both either have the same longitude (conjunction) or
are separated in longitude by some specific angle (for example, sixty degrees
in a sextile). Standard transits and progressions thus happen at fixed
moments of time, with the 'dynamic' (i.e. either transiting or progressed)
planet moving to within whatever orb is allowed, reaching exact aspect
and then moving away from the exact aspect and out of orb. The process, of
course, is not always that simple, with the slow-moving planets sometimes
forming an aspect to a natal planet two or three times as a result of
retrograde motion. Even in this case, all we need to know is 1vhen an aspect
happens.
The picture is much different when we want to know both when in
time and where on the earth two planets will make contact. Since we are
dealing with both time and space in Astro*Carto*Graphy, there are only
two transit moments similar to what we deal with in the standard horoscope. The first is seen when a dynamic planet has exactly the same
longitude and latit;-tde as the natal planet, a comparatively rare event which,
when it involves two transiting planets, we would call an eclipse or an
occultation. The second, similar to a square and also comparatively rare,
is seen when the Ascendant/Descendant lines of two planets cross exactly
at the equator. Though neither of these cases is likely to happen too often,
they are considered to affect the native no matter where he or she lives,
so that they are thought to be more general in their effect than simple
line-crossings.
Since in Astro*Carto*Graphy we are not dealing with planetary 'points'
located in one place in the zodiac, but rather with two sets of planetary lines
(the natal and transiting or the natal and progressed), the transits and - 2 45 TRANSITS AND PROGRESSIONS progressions we are looking for are the times and geographical location-s
which those lines cross. A brief study of any of the maps in this book
tell the reader that the lines linked to any two planets will always cross
somewhere, and in fact, except in very rare instances (such as those meJn-1
tioned above), lines for any two planets will always cross at four po1nts
somewhere on the earth.
As a practical matter there is no need to know where all these crc>ss:~~:s•
are, since most will fall far away from any land mass or population centre.
When we are dealing with transits and progressions in an ACG map it is
therefore best to centre on those places where our own interests
activities are strongest. The comprehensive method of doing this uses
clear overlay in which a map combining both transiting and or<)gr·ess;ed1
planets (more about that combination below) is placed over the natal ru~IPs:
allowing easy visual determination of those places highlighted by p1anet:arv
movements. If, on the other hand, we want to concentrate only on
or two localities, then looking at transits or progressions to the angles
a simple relocated birth chart can tell us quite a lot, except that, since
lacks the additional dimension shown by mapping (particularly the
of latitude along with longitude), it cannot time things as precisely
mapping will.
Though we could use such overlays to look at both transits and or0•
gressions involving all planets, the planetary-line 'spaghetti' would vA1"'11.
quickly become too complex for us to make a sound judgement on
thing. Thus, from the standpoint of economy and simplicity, the 'Cydo>!<_
Carto*Graphy' overlay considers only the progressions of Sun through Mars
and the transits of Jupiter through Pluto. This makes good sense since tile
progressed inner planets move at rates that are roughly equivalent to the
transiting outer planets. The. interpret~tions that follow are written with
this viewpoint in mind, though we have more generally denoted the
dynamic planet as being 'with' the natal planet in order to signal that these
readings can, with some modification, be used for more general purposes.
As with the transits and progressions active when George Bush led tllle
Gulf War and when Harry Truman ordered the total destruction of Hiroshima and Nagasaki, even though consideriog transits and progressioms to
an Astro*Carto*Graphy can add some work to interpretation, it can also
be well worth the effort. The effect of the planets in this framework tan
be very powerful, even if transitory. • • 18
The Sun: Let Your
Big Light Shine The Sun progressing across an angle of a locality you visit or reside in is
a powerful influence that can last as long as two years. During this period
you are apt to seem far more outgoing, extroverted, ego-centred and
theatrical than usual, and you may find yo\:l.!sdf in a public role of some
sort, perhaps· for the first time, because of the leadership and authority
you seem to radiate instinctively. Despite its temporary nature, the progression could mark a positive and major life turning-point during which
you discover parenth0od, artistic expression o~ even perhaps turn yourself
towards an artistic vocation.
People in powerful positions seem more inclined to pay attention to
you, so that you feel appreciated and 'special', reacting to such attention
with an opening of your heart that leads to a discovery of your deepest
creative instincts. This time in the spotlight will seem all the more powerful
in its effect if you have felt you were suffering from a lack of recognition.
Riding the surge of self-confidence you are likely to feel, now is the time
to slay your personal dragons as you prosecute a quest for identity and
empowerment. If you can build on the good things that happen to you
now, and you can learn from the bad, you will set a standard of effectiveness
and accomplishment that keeps you on th~ same track for many years after
the so~ar aspect has moved along. More than any other time in your life,
you can now learn about your heroic inner self, and you will find the
process of self-discovery you are embarked upon aided and encouraged
by the people around you.
Stm with Natal Sun is in effect slightly longer than aspects to other planets,
lasting for about three years. Gene:rally the indications are the same .as
those for the Sun alone, only stronger. 247 TR~NSITS AND PROGRESSIONS SUN WITH NATAL MOON • Residing here could mark a turning-point in your acceptance of
nurturing, parental and emotional potentials as you find new and u·n Plutão <Qtt :amt
relatiottships with dependants or younger people becoming central to
life. This in turn can bring about an acceptance and recognition of
importance and nature of your parents' influence ott you, and a '-V'"'"'-''-~u'-u."~
acceptance of your family background, ethnic heritage or any other p€rs<D.lil.>ally relevant tradition. You also begin to recognize your need for other
people, as you explore fantasies which at other times· might have been
ignored or suppressed, becoming more sensitive and more willing to
yourself feel and experience life. Those areas of your life which """"'!<!'":
formerly marked by a somewhat rebellious attitude now become the scene
of more socially approved behaviour, as the responsibilities you seek ma:. Urano ~
society, its support and others' opinions more important to you than me~v.
might have been in the recent past. Security needs, erotic urges and •ccJL.U.'l)i(,
of community dominate your awareness, as you accept your
interdependence with and attachment to others. SUN WIT H NATAL MERCU RY This period marks an important change in life which for most oec)Dle.:
comes before the age of thirty. Under this aspect you may discover
the first time your ability to use symbols of all kinds as implements
your personal will and desire. It is in this period that the educational
process first 'clicks' for many, so you may find that you begin to understatn.d
the possibility of using learning resources and information in a way y0u
weren't capable of before. As you explore this new-found capacity to learn,
you may acquire important new skills or information, perhaps resulting in
some formal recognition for scholastic work well done. Job or educ;atioltlal
and community concerns bring you into the public eye, and deeper analysis
of the symbolic significance of the events that befall you at this time may
reveal an emerging personal myth or theme which can affect you strongly
for the rest of your life. Mystical insights or a growing interest in the oe<c\l!lit ~
are often products of the insatiable curiosity brought about by this aspect. THE SUN: LET YOUR BI G LIGHT SHINE SUN WI TH NATAL VENUS
This occurs for most p eople before the age of fifty, often marking the
most significant time in life for the formation of aesthetic tastes, growth in
artistic abilities, and for the bonding which forms important relationships,
including your relationship to society as a whole. In everything you do you
seem bent on making yourself more accepted socially and approved of in
ways that might not have been important to you before. You discover that
you have the power to select and cultivate friendships and partnerships
with the types of people who truly interest you. Love is, of course, a strong
possibility during this period, as are marriage and parenthood. 'Children'
born during phe year or so this aspect is in effect may, however, be of an
artistic or abstract sort as well, since your creativity is stimulated in ways
you may never have dreamed of before. In many of your new creative
endeavours you find you have the potential to reap monetary or social
rewards, some of which may permanently alter the course of your life. SUN WITH NATAL MARS
For the time this aspect is in force, you can reach a new level of realization
about your ability to effect change and to imple~nent your will in the world,
as ' you become better able to develop a conscious life plan than you were
before. Even though ideally this is a period of self-imposed discipline,
often under rigorous and harsh conditions, at times you may feel the need
to express your powerful inner energy in a strongly sexual way, or even
through aggression. D epending on many factors, such as your maturity,
your gender and your willingness to openly acknowledge your own potencial
for aggression, this period can either be one of tremendous accomplishment
or of constant involvement in seemingly unprovoked attacks, rampant
controversy and accident-proneness. Rejection of domination by others,
and a need to embrace risk and the thrill of physical stimulation, can lead
you into many confrontations with authority, and overall you are apt to
surprise yourself with a level of courage, daring and erotic appetite that
are much greater than you have experienced before. More than anything
else, you must strive to understand just what your physical and confrontational limits are, as you are likely to be testing them constantly. Knowing
2 49 TRANSITS AND PROG'RESSIONS how far you can go helps you to cultivate dis.cipline and directed oe11aVIOBtil'
not knowing simply puts you in jeopardy. SUN WITH NATAL JUPITER Under this pleasant but energetic aspect you can reach a new level
realization in regard to your ability to promote yourself, as more and rn®ne
you seek social approval and generally strive to rise in status by
others know of your accomplishments. Full of self-confidence and selfassurance, you begin to think better of yourself day by day, and this
improved self-image in turn attracts the favourable attention of those in
authority. Obviously, some may fi11d your positive thinking and sdf•
boosterism a little hard to take, as you tend to advertise your own wonderfulness at high volume at inappropriate times and may also try to tor<~e
your own ideas of morality and rectitude on to others, as if to ask ......'"'"'''"
to play the heathen to your missionary. If you work at it, however,
renewed self-confidence can take a highly positive form, introducing ~rt.:~111,1
to a broader horizon of academic, cultural and literary concerns. No rna
what, though, nearly everything you do is bound to attract attention,
you quickly learn to play others' opinions like a musical instrument, ...u ......,
their support for what seems to be an inexhaustible quantity of en1terJprt:s·es:
and promotions. In general, this is a very lucky period that can bring ,,,..,,,
many personal and financial rewards. SUN WITH NATAL SATURN This can represent a very important and critical time in your life, one that
probably subjects you to some rather unpleasant di$cipline in order t<f>
make you aware of your weaknesses and failings. With some care and
attention, h0wever, such shortcomings as you have can be turned irite>
strengths during this period, often as a result o f your increased psycholqgical sensitivity and your reaction to feelings of powerlessness. Carl jlaflg
suggested that everyone has a 'shadow', a subconscious identity comprise<d
of functions and experiences opposed to the conscious talents and abilities
from which the outer personality is fashioned. These rejected functioms
are things that you can't do well, so during this time you are often made THE SUN: LET YOUR BIG LIGHT SHINE aware of what they are, perhaps traumatically enough for you inwardly to
vow to master them at any cost. It is from such awareness of deficiency
that one's power needs arise, so this is also a time to experience the
extremes of power and powerlessness in your life. Self-restraint, autonomy,
guilt, abstemiousness and patience come to the fore in your own behaviour;
but despite your virtuous bent, the world seems all too willing to paternalize,
discipline and punish you for real or imagined transgressions. Through
dealing with problems, you learn to mask your insecurities well, and can
become adept at manipulating feelings of weakness in others, all of which
amounts to a constructive overcompensation for the feelings of inadequacy
and ·sensitivity that plague you now. SUN WITH NATAL URANUS This is a time that is full of surprises, and it can mark a turning-point of
lifelong significance in your relationship with society and your own selfimage. Outer circumstances or people propel you to explore and express
the more nonconformist or even antisocial aspects of your personality.
Your sense of individuality is stimulated, as personal freedom becomes a
critical issue, and you often find yourself standing alone, espousing unpopular ideals as you inspire others to align themselves with you on the side
of principle. Such preoccupations may in turn lead you to form groups
dedicated to common interests, idealistic causes or social objectives, but
your strict (and even restrictive) adherence to abstract standards of honesty
may well mask a discomfort with intimacy, emotions, feelings and other
subjective concerns. T o your surprise, you may find yourself designated as
the symbol of some cause, popular or unpopular, perhaps bringing about
a constant tension between the personal and social spheres of your life.
You may be attracted more than usual to the forbiddingly bizarre and
technical, these being symbols of the awakening awareness of your own
individuality, as you SC?ek to associate yourself with anything and everything
that can define you as being anything but a slave to conformity. TRANSITS . AND PROGRESS J•ONS SUN WITH NATAL NEPTUNE
You are now able to reach a new leveL of awareness about the ........"""·
have in your 1ife with the unconsCious, the mythological and the .lu<;;;u :!ftElO
Depending upon how comfortable you are with ideas arrd pnenc)m.enia111
are both mysterious. and illogical, you will find this time either J.a>:>•~HJ:)j
ru:J.d miraculous or fnightening ahd bizarre. Usually under this aspect,~~~dYi
stages of your awareness of the irnpot:tance of the unconscious WiUl: 't>e
acted out tht;ough projection, so you will probably ·find yourself
by peculiar, spaced-m1t and even unbalanced people. Later, by cuJ.tivareil~2
an awareness that there is a place in everyone which ta.uches the ..............
scious, you can discover your own connection to the totality of
and time, perhaps expressing the feelings engendered by Sun-Nepturi(!~as
altruism and self-sacrifice as yeu experience a poetic merging of the
with the cosmos. You have a need for privacy; that is greater than .........:-•'£'
now, so trying to be 'on top ot things' will ~enerally not work too
for you. Self~defeating behavi0ur - addiction, defeatism and teo
reliance on intuition rather than factual knowledge - can be a danger
but it can :also bring benefits by helping you to transcend life's banality\
develop a perception of the infinite; and to shatpen the artistic ·a nd H.:.1\:.A,l.l'l""'
aspects of your personality. s .UN WITH NATAL PLUTO
You may fihd yourself required to learn to deal meaningfully with conee~'tiS
such as mortality, birth, deat.ht and regeneration in a way that allows o/'~U.
to redirect yourself towards a more purposeful ex:istence. Pluto is 'ou•w
consdoqsness', so· a feeling of alienation an:d competition may begW:t: i1l0
permeate relationships wheFe you feel you are being taken for granteili,~s
you try te define yourself in terms contrary to the possessiveness aiFl'd
venality you see in mainstream society. A.tiy activities that you try to K~'€1?
hidden now may spill unbidden from their closets, lea~ Vênus to revelafi:®ms
d1at force you to take a stand in areas of your life· where you had ·b~S~Jil
'going along to get along' before. All of this ~pheaval can be the
to a new personality and self-concept which are shorn of many of ~
. i'l~_a.:
old illusions and unnecessary psychological baggage; but it dn also ~ea.<:t
252 THE SUN: LET YOUR BIG LIGHT SHINE to farewells that are almost always painful. Ruthless, spiteful, manipulative
and envious people you come across are really only symptoms of the
buried and repressed parts of your psyche, so if they seem to dominate
this period, this indicates you should pay attention to parts of your heart
and mind which urgently require development. This can be an exciting
time of firsts and lasts, but it is also a time in which you often feel you
are fighting your battles all by yourself. 19
The Moon: An Emotional
Interlude • ..
~ • Though the Moon progressing to a particular place on your A C G '1\\':>llt!
moves quickly, it is still a powerful influence that lasts about eight m<>ntns.
During this lunat; period, your needs and emotions are intensified, as
develop respon&iveness and sensitivity, and generally find yourself rn<ll•rc
involved in the moods and sensations of others. Because of this,
become aware of the subtle emotional climate of your location and
way in which it relates to the social milieu and to other people's ne~;a
and their demands on you. As your appetites for affection, nurturance
sustenance become critical, the accompanying sharpening of desire oresa
an important stage in the development of your ability to care for vuurs:e
and to tend to the needs of others. Instability and restlessness
when, goaded by the increased urgency of your desires and the "'~-'~'....._,_..
impossibility of their satisfaction, your life begins to change frequently
unpredictably. You are apt to find youtself the centre of attention more!
than ever now, even though the accentuation of your feelings and u.-.-..""
actually tends to make you somewhat sensitive and shy. This
consciousness nevertheless can endear you to people, particularly
for some success in political concerns and in any other endeavour .. -.. . 1 u..u.~..u,~~
others' support. At times, your life may seem to be populated (even nv,,..r.
populated) by mothers and/or dependent children, as issues of
and support for yourself demand recognition through projection of these
needs on to events outside you. During this period you'll probably begin
to feel a subtle but persistent loss of control, as you sense that others ate
calling the shots in your life more than you; and because other n Pr•n• Plutão concerns dominate, ambitious, selfish schemes and purely personal plans
may have to be postponed until this aspect passes. T he value of the r.•.m"'"
lies in gaining a better sense of what you need, along with a
knowledge of how you can begin to satisfy that in yourself. 254 THE .MOON:: .kN EMOTIO.NAL IN:FERLUDE
. Mo.on u;ith Natal M{)on shows similar indications to the. ·a bove, though
much stronger. MOON WI1>H NATAL SUN You may well find yourself temporatily fascinated by, attracted to and
immersed in situations w,hich deal with your concepts of authority, leadership, ego and pride: Either you will find yourself surrounded by people wh0
express such attributes, or you yourself may become more s.elf:-possessed,
theatrical, outg®ing and c:reative. This is no.t likely to be a major .life
turning-point, as' these. periods occur every seven years and last for about
five months. Neve~theless, this can be a v.aluable time for personal growth
and change if you consciously seek to experience your own potential for
doing things that require you to stretch the limitations of your abilities, to
seek recognition for. yo'ur personal- efforts, and to make progress in your
search for sdf-actaalization..This progression could coincide with a heroworship phase, as yc;:>a p11oject your owa potentiah. on to ano.t her; or,
negati;vdy; you may find your.self under the thumb of one who vaunts
authority, representing a projecticm of you~ 'own ins·ecu.te relationship with
your ego. On a m.ore maturdevel, you eocld find that romance, speculation,
amusement, parties: and social life become central to your existence; as
evidence ,af im:reased setf"'esteem and respect for your own emerging
selfhood.!.Your dreams and daydreams, ambitions and yearnings eentr.e ..on
power and authority, the type of leadership and self-confidence that make~
others follow and admire you. MOON WITH NATAL MERCURY Under the spell of the planet of feelings passing over the planet of communication, leavning and youth) you may find yourself temporarily fas.cinated by, attracted to, and imm_ersed in the pmsuit of knowledge, practical
education, yoMth affairs or the problems and interests of your immediate
community. Since such periods Sol <i:c.ur every seven years or so, lasting for
about five· months, this is not likely to he a really memorable time in your
life. Rather than pondering the riddle and muddle ofexistence, you will find 2'55 TRANSITS AND PROGRESSIONS yourself drawn into the immediacy of writing, maths and the acquisition
skills, particularly those relating to a vocational interest or study. You
become fascinated with a class of people you normally avoidsalesmen, even hustlers - as the teeming life of cities and commerce attt:act:
and intrigues you. Complex and involved areas of study also
though the acquisition of new skills and vocational resources will u~;;;uLv,
always be central to the concepts and ideas that fascinate you now. .~..~a.~.,~,-,
guages and symbol systems (such as maths or computer languages)
easily absorbed, and your mind is impressionable and retentive, even th<~·lf!rli!:~
it can at the same time be easily distracted and led astray. This could .u~·v •
mark a period of travel and general unsettledness, as you are drawn
of old patterns and safe, traditional havens to seek new experience
first-hand knowledge of your environment. MOON WITH NATAL VENUS As this aspect takes hold, you will find yourself fascinated by, attracted
and immersed in aesthetic and social concerns, including romance,
well as more than usually interested in acquiring money. Concerns <Lu~.:~u
relationship, perhaps include marriage, become more important to
and even in those areas of life where such concerns might be se<:onaru
you find yourself sensitive to and intolerant of disruption and strife. B~ Júpiter ~~L'
holds more than mere fascination for you, as you become attracted to
things beautiful, from art to people. You fin.d your own capacity to attt:Gcfl
people to you is enhanced by the fact that you feel more confident than
usual about how you look to others, and because of this you may ~..... ...,
yourself yearning and daydreaming about love, a wealthy lifestyle ar.td
romantic excess. But while feeling better about how you look might he
good for your self-confidence or your fantasy life, it can wreak havoc with
your self-control, and you will have to guard against overindulging in both
food and goods. Socially, you find it easy to get all caught up in goss~]>
about other people's problems, but while it may be OK to listen to what
others say about others, passing it along is not. Women are liable to play
a more important part in your life now, along with elegance, sentimen1!1
glamour and vanity. This is not an enduring situation - six months
probably be the extent of it- but nevertheless it is a good time to
yourself out about your feelings regarding possession, relationship THE M ·O<:>N: 4N EMOTIONAL IN-TERLUDE perhaps .finan:cial attainment. Even if yom fitJ:d thinking ·to:<:! mueh about
sueh things alien to your natlire and vet: Netuno - much .out of cha:Ca:~ter, you ·will
probably associate· with other people w:ho act out the inne~: :feelings you
yourself are suppress.ib. Vênus . MOON WITH NATAL MARS Thls is an interesting ·a nd .o ften coatradictory combination, especially for
those ·who by natate (and be·ca-use of the placem(}nt of Mars. in their
horoscopey are not at ease :with those things the planet of strife, as.sertiveness and <mmpetition represents. In general, over the six montihs o.r so
this. is. in force, yol!- will find yourself attracted to and imme~:sed in matters
of a st:t!ongly masculine .and eompetitiv:e nature. You are als<D likely tG be
drawn to' the ·erotic and assertive aspects of the human psyche, a tendency
which can. manifest in you being attracted to rol:lgh-and-ready· 'maehe'
types, and engaging in Jtense, {iemani::ling situations that test yo:u to the
limit. The-impatience and i.nritability that well up inside you now can also
inspire belligerence in others, so it is best to find a way to vent such
assertive energies through hard physical work, athletics, martial arts or
entrepreneurial projects that require all of your attention. Eschewing the
finer things in life, you may find yourself yearning for the minimalist
simplicity of the oufdoo'fs, a'nd if you daydream at all daring the time this
reality-prone aspect is in force, these fantasies will be about getting away
from the crowd ~and fotging out into. the .unknown by yourself. Dur.ing
this pioneering and independent period, your capacity to fight for and
defend yourself is much s-t ronger, than .any desite Netuno ,ouc might have to
compromise. Relations with womem, not to mention your home life, :are
apt to he distutbed, as you find that others' needs for fre-edom and autonomy seem to s:tand in the way of·your goals and objectives. MOON WITH. NATAL JUPITER The sky is the litnit for you, at least in your dreams-, as the awakening of
the planet of ex:ces·s by the planet ef emotion turns you towards a quest
for .the good feeling that c-an come from ·soCial superiority and status.
You yearn for acco.mplishments that assure others' .admiration and 'their TRANSITS AND PROGRESSIONS admission that you are a 'quality' p erson who is masterful,
and above reproach. As most people relate such social approval to m<>ffe~ Netuno you may soon be making endless plans and schemes to strike it rich,
the big time and generally outdo the Joneses (who will then be busy ke<~Pll:l'
up with you). Periods such as this come every seven years or so, and rru:~~'\1
last more than six months, and therefore even though you may feel fGr
while that you can hit the heights, it is doubtful whether you'll really
able to do so, at least for any sustained period of time. Unt<>rblnatfe.LVI
there is a danger that you might confuse the trappings of authority w.tti't
power itself, so if you're not careful to keep your priorities in good ort:1er!
you might at times overstep your bounds. If, on the other hand, you
keep yourself firmly grounded in reality, you can benefit from the neecl
pursue .religious, academic, professional and cultural concerns, 1" Plutão tl" rf't
whatever seems coarse or ordinary in yourself or your life. If you kee:ll
your sights set 0n being the 'best' in moral rather than financial ter.m:s:
you can, in fact, turn this into a deeply religious period in which, W11lb
some effort, you gain an intensified spirituru understanding of yourself
the world around you. MOON WITH NATAL SATURN
In contrast to your need to hit the heights under Moon-Jupiter just
experience the rush of exhilaration, under this progressed aspect an extrenn~
awareness of your own shortcomings, usually the product of a te11np,otaf!U]
accentuated sensitivity and subjectivity, can lead you to seek
of your worth by pursuing real, lasting power and authority. During
brief period, you'll be more than usually aware of your intense .,.....,.....u."n,,-._
which in turn causes a heightened awareness of personal difficulties. Im
fact, problems in your life that under other circumstances you might simply
shrug off could cause you to set your sights on making yourself independent
and powerful enough to avoid (or at least think you won't have) such
problems in the future . .Painfully aware of the situations you fear rn0St,
you are able to direct an unusual amount of energy towards OV(~rc<)rrtlng
bad habits and carrying out ambitious self-improvement projects.
despite your best efforts, the emotional climate is likely to be pretty
so it is hard to avoid feelings of despair, frustration and powerlessness
the face of the hostile external forces you see all around you. Awar~ THE MOON: AN EMOTIONAL INTERLUDE what you feel you can't do, once you are past this period you can set
yourself to learning how· to overcome the personal disabilities that are
brought to light during this time. MOON WITH NATAL URANUS The bizane and nonconforming aspects of your life hold a real fascination
for you now, and you may ·End yourself surrounded, at least temporarily,
by people who express the unusual and rebellious aspects of yoUf own
personality. You have a great yearning for freedo~, at least for yourself,
since your own urge for intellectual independence can lead you to demand
that others conform to unrealistic ideological expectations you lay down
for them. While your endless reiteration of the correct party may be right
in some abstract sense~ your fervour is more likely to alienate people than
to win you supporters. Your yearning for the bliss of unrealistic social
Utopias, daydreams, ambitions and idealism centre on an urgent need to
right what you see as wrong in the world around you and to rebel against
repressive and restrictive social constraints. You may find yourself attracted
to social outcasts and rebels, as anyone outside 'the system' is seen, in a
heroic light, as a role model who can show you how to overcome your
own compromising adherence to social values which you feel are untrue
to your innermost beliefs. Fascinated by unusual ideas, technologies and
people, you are constantly excited and stimulated by the latest and greatest
idea that comes along to liberate you from your commonplace and routine
existence. While a brief aspect such as this will rarely bring you to a
crossroads in your life; it will certainly provide some relief from the humdrum and the mundane. MOON WITH NATAL NEPTUNE The hidden, mysterious and unconscious aspects of existence hold your
interest for a brief while during the six months or so this aspect is at its
strongest. The commonplace seems hopelessly dreary to you as you seek
the spiritual heights and aesthetic extremes of sensitivity and awareness.
You may find yourself yearning for an opportunity for self-sacrifice, to do
something to right the social wrongs that impress you so deeply as you
' TRANSITS AND Plutão 'ROGRESSIONS go about your everyday existence, but such altruism is also mixed wftfi'
confusion over what is real in your perceptions and what is not. The des~e
to help others can at times take unsavoury forms, especially if you allow
yourself to be taken advantage of through burdening yourself with a sense
of guilt that opens you to exploitation. You want to rise above it all to a
place of spiritual ideal and perfection, but enmeshment in escapism, addictiot) and hypersensitivity (whether to toxins in the environment or to
parasitical people) are the less than desirable results if you don't exercise
some control over your personal situation. You can avoid a lot of trouble
by cutting down on your expectations and keeping your feet as firmly ·<iU'l
the ground as possible. Artistic, intuitive, psychic and aesthetic awareness
is acutely tuned now, so try not to subject yourself to avoidable unpleasantness, and above all strive to adhere to strict health regimens to avoid
illness. MOON WITH NA TAL PLUTO
Under this aspect you can become extraordinarily aware of the po:ten.tlaJ.s!
of this zone, since they are activated by influences which, even though
temporary, are quite intense. You are attracted to, immersed in and fascinated by the concept~ of birth, death and regeneration, but even
you may long for complete and total change in life, at the same time ""'11 ·
fear abandonment and are bothered by the limitatiohs of y0ur own m0'ttality. This could be a time of farewells, particularly in short-term relati0..m."'
ships, as you are highly aware #lat som etimes growth can only occur after
the old has been shed in order to make way for the new. You seek intensity
in daily life, and find yourself impatient with the trivial nature of y0ut
day-to-day concerns. Your awareness oflife's impermanence tends to alienate you from the mainstream of society, and thus you may idealize .cl'ie
outlaw, identifying with social scapegoats and heroes. Death itself may be
looked at more closely than usual, as a greater awareness of your own
mortality can provide a motivation for living life more intensely and h0ta"'
estly. The unconscious mind intrudes frequently in your thoughts
actions, and life's daily dealings can thus take on mythological importance
for you, symbolizing cosmic trends and powers. This is a short perio<ll six months long or so - but its intensity and the depth of the challenge
and isolation it often brings can leave their mark on you. ana 20 Mercury: Link to the Network This powerful temporary influence can last as long as two years, making
you fascinated and preoccupied with anything involving communication,
travel, work, ideas and mental growth. I t will more than likely be a very
busy and active time, in which you may find yourself overcommitted
and heavily scheduled, particularly with regard to educational and career
concerns. Travel and communication figure prominently in everything you
do, and you spend a lot of time mentally integrating an amazing flow of
information about your environment that passes through your hands. When
you speak, everyone listens, not so much beeause you have suddenly
developed a profound viewpoint or a powerful style of expression, but
because you're a critical link, plugged into an information network and
the important resources it contains. Your interest in computers and their
possibilities should increase, along with your interest in neighbourhood
concerns and your participation in informational study groups.
Ideas about the world and who you are which have been evolving quietly
for the past few years now graduate into practical, usable forms, often
becoming the basis for marketable skills. The foundations for a new attitude
towards and comprehension of the world are also ·developed, bringing a
concomitant increase in your involvement with new people in your own
area of interest as well as professional societies. Your organizational abilities
develop rapidly along with newly learned vocational skills, interests and
hobbies; setting the stage either for promotion, if you are an employee,
or greater commercial success, if you are in business for yourself. Television,
radio, video and other media all assume more importance than they had
for you before, often providing a new outlet for the expression of your
emerging consciousness. One interesting sidelight of this progression is
often that your phone bills can attain new highs. Under most circumstances
this is not simply the result of an increase in your need to gab the day
away (though this too is possible), but rather because your sharpened mind
2.61 TRANSITS AND PROGRESSIONS seeks out new personal and intellectual connections to help you to
and to realize the ideas you are developing in the most efficient and
productive manner. You become very aware of both the limitations and
possibilities of your private resources, as greater opportunities for their
development and utilization manifest at this time. MERCURY TO NATAL SUN
You may find yourself becoming aware, perhaps for the first time, o:f
personal myth and (quest' now, usually the result of a good deal of reading,
introspection and mental self-searching. The results of your thoughts taking
this direction could be a more accurate self-image, one dominated by your
potentials for leadership and by a better understanding of your authority
pride and ego. This progressed aspect often represents an important turn·
ing-point in your life, thrmllgh a process that takes about a year to
completed. Young people, students, teachers, travel and new modes
communication and employment tend to figure prominendy in this growth
towards your realization of a new goal in life and your acquisition of
talents that can help you to reach it. The work you do in order to u ............
a living may become more creative in an artistic sense, requiring the devel
opment of faculties that may have lain dormant ot even completely ~uu.uv.l!
from view.
As you become more aware of the real roots of your identity .....~,.. ,
selfhood, yo.u r need for approval from others. for what you say and do
grows in most areas of your life. Even if you are essentially a modest
person, you want to put the mark of individuality and identity on everything
you do, thus leading you to express yourself in. a more individualistic and
unique fashion. The importance of this period of time comes from its
usefulness in helping you to identify the inner myth that guides you, and
while this may come solely from your own introspection, important clues
can also be provided by important people who turn their attention on you.
Even when you think you know it all, listen to what others have to say. MERCURY: LINK TO THE NETWORK MERCURY TO NATAL MOON As this aspect intrudes mildly on your life, you may become more conscious
than you have been of your roots, of your heredity and of the importance
of your home and family in shaping your personality and personal identity.
At the same time, however, you will be able to develop a greater understanding of the particular individual needs and desires that mould your character
and individuality, quite apart from what others say, do and think about
you. As you become ever more active, talkative and alert, your restless
mind seeks to define and to comprehend the meaning of your past, so
that biography, nostalgia and visits to places important to your family
history are likely preoccupations now. You may be more· aware than usual
of your emotional needs or erotic appetites, and of your need for people,
things or a sense of belonging, and a need to bring some order to these
basically chaotic and overpowering desires in an attempt to underst-and
them. Over the year o~ so this progression takes to run its course, its most
useful purpose is to provide you with symbols, words and even material
reminders (such as souvenirs) of your roots and personal origins. This is
a period in which to spend time with your mother) if possible, or anyone
else who knows much about your past, as the realization you gain now
about where you ca:me from should figure prominently in your effort to
find a new self-definition and will increase your understanding of where
you should be heading in your life. MERCURY TO NATAL VENUS Though at this location you generally have a need to cultivate your desires
and talents for love, harmony, peace and artistic expression, for the year
or so of this progression, the accent is on understanding these needs ·i n
more depth. For example, you could become interested in explicitly defining
an ideal to be the object of your affections. At the same time, you turn your
intellectual curiosity towards the exploration of your affectional appetites, as
well as your need to acquire money ahd the good things it buys. Communication is central to this process, so you could be more involved than usual
in correspondence, study and the reorganization of your thinking about
your personal needs for love, affection and pleasure in life. This is likely z6; TRANSITS AND PROG-RESSIONS to be a very active and highly social period, one in which you have mot
opportunities to socialize than time to pursue them. Áries out work is als6>
area for change and expansion: you may be presented with chances to
more creative and to develop greater pride and a sense of aes.thetiGSJ
what you do. MERCURY TO NATAL MARS
The combative, aggressive and competitive side of your nature are nrn:uli't'•
fully accented, and though this period may be more than a bit trying, cit
an important time in which to develop your understanding and coJmt:>reJtteJi
sian of those aspects of your character. You could possibly eX!)ertetJLee':';a
abstract intellectual curiosity about the concept of masculinity, a
perhaps focused through your relationship with younger people or
mental interests, hobbies and pursuits. The combination inclines yol!l·
view the world thtough a system of values that is more m~ue--or.ten.ta:t:ec
macho and confrontational than may be usual for you, so you may
yourself more than usually inclined to dispute the views of others. Áries :
become aware of how competition and the threat of coercion can
you and thus may tend to react by pushing a little harder than usual.
J.s particularly problematic when driving or travelling in general, and u· ~t\~
operating machinery, as your impatience, if unchecked, could prove uaJ.~!'>'\.-J
ous in these situations. On the positive side, this period of time (abou~
year in duration) is excellent for beginning vigorous, challenging ent:eq:,rfS4e-~
and your courage and willingness to take risks expand. Your work
become more masculine, dangerous or physical, and your power of ,.......u~,.,
is exercised more often on concrete problems and competitive issues
on abstractions or matters dealing with imagination. MERCURY TO NATAL JUPITER
Under this highly mental and communicative aspect, you develop a rasc:m~
ation and curiosity regarding social power and the symbols of status, .:u"';'-.~
with those who define and manipulate these symbols. This important pe1:1oc
is particularly useful in forming or adjusting your attitudes towards ·soc::f@l!t
and the demands it makes on you to conform. Your most powerful Pvt-\P1'fl MERCURY: LINK TO THE NETWORK ences now emphasize the importance of status, particularly in your work,
your hobbies and your intellectual interests. You tend to see clearly the
'pecking orders' by which some define their place in the world, especially
becoming aware of your own position (or lack of same) within them. Your
job may put you in touch with a higher sodal stratum - perhaps th:rm:1gh
travel, educational o·r cultural concerns - so this is apt to be one of the
best periods in your life for the acquisition of honours, degrees, credentials,
or for taking advantag€ of other opportunities to rise socially. Your health
also may improve generally at this time, and the understanding you gain
now of alternative therapies, health regimens or diet can be important and
useful to your future well-being. MERCURY TO NATAL SATURN
You develop ·a fascination with and a general need to explore society's
power systems, possibly driven by a situation (particularly in a work context)
in which you feel you have either too little or too much. You become
aware of how pervasive and potentially oppressive inequality is, possibly
for the first time realizing how politics, gover,nment or other power structures affect you. This time (about a year in duration) could become a
continuing symbol of all your deficiencies and weaknesses, and in later life
memories of it might act as a motivational goad to accomplishment and
ambition. Out of necessity, you develop systematic, diligent work habits,
learning to focus your powers of concentration in a way you may not have
done before. Where before now you may have been a bit easygoing and
even lackadaisical, strict routine becomes your favoured mode of procedure,
as the world around you seems driven by reality and dominated by necessity.
Feeling somehow oppressed by those who have powers greater than your
own, you study and reflect on them, creating mental attitudes that are
pragmatic, patient and based on real experience rather than upon speculation or theory. This zone is naturally one of discipline and self-sacrifice,
and at this time such tendencies are .focused through work, study and
mental attitude. • MB.RCUR. Áries ' T 'O NATAL .t f:RANUS ¥o1,1 6.n_cl,youtself becomin. Vênus more and m0re fascinated by th,e· !:>tZ:Mtt<t~~
the noncont<::lrm.ing _as you pegin to as.slm.ilatl)! t;ne!'ltal jdc:;a.s a~d atlililll
lihat·aret;l,:tflusual. aflcl may even be•.s0ciaUy Qisa8prov:ed. Yol;l:t mind time-is attracted to the f.oibi<lldirtgly teehnical 0r·t0 .st!idies sueh ·as astt:ore
which fall outside usual academic b®l!ln'claries. Awakened to excitin~
interests~ Netuno ,:og begin to see n0w iilarro:w: ~nd limiting social
kn,_0wledge c~ he. What st-atts out li>e!'haps as ;.an abstract study of •Sll>ll'l~
phase qf kn0wledge beeomes an important, lifelong symbol,.of yo~
vidl!lalicy,l and eyents and interests wlille thi.s progressed. aspect is in
can.. coastitute a new foundation for your intell~<:;tual independence
creativity. Young people,_c:reativ:e work assignments or hard-to-dl~~gf.ik!fs~
health problems 'point the way; towar<.(s these highly indi:\Tidual teaJllzatrg~~6l
so that ;aftet: this periQd is 9v~r you tnay find :you have developed .
ability te perceive·associations betwe~n ideas which others see :as
Am:x ,effort to redefine y0urs.el£ at pres.ent will .likely be cool, .l, ·rtt·c~llei~.tW
and unemotie>nal: ·you StJ.i~ Netuno the established political and social systet:f1i~
order to learn how t0 exerds.e your freedom and to experience
ineliv.iduality witl'iin it. . MERC.U R¥ TO N.AT.AL NEPTUNE The dreamy, illusory, ..romantic and intuitive nature of this' zone is aJ:J.lf#iliO
affect you strongly at )the mental level now~ so that yol!l ma. Netuno 'undertake
i:ntellecttlal e~ploration of the-most hliide~ ancl mysterious aspects.,of J:Ilfu:(d
ap.d tran.s.e:endent experien~e. 'Young p,eop~~' Netuno :ou.r .job_, or con§etips ab<i>.~t
your ,health may be the_pr.eciR.itating agen~ Netuno that propels youheadlong~1i0
bizarre a.11d other-worldly mental expenien,ces, inda~ng alt~red s.ta:t¢s
consciousness. This period could bec?me a permanent ;ymbol.in your Jll.i~
for all that is weird, fo:trbidd.in: Vênus and fa.ntas.tio. The;.strortg stlii;ml~ttrGrm..14i!>f
yolil1" imagination leads you to·emp3:thlze or iderftifjr with anyone or
society has rejected -' whether IJ,eople, idefts, or behaviou,r parrerns·. fl ~s
importa.11t to avoi~ drugs n0w, ~s well as the i.dea of becoming ~ ~fl·
dependent .or a martyr in order to compensate for the shortcomings
others, since these things will be ot no help to you either spirituall~ z66 MERCURY: LINK TO THE NETWORK practically. The year or so of this aspect's influence may test your reason.
and world view, but it also can leave you with an expanded consciousness,
more in touch with its intuitive and transcendent resources than it was
before. Your philosophy and world view tend towards the trans personal,
resulting in a: clouding of the more practical side of your thinKing processes.
by the philosophical, something which can cause work and finances to
suffer even as it is enriching your spirit. This can be a time of progress
and learning for you, but only if you have the benefit of guidance and
advice from ft:iends and loved ones with a more practical view than you
have at present. MERCURY TO NATAL PLUTO
You find yourself ready and willing, though not always able, to explore
some of the more forbidden aspects of life - birth, death., regeneration
•
and sexuality. Work, health and intellectual interests tend to lead you into
situations that are somewhat bizarre and perhaps transforming in their
effect on you. This can be an important stage of your life, even though it
is only about a year in duration, if you can handle the peak experiences
and the lntensity all arouild you. This could also be a time of research as
you learn to focus and discipline your mind, particularly when you apply
it to understanding archaic and arcane subjects. The information you gather
from such probing tends to set you apart from others, perhaps alienating
you from those who have been too timid to look so deeply or so searchingly
into their own souls. Your attitude towards the world becomes mote
imbued with awareness of the regeneration and renewal themes that are
so centtal to life; knowledge itself for you becomes a means to transcend
the mortality to which the flesh is heir. Mental pursuits at this time can
silendy sow the seeds of a complete life transformation, as you look beneath
appearan~es and become aware of how life's finiteness, as an ultimate
shared reality, motivates all striving and interrelationship. ' 21 Venus: A Time of Love
and Pleasure Venus progressing to an angle at any locality is a powerful tennp~~.ta~ti
influence, lasting as long as two years. During the period highlighted by
aspect, social events, parties, affection, love and relationship will uvJL.LJ.u....,
activities in this place, along with a desire for pleasure, ease, luxury
financial success. You're apt to become the recipient of favours, u·tvlt:atl•Oa1:
gifts and affection, even proposals for marriage or other relauv•u..:>.L..L.L}J<
more often than usual, and your senses and their satisfaction take on
importance for you, especially if you have relegated these to ._.· •.,.·~;•u . ....., ..... ...,,
in your life up until now. This attraction to beauty in turn attracts otn.eli
to you, since you exude a happy air of charm, diplomacy, grace and
Social activity may reach a new high for you, particularly the less .,.....,. .""~
sort - birthday parties and the like - as your circle of friends see:lil1i
bent on pleasure, hedonism and self-indulgence. Desire for cotnrrutt·e~
relationship increases, and even inveterate bachelors (of either sex) nrn.F>:r
begin to see the security of marriage in a new light. Along with
increased interest in marriage, a deeply felt need for children can
develop; even if you don't have any of your own, other people's
become more important in your life. Women figure more prominently
your life now, along with traditionally feminine interests and occm):>atlGruJ
While you come across new financial opportunities (perhaps through
acguisition of tangible goods), your new and often insatiable appetite
pleasure leads to the exaggeration of both extravagance and poss
during this period. Even if marriage does not come about now, this ....·,J.llil
can represent a turning-point for you, especially as you begirt to unders .......\ Júpiter that increased happiness and improved self-esteem are the golden l_....ra.
that unlock new doors in your life. VENUS: A. :tiME OF LOVE AND PLEASURE VENUS TO NA T AL SUN While being born beautiful is certainly fortunate, during this time you can
learn how to make yourself more attractive, whatever your n~turallooks .
Of course, being attractive has as much to do with attitude and feelings
as with facial features, so the grace and charm that mark your selfexpression and become an important factor in the way others see you, do
in fact make you more attractive so that you find yourself at the centre of
much social activity. Romantic relationships which you develop now may
focus on people in leadership positions or on artists, performers or entertainers. You find yourself becoming fond of children, and you cultivate
an affectionate, playful world view as .part 0f a general tempering and
harmonization of your personality. In many areas of your life the rough
edges are smoothed, so that you present a more loving, pea«eful demeanour
to the world. Your finances are likely to be favourably affected while this
aspect is in effect, though improving finances· may encourage any tendency
you have towards ostentatious spending and speculative pursuits. Finding
a creative outlet in the arts will help you to employ some of the mote
indulgent and non-productive effects of this influence constructively. V E NUS TO NA T AL MOON Your home life, and your relationships with family and relatives, improves
measurably under the friendly and benevolent joining of these two planets.
Thls is an ideal time to beautify your residence with interior decoration,
remodelling, gardening or other aesthetic improvements, but outer glamorization of the home merely reflects an inner harmony with your environment and a growing affection for those Closest to you. You now can learn
how to take care of others with style: entertainment, parties and other
social occasions (numerous and often glamorous) are liable to mark the
year or so that this influence is in effect, reflecting a new-found sense of
self-worth and a willingness to express your love and affection for others.
Things can become a litde t:oo pleasant for you, however, as this influence
tends to enforce a kind of idleness and a pursuit of the material which
may prove 'boring to more ambitious types of personalities. While, on the
one hand, men are likely to feel their erotic needs intensify, women may TRANSITS AND PROGRESSI"ONS retreat into rather banal, trivial relationships. In either case, tm~nctsn:~p
with women improve in general, as you learn that love can mean
affection and harmony as well as passion and intense erotic "'""'~H-....-•..,~~~
Money and possessions are important now; real estate and many uUJ.,AIJ.l
items purchased now will probably increase in value, though the se11t1tn~:ro.ta
attachment you are likely to develop to such things makes that fact ra
irrelevant. VENUS TO NATAL MERCU R Áries Your capacity for verbal and written communication is increased, and
your mode of expression takes on a new ease and facility, it's a good
to capitalize on the skills of persuasion. This important aspect often ...........
the time when we establish lifelong standards in these areas. Work-vx••'-'
skills also reflect greater sensitivity and awareness, and day-to-day tasks
performed with ease and carried through ·with artistic simplicity. Kelatron
ships at work improve to the extent that you may find yourself often
the role of peacemaker; others see you as a ·satisfactory compro•rrw:;e
someone who is able to restore harmony between warring factions
individuals. The creation of any sort of symbol system - from .......n.,
poetry to computer programs - can be completed now with
. and efficiency, and it will demonstrate structures that are balanced
harmonious. Your attuned artistic sensibility discovers beauty in
environment as well, and making an effort to develop and train attiLuu. .,
of aesthetic perception can make your future life more pleasant. Prou.."''"'•·
are easily solved, and academic studies benefit from improved coJmnatu:W·<
cations skills. Attitude and mood are optimistic and elevated, so that uhls
generally is an excellent period for work and life's day-to-day pursuits. VENUS TO NATA L VENUS
This doubly benefic progressed aspeet is a locatiolil. that will be very help£ul
to you in most areas of your life. It is an exceptionally good time to J..I;;;:)JLu~:<~
in the place in question, ·especially if you are interested in. dealing m:<:)Jie•
directly with issues of love, relationship, financial accomplishment
self-indulgence. This is a powerfully social period in which coop~;;...aw.vJ.Jj, VENUS.: A T Urano M:E 0F, L OYE'· AND PL£ASURE harmony and peace are sttiv:en for io all .human relationships. Gonfl.icts
and eompetitive cb.all~itnges are apt to be minimal, the greatest danger being
that ·there are so few problems fr.ia:t yog tend to. become a bit lazy, going
with the flow just a little top mu~ Saturno . Áries o,u'll feel dos.e r to most.wQmen you
know, and you will find most of yoq:r activities .in:v.:olving th~m to be
pleasan~, carefree and elegant. Self-esteem and personal appearance certainly cmght t0 improv~. now, and,. on the other side of that coin, some
important theme in. your eonceptualization of the 'Perfect Other' can be
'
.
identified as well. This could in:v.:olve something as simple as corning, to
understand ideals ·o f physical appeaJ;ance ·or as complex a.s .beco~ing aware
of the personality type that interests you most. Whatever the case, selfacceptance furthers your quest for .i dealized love, a quest which, .c ould meet
with s0me success at this time. VENUS TO NA,TAL M.A,R£
This contact is perfect for the development of grace and style in any
.athleti<;, gymnastic or dance pursuits, but it is also a good time tO learn
how to get things done in any .l ife .area where the cooperation of others
is re'-luired, or in which aesthetic awareness. plays an imgortant part. No
matter what Netuno <;mr l\Otmal tena€-nd~s. a.,:e, you a~e..apt to take greater pleasur.e .
in exercise and ::physj~al a,:ctivity:, and find erotic ·pursuits, which could be.
numer-ous and. gratifying now, of more interest than u.sual. You will s.e em.
more attractiwe and interesting to others. generally, and thus may find a
surprising.nl!lmber .o f peo.ple.making khown to you their interest in fonging
a new relationship.. SoCial skills improve as well, largely becaus~ any
impulses to selfishness and comp~titiveness are moderate$1 and te~traiaed,
and as others find you easy to ,get al9ng with yet able to ·.ge~ things done~
rel~tional and practical concerns move. forward with the.ir cooperation and
suppott. While this infltJence. is in effect, the more aggressive and con,..
frontive aspects you might normhlly hav-e to deal· with at this location are
mitigated,_with the energy normally devoted to such things channelled into
a sharpenea interest in sex and t:elationships, aad a consequent increase
in opportunities for thejr gratification. Áries 0\,l;~re. ~apt ~ Mercúrio ' be drawn to more
masculine typ.~s (of either gender),., ancl :whjle·you participate wholeheartedly
in the battle of the sexes, you join the struggle with style and Vênus £ace, not
with rancour. TRANSITS AND PROGR·ESSI.ONS VENUS TO NATAL JUPITER
Your search for social acceptance and status, and situations in which
can express authority, are likely to meet success, especially through
means of an increase in financial well-being. Professional, social and ·
sonal relationships proceed smoothly for the most part, and may cor1stituti
a foundation for social advancement and enhanced prestige; you fimci
easy to meet 'important people', especially in the arts, high · society
academia - people who react to you and your aspirations favourably .
with encouragement. This period is one in which you can enjoy re'\:v~dl
that come from careful planning in the past, including the maturing
successful investments, and an increase in public awareness of who
are and what you can do. You are able to administrate and control
personal and social circles in such a way that people are happy to
to your success and comply with your desires. Social contacts be1c<1>t~
greater sources of social and financial gain than they have been in the
offering knowledge of or opportunities for investment and pre:tet~m<i~l'l
The danger lies in things being too easy for you, so you'll have to m~iB;
a special effort to fight the twin problems of complacency and laxityyou just kick back and enjoy all the party invitations, you will not
able to use this period to lay the foundations of long-term success
advancement. Extravagance also may result from the decrease in
control that often accompanies this aspect, especially if you indulge
frankly materialistic values. that contribute to financial growth and suc€;1es
at this time. Overall, however, this time should be memorable fon
pleasantness, as your feelings of fitting into the social scene, of U\..!VUJ~.U.·)
and even of your superiority to others in some respects are all acc:on1pafnl<ild
by an irrepressible sense of well-being and joie de vivre. VENUS TO NATAL SATURN
You may express graceful acceptance of the limitations which usually
accompany the angular Saturn at this location and can even find a wa'> Netuno :
incorporate them positively into your self-image. Social situations seem
prick your most sensitive wounds now, but despite this you can rea:liZe
certain pleasure or benefit from such difficulties, bearing them with Vênus :t;_a~e~
272 VENUS: A TIME OF LOVE AND PLEASURE and dignity. Moreover, social opportunities may present themselves precisely because of what you see as your own personal disadvantages and
deficiencies, some of which may ·relate to age differences or spring from
perceived inequalities in abilities or experience. However, since the concepts
of power and physical beauty seem somehow to be linked now, through
dealing with people of divergent age and experience you can come to
understand those parts of your own earlier life that were unsatisfactory.
Since your best ideas now seem to be der:ived from a need for personal
power, this can alienate potential supporters. Because of this, loyalty is
likely to be a real issue for yo.u now, and relationships built with this
consideration in mind may prosper while those that ignore it do not.
Whether in relationships or other areas of your life, when things. go wrong
you caa turn those defea:ts to your advantage by: accepting them with grace
and dignity. Careful ·investment at this time can yield long-term benefits,
though specl:llation should be avoided, particularly in areas pertaining to
recreation, art or currency. You may find yourself attracted to people of
lesser stature and status than you now - the disempowered, the impoverished, or the isolated - as you see them somehow as symboli~ing yout
acceptance of your own deficiencies. VENUS TO NATAL URANUS
This period can mark a major turning-point in your ability to develop your
individuality and personal uniqueness in a way that is neither threatening
to your success in the long term nor intimidating to others in the short term.
Artistic style, grace and elegance are imparted to any strongly individualistic
self-expressions - especially writing, social concerns and any dealings you
have with groups. You are able to express your ideals pleasingly and
diplomatically, making it easy for you to find allies and supporters, no
matter how unusual the cause. You may feel the need to change your
physical appearance in such a way that it expresses your individuality better,
so that the cl?thes, jewellery and accessories you wear may in some respects
diverge from ·current fashion in a way that frankly accentuates your distinctiveness. Breaking with routines and seeking new social liaisons can be a
positive delight for you now, particularly in the area of investment, where
your tendency to wander off the beaten track can bring either enormous
windfalls or heartbreaking losses. You may find yourself attracted to rather
27 3 TRANSITS AND PROGRESSIONS bizarre and unusual people at this time, perhaps seeing them as soJnelil0JW.
embodying the type of individuality you would like to express in your ,....""'',..
personality. While this can make relationships forged now quite · lterestJli\l; Vênus ~
a roller-coaster variability should be expected in marriage or other lOtlg-tettt
commitments. Above all) this is a good time to convince others of
value of your ideals and opinions and to gather social support for un1.1Sllill.1
personal causes or pet projects. VENUS TO NATAL NEPTUNE The aesthetic dimension of this location is particularly emphasized now
so that increased sensitivity or inspirati0n is likely in any fortn of artrstl.c
expression you engage in, though especially in music. Relationships
also take forms which are different from those you are usually accuston1ea
to, as you could find yourself attracted to visionary, artistic or co1mt:ei~
cultural types who may give your personal experience a slightly
edge. D espite the ups and downs, however, the love you feel for otlle.liS~
and which they give to you, becomes a deeper, m:ore mystical ext::>er1er1ce;
full of nuance and poetry and wistful, sentimental romance. You oe<:onle
extremely receptive to the subtle, disturbing influences usually found ·
this zone, but you take a certain pleasure and delight in feeling
responding on such deep levels. Spirituality beckons, often through
riage or relationship, and you seek to live out your romantic fantasies
either rural surroundings or some exotic milieu that intrigues you with its
romantic and mysterious aura. You're easily possessed by idealism hene,
and while your grasp on reality is a bit tenuous now (because of the
difficulty with which you separate factual necessities from your hopes at:~d
aspirations), during the year this aspect is in effect you can develop in your
character an ability to make others look beyond immediate goals so clir.at
they can learn to seek perfection and spiritual gratification. VE NU S TO NATAL PLUTO Processes of change, growth, intense personal development and rapid eV'Gf...
ution in your fundamental views of life and death are likely to be accomplished through the agency of relationship. While this may mean that stable,
2.74 VEN U S: A TIME OF LOVE AND PLEASURE important relationships such as marriage can suffer stress, they can also
act to spur you on to a realization of who you truly are and what your
purpose in the world ought to be. Instead of seeing sex and relationship
either as ends in themselves or in terms of possessiveness and commitment,
you must try to become aware of their catalysing effect on emerging
parts of your personality and consciousness. A symbol of such realization
emerging within you may be seen in an attraction to rather rebellious,
asocial types, or ·even to outlaws - alienated and unique people who can
act out your own potentials before your very eyes. Odd obsessions and
unreasonable fixations may plague you from time to time, especially as the
numerous breaks with the past you are likely to experience often result in
a compulsive need to attach yourself to whatever replacement first offers
itself, in an attempt to fill the void. Financial matters in this p>lace reflect
the general instability of your life, and can easily become entangled with
larger personal issues. D~ing this period you are very much in the mood
for settling up old accounts and making clean breaks with the past, so
these thing$ usually can be accomplished with a minimum of trauma and
heartbreak. 2 75 22 Mars: Stress, Competition, Energy This is a powerful influence, and, though temporary, it can last as long as
three years, years that are marked by aggression, assertion and com~
petitiveness in your life and relationships. Stress, harassment, pr<)V<)Ca.tt.an.~
irritation, and annoyance seem to cloud everything you experience,
lenging you to rise above pettiness while working to develop your ,._,.,....... uv~
qualities and your capacity to take care of yourself as you take
responsibility for the direction of your own life_:. You become very <>r t·•'tT..
as life makes continual demands on you to exceed what you thought
as your physical limits; everything is seen as a challenge, often quite <l'-'--lll'
rately, as others single you out for contest and competition.
You find you have the urge to purge your life of non-essentials, ....
· ......,.•'-UJ'-41
unproductive relationships and possessions. Because of this, social I.Jl.~"'
and your ability to enjoy domestic comforts are under fire now, and uc..~o·i
relationships, whether to peer groups or individuals, become more .... v.u"'~··'"'
tious and competitive. Temper and erotic appetites are inflamed, l'l1·,,,.,.
you the courage, impulsiveness, audaciousness and daring necessary .."".....
their indulgence. A hardy, adventuresome and reckless feeling de,veH)Ji)S
inside you, perhaps making you more inclined to take risks and spemd
money. Though all of this may surprise you and your friends, especialLy.
Mars is wealdy placed in your horoscope, hints of this emerging powe.r.
could have been seen many years ago. This is a risky period, so caution
in the use of firearms and machinery or in driving should be exercised
diligendy, something that will take a great deal of effott at times. Attacks
can also take inward forms such as fevers, inflammations and other health.
problems. If you can balance this out by developing some certainty about
who you are and what you want, though this period may not pass with0:ut
some real or psychological pain, your capacity to endure it is expanded.
You relish the difficult conditions and harsh environments that challemge MARS: STRESS, COMPETITION, ENERGY you at this time, and cultivate a self-image that has a tough, masculine
edge to it. MARS TO NATAL SUN The importance of yom ego and how others see you will increase, perhaps
to the point where you become difficult to cooperate with, somewhat
selfish and strongly goal-orientated. You'll find that you have a lot of
energy to expand your increasingly ambitious horizons, and since you feel
more competitive, dominant and critical, others may see you as threatening,
provoking, intolerant and pushy. Particularly if you are a man, your sexual
needs could be very demanqing for the duration of this influence, something which has less to do with a desire for love and affection than with
a persistent intensification of your basic biological urges. Your manners
and demeanour may coarsen somewhat as well, which should make you
more prone than usual to vigorous physical activity. In fact, being as active
and athletic as your own physical condition allows is highly recommended
now as a way to relieve the powerful physical tensions that seem to beset
you in your haste to set new life records and higher standards of personal
accomplishment. RasJmess is on the increase, s0 accidents, and conflicts
with authority, quickly follow. Others may think you're becoming cruel,
insensitive and domineering, so that their cooperation is often difficult to
gain; and though it may seem easier just to do everything yourself, this
attitude greatly limits your effectiveness and thus should be moderated as
much as possible. MARS TO NATAL MOON You are apt to beco~e somewhat irritable, easily annoyed and reactive
during this period. Your relationships with women (or your self-esteem,
if you are female) may begin to deteriorate, though this doesn't prevent
you from acting as the mother hen to anyone in your sphere of influence,
perhaps even providing them with a lot more nurturing control and care
than they want. 1£ mothering becomes smothering it may stem from the
fact that it's a time when you feel under stress, you are releasing pent-up 277
I TRANSITS AND PROGRESSIONS anger relating to insult or injuries in the recent past (maybe from
family) and are thus unconsciously acting out your anger on others.
ever, this can be a good period for confronting direcdy any who hr.~rt"
wronged you - you won't spare their feelings - but be sure only aeserv
parties are victims of your wrath. You're certainly able to stand up
your rights now, but don't visit the crimes of the fathers on the sons,
to speak, just to prove you can. Your forcefi.u frame of mind :6ts you
for taking on strenuous, constructive projects that help you to relieve .LU.I.L'-"'
pressures, though if home remodelling is unde.vtaken, be careful non
throw spouse, house mates, relatives and neighbours out along with
old carpeting! Carefully review plans such as this with s0meone who
expertise in what you intend to do, and beware of taking on anything
could result in serious injury if it gets out of hand. MARS TO NATAL MERCURY
Your concepts, beliefs and opinions are assailed by others and
sharpened by you in response~ as numerous arguments force you to ,.,.,...,+-.....
your verbal skills and learn to reduce arguments to their essentials. If
have always been a courteous listener and a compromising diplomat
debate, this period could be 'Milquetoast's revenge', as you learn not
how to force others to see your point of.view but also how to take '"'"'-''"""
in their acquiescence to your way of seeing things. You approach
daily tasks, both mental and physical, with great energy and intense in teres
so it is important that the work you do is challenging enough to re!tev,·e'
the nervous energy and pressure of this highly charged time. Travel - ·-.
neighbourhood concerns can become the focus of much of your
energy and activity, but be careful not to let your impatience and impetuousness put you in dangerous situations in these areas of your life. If v.v.....
are involved in education, this definitely is a time to excel through ha.rd
work and the cultivation of your desire to compete. MARS: STRESS, COMPETITION, ENERGY MARS TO NATAL VENUS
Friendship and affectionate liaisons tend to be rejected under this aspect
in favour of more satisfying physical relationships, and you may find yourself losir.J. Vênus patience with unrealistic and romantic people, preferring the
company of adventuresome, daring, risk-taking types. Love may not be
romantic during this period, but it is certainly passionate, so relationships
fo.t:med now will thrill you witl:). their intensity and sexuality. You are likely
to find yourself more in the company of men than usual, especially strong
and assertive types, and traditionally masculine concerns - sports, military
matters, arduous physical work - could well form the centre of your social
life and contacts. You have less concern now than at other ·times for social
graces and less interest in what others might say or think about how you
act, as gratification is the most important consideration for you now, while
propriety, fairness and cooperation seem irrelevant. You are more likely
to spend your money on indulging your need for interesting experiences
than on accumulating possessions, and while this period could deplete your
savings, it also provides you a great deal of intense, uncomplicated and
physical satisfaction. Action, adventure and a more vigorous lifestyle keep
you moving throughout the eighteen or so months this aspect is in force. MARS TO NATAL MARS
All the concerns enumerated in the introductory paragraphs above will be
particularly critical now, so if you are considering a move to a zone in
which this aspect prevails, this should be taken as evidence that these
potentials are more than ready to be consciously assimilated. You seek to
experienc~ intense events involving sexuality, conflict, athletics or just plain
hard physical work, so the warnings about excessive belligerence and rashness mentioned above should be .especially heeded now. Your ego is apt
to be sensitive and easily provoked, your body stronger and more athletic,
and your appearance somewhat coarser, yet still attractive in a powerful,
masculine way. You should tend to the formulation of go~ls, life ambitions
and important short-term objeeticv:es, while simultaneously working to suppress any tendencies to be argumentative or over-competitive. While this
zone is always one in which assertive and egocentric concerns come to the TRANSITS AND PROGRESSIONS fore, it is particularly strong in these respects now. If you don't cotJsctout;s:N:
undertake to integrate these potentials internally, external situations
constantly urge you to do so. MARS TO NATAL JUPITER
The more problematic aspects of this influence may make you more than
usually prone to push your ideas on to others and to feel empowered t0
judge what is right and wrong in their lives. Even though your beliefs may
be under attack at this time, you should look beneath the surface and. try"
to see how a limited world view or unthinking ignorance on your part
could have contributed to the misunderstandings that seem to plague Netuno <D~
Your reputation, prestige and financial status may also be under attack, as
antago.nists and your own rashness and ill-considered actions produce
expensive mistakes, meaning that expenses now may seriously out$tti.p
income. ·B e particularly prudent in investment now, and anticipate ma.tj
some of those who ask you to place your cash in their hands could
out to con you, or that entrepreneurial schemes described in rosy, !llOWlfl!l
terms could end up as real losers. On the positive side, this period of .........,,.....
is excellent for athletic competition, as your belief in yourself makes wu·,llJJJ.,,~.
easier; expect to set lifetime records and to have more stamina and en1et~Yc
than at other times. Jogging and similar activities will relieve tension =·~~·
help you to channel excess energy constructively. MARS TO NATAL SA TURN
If you are unaware of what your weaknesses and failings are, expect that
to be changed soon at this location, as external forces or your own intu10~
spection are apt to probe your most sensitive secrets and subject you to
a rather unpleasant awareness of what you need to improve in your person,.
ality. If you suffer indignity and injury at the hands of others, this can be
taken in a somewhat constructive context as arduous discipline to toughen
and to harden you. This period is helpful for exploring and recognizill!! Vênus your limits, particularly physical ones, and it is good for hard work, intense,
sustained competition, and learning to overcome what may at first s:e em
insurmountable through the determined application of incessant effort. If
2.80 MARS: STRESS, COMPETITION, ENERGY you must be here during this period; expect it to be rather debilitating,
dreary and depressing, though the dullness is somehow worth it for the
sense of power and self-motivation that comes from surmounting imp<:>ssible obstacles. It is also good for those who already do demanding physical
work in manual trades - carpentry, metal working, etc., though you should
be aware of an increased danger of injury, incapacitation or illness at this
time. Be sure you are ready for an arduous, adventuresome and intense
experience·if you happen. to be considering a move here riow. MARS TO NATAL URANUS This locale will always be the scene of upheavals and powerful changes
for you during the eighteen-month period in question, but such change is
apt to come without much warning, and could perhaps be engendered by
fire, violence or accident. Much of the problem stems from your attitude,
as you tend to be more rash, opinionated and so certain you are right that
you'd rather fight 'than switch. - or even listen. An impulsive desire to
rebel against any constraints on your freedom makes you hard to get alongwith, and you should avoid travelling, using machinery or handling fifearms
when under the spell of one of the frequent fits of anger you may experience. This is probably a good place to avoid at this time, unless you are
ready for hair-raising adventure and exciting, perilous stimula_tion on an
almost daily basis. The adrenalin junkie and daredevil may delight in this
climate of intense unpredictability, but most will find it too dangerous,
upsetting and threatening except in limited doses. Those who enjoy the
thrills and spills they can find here will emerge from such exploits with a
good stock of interesting stories to tell, and the scars to prove they lived
through them all. MARS TO NATAL NEPTUNE While this locale is always the scene of non-rational, imaginative and chaotic
intrusions from the unconscious, these are now stimulated to a sometimes
distressing degree either by external a:ttack or by inte.tnal distress so acute
that it seems to threaten rational integrity. Perhaps the best way to deal
with the seething, intense feelings set loose at this time is through some
281 TRANSITS AN D PROGRESSIONS marriage of art and action, such as dance, gymnastics 0r strenuous trainin, Vênus ;:
in order to perfect some form of visual or musical artistic expression. If
positive steps are not taken to channei these chaotic energies wisely, health
and relationship affairs are apt to suffer from the excess of undirected
emotionality seething in you, and accidents and illn"esses could be the liktd; Netuno result. Drug abuse, allergies, venereal infections, involvement with cri.me
and delusions of persecution are the most intense (though thankfully rare)
expressions of this force, but anyone can expect practical matters to suffeli
as moods swing from one extreme to another, upsetting the natural balance
that helps us do what we need to do. In addition to constructive artistic::
expression, this period of time can bring political involvement, especially
when it involves high ideals and Utopian visions, but too often this kiBtd
0f activity ends up accomplishing little. This period will last quite a while
- up to eighteen months - so if you must reside here during this time,
selfless activity, spiritual pursuits and a saint's patience are perhaps the
best defences against the more negative possibilities. MARS TO NATAL PLUTO
T his is a difEcult zone to begin with, as explained elsewhere (page 2. 34),
but during this .period it is even more so. Powerful upheaval and life
changes are occasioned partly by a belligerent, provocative attitude both.
in you and in others, and partly by fate, and it is often difEcult to keep
arguments from escalating into vendetta. Long-forgotteh relationships may
resurface, demanding that unfinished business surrounding them be
_resolved. If your work exposes your routinely to danger (such as military,
.Jaw enforcement, search-and-rescue, etc.), yot~ may find that you exult Hit
the risk, something that sho'U.l.d serve as a warning, as a healthy sense (])t
danger may keep you safer and help you do your job better. The purpose
of this period of time is to make you aware of your physical mortality to the
end of defining a more realistic directio111 for your life. Shocks, indulgenee m
erotic intensity or you yourself becoming more brutal and cruel are external
indicators of a great inner change that demands an alteration of your life
directions. Expect this period to be intense, and be willing to surrencler
life interests that have run their course. -1 2. '$ JuJ?iter·:· Full Speed Ahead This is a £>OW:erful tetn,pG>~~ lr.rfiuertce, lasting about three nrohths, though
it can ii€'G>'<!:'Gtl,f tih:i'G>ugheat"di:e year as a reswt e.f rettbgression. During this
period, expamsjv;etJ.es.s, O} Plutão .uj.mi:sfn ·and incneasecl self'-'es,teem ·are promoted
by e:xtern~l .events,, whi.~lh., e>ffer 0ppottunitieSi for Saturno .onours, rewards and
recogni,t±G>n. ~o:u find yourself dealing significantly w.ith th:.e ·prospe·e.ts ~nd
problems of CJ~·m:.f0tmity and social or cultural tegpiation at thls time,
m0st likely tlu:o.ugh recognition iet rewat'd of: your a:ccompfishments by
es:nablished authorities irt ycmr fidd of endeayGtl:t: Howevet', your appetite
for success a1;1d wealth may .exceed the bepevolence of even thisJ.ortunate
i:m:fiiue"t<tGe, and : Netuno ;ou a:cm~ Netuno qtay .feel .t!h7,1Jt what has lDeetJ. offered Y9li is
either ~not ·enough or is rrot w:ha;_t you wanted. H tthe latter is a ·pJ?.<D:biem:, .it
is quite pos&ib>le that your reaf ttrouble' Js that Áries ,Ol!l feel that aG<>epting
:reco~ition J.ltmits yeur fumre ·Options in: Some"sense.
Oh>J.ecti;v;e1~, thd>'ttgh,, business is ap.t to he exG:ellent, and opportunities
proliferate for social advancemeht and improvement of your . financial
·status, as 01: Plutão .e.r.s. s·e em to see -yeu as s0mehqw des.~rvi:qg 0J teeoMiti<Dn
and hon,.o: Netuno .:r. '¥:0u .eX;~.cl~ a :seus~ o.f ,le:~clership botn of a t;onfi:dence. that
you someh.©w ·:repr~sent 't!he hest in Netuno :0ur .s:phete of influence~ and you
expect e'V'e.ry;one to acknowledge.r.this i.riherent superiority which you now
feel. ·He>weve:r,_such e-xpectations may·not, if displayed too operuy,:,.,sitwdl
With the less ttencly. and f:rshion-consc;ious .o f yow: acquaintances. Suoh
negative j,udgements wjil not affect : Netuno ou tnu« Saturno fo.r.·now, as Netuno }>l,l are li~ely
to be to0 busy enjoyiBg the company of the rieh apd famous (0r what
passes for sanre in yol.llr world), as you e:xpand yG>ur social .o!rde in order
'
t0 feed 'b0th your ego ~d ambiti©.a. Other, Vênus ' rights and opinions may aot
seem very imp;ottant to you fet flG\W:, .as: you. tertd t0 f:€d that Netuno .out way is
the .onh: p,rop.er wax and that 1:his ~act''_is v:alid~ted by younassociation
:wim tlle :right penpk in, the r1ghtplaees·. 1n &e midst ofyour evet-expandipg
hopes, dre~s and ambitions, for the·future,keepi,n QaitJ.d that this' inil.aefofee TRANSITS AND PROGRESSIONS is ~short-lived, and try to accumulate durable and real accomplishments. If
you cater only for the short-term and don't .try to build on present opportunities, all of the glory will fade quickly once the transit passes on. JUPITER TO NATAL SUN • Under this particular configuration, you are apt to feel quite optimistic;,
se.c ure in the knowledge that you can handle any situation; but though you
may feel your actions and intentions border on the heroic, you should
beware of a kind of 'psychic inflation' that leads to -overconfidence and
overextending yourself. This very fortunate period is one in which you are
apt to act the role of the authority, teacher, leader or entrepreneur, amd
good luck, often extraordinary in degree, confirms your self-confidence
and will to succeed, almost on a daily basis. The only real problem with
this influence is that it is relatively short-lived. However, it should, when
in effect, be full speed ahead on personal projects, especially those involving
art, personal charisma or leadership, and it is definitely a good time to
apply for jobs and positions. Health improves, religious insights are deeply
felt, and exposure to cultural influences increases awareness and imparts
an air of 'class' to your image. Opportunities offered and projects initiated
at this time can become the cornerstones of future prosperity, as the world
seems intent on recognizing and rewarding you for who you are. Don't
let this time pass without making a concerted effort to move several step~
up the ladder towards your goals. If you are one of those strong, self-assured
individualists who do not find the type of social acceptance that comes
with this transit of much value, you should still consider the long-term
benefits .of riding on the crest of the wave generated by this aspect. JUPITER TO NATAL MOON
This is a most fortunate and positive time, one in which opportunities al!e
offered, doors are thrown open, and you are able to rise socially. Powerful
feelings and emotions are the driviag force behind all of this, as yo..u
become aware of your deepest needs, perhaps because you feel that they
are being satisfied now more than ever. Emotional security lets you feel
and express deep caring and love for others, which is returned to you -1
JUP'ITER: FULL SPEED AHEAD manyfold. Family affairs go well as expansiveness and optimism prevail,
and you feel highly pleased and very comfortable with who you are, with
your roots and your personal origins. Your needs and cravings may increase
in power, but seem to have more than the usual chances of being fulfilled;
more people may depend on you, as your confidence and contentment
attract them. Physical needs increase along with the emotional ones, so
that over-indulgence in food or drink could be among the few ·problems
encountered here. A subtle attraction to the commonplace which often
accompanies this aspect may deceive strong, hardworking individuals into
a comfort and complacem: Netuno quite out of character, but there can be little
harm in indulging this, so long as you are ready to get back down to
practical basics once the transit has passed. - JUPITER TO NATAL MERCURY
Success and advancement in work and educational areas are feat,ured now,
along with opportunities to travel that can bring both material and cultural
awards. Studies, research, writing, journalism, business expansion and ahy
undertaking involving communications should go very well now, perhaps
attracting prestige, job advancement or financial success. Highly suitable
for self-promotion, this period is one in which the more positive potentials
listed above, and their more cultural and expansive interpretations, will
manifest. Influences from foreign sources, along with the assistance of
people of influence, should make life easier for you, and if you wish to
seek new employment, to write or seek a publisher, to promote or advertise,
these matters should go particularly well for you. Exciting new ideas from
the four corners of the earth stimulate a new view of the world, as you
are made more aware of the importance of your fit into the grand scheme
of things. Feelings, sex and relationship seem less important in the midst
of the abundance of ideas that flow during this time. JUPITER TO NATAL VENUS
Personal pleasmes, indulgence in the arts, socializing and not a small bit
of ambition for social advancement drive you during this very pleasant
transit. As the planet of abundance aspects the planet of love and harmony, TRANSITS AND PROGRESSIONS you may find yourself going to more parties, or even weddings, than usual,
as the world around you seems full of happy, playful, contented aadt
nurturing people. Rewards (including increased income) accrue, resultiug
in a sense of security and success, and even problems that occur now
seem to have a silver (or perhaps golden) lining. You are recognized for
accomplishments in your career and, in keeping with the new status that
seems to go with this, you may seek to spend more than is reasonable ®a
improving your appearance, outdoing theJoneses and 'putting on the Ritz'.
Suddenly, limousines seem a tempting mode of transportation, particularly
given the social company you'd like to be keeping. Over-indulgence is, of
course, a danger under such beneficent influences, and those who already
have weight problems, or who tend to spend too mueh, will perhaps ]!le
the only ones likely to find this a challenging period in some respecJ:&.
Relationships develop in a positive direction and, if begun at this time,
have a good chance of being prosperous and enduringly affectionate. Áries au
envision a prosperous future, and you strive to .meet people whose support
you think can assure it. Whether social or financial, investments you make
now. have a good ehance of prospering significantly over the course ©f
tune. JUPITER TO NATAL MARS Some of the more difficult potentials of a zone where the planet of competition, strife and self-assertion is strong are mitigated, allowing you to make
major accomplishments in fields of endeavour which normally might not oe
favoured here. This is a strongly energizing influence, so sports aficionad0;s;
competitors, entrepreneurs and adven~~rs of all kinds can enjoy outsta:m:ll'llng success - as long as they are not driven to excess by overconfidence.
Athletic or military training, body-building, outdoor work, construction
and practical concerns do especially well now, as aggressive instincts are
sharpened and focused in a way that tends to stymie the competition.
Perhaps the only problem in dealing with tl1e success that comes your wary
now lies in your increased potential for being inconsiderate and brash, -as
winning battle after battle may incline you towards boastfulness, authoritarianism, and domineering pushiness born of overconfidence. Whet:fler
you are male or female, you are likely to act somewhat macho, but as this
is not a long-lived influence, you can make the most of it by concentrati.:ng
2.86 JU'PTTER: FULL SPEED AHEAD your energy and assertiveness on some kind of strenuous, demanding,
active and constructive undertaking, including giving some attention to
health regimens. Try not to take foolish risks, even though the temptation
to do so will always be there. Overwork and .getting stressed out should
also be avoided.· Sexual aiJ.d erotic appetites a):e expanded, as high-energy
biology can often overwhelm politeness and social restraint. That may be
fine for short-term s.atisfaction, but don't count ori building too many
long-term relationships unless you are really willihg to work at it. JUPITER TO NATAL JUPITER
Jupiter transiting Jupite.tr brings a time that is notable for both su€cess.
and excess, because <
while your potentials for increased status and socia'l
accomplishment are .in high gear, so, too, is your potential for more snobbery than the average person can handle well. This is a prime time to
speculate, but you should always observe the caution not to bet the rent
money, since the luck that seems to follow you around now is very fickle
and will abandon you at a moment's notice, particularly when accompanied
by your good sense. Despite the cautions and precautions to be observed,
however, you should he awa.tre tfuat lottery winners and the like often: tnake
their fortunes during this short but optimistic period of time. Yow: desires
for status and social approval in all its forms are heightened now, as
limousines look somehow more attractive as a mode of transport and you
may begin to worry more about what the neighbours think. Honours,
promotions and recognition which are sought can be won if you invest
some effort, and in general you can find yourself travelling with a 'better'
(though possibly more boring) crowd. T eachers, counsellors and healers
who undergo this ttansit will find ability to inspire and encourage others
at a peak now. Salesmen are also likely to be in hog heaven, as positive
thinking seems to help them set new standards for others while at the
same time setting new records for their own personal earnings. Cultural
and educational concerns also prosper, as you seem more worldly, mature
and just plain professional. No matter what your profession or other
interests, one thililg to beware of under the heady .intoxication of this aspect
is that you don't sigp. up for long-term debts which you later realize you
can't really afford. The more negative effects of J:upiter to Jupiter are often
subtle and long term, so if you concentrate on reaping rewards (particularly TRANSITS AND PROGRESSIONS financial) that are obvious and short term and don't require future commitment, you can have all the good and nqne o'f the ·bad. JUPITER TO NATAL SATURN
As a consequence of the release and relief which Jupiter brings to bear on
the usual restraint of Saturn, you are able to make slow but real progres-s
against difficulties which you have faced at this location, and you caf:I
possibly turn such liabilities into real and lasting successes. You seem tQ
be on the way up, and while this ascendancy may be short-lived, you can
make good use of it in redeeming past mistakes and the restrictions in
your life that resulted. People in authority, or others who have some
measure of control over your life, may offer you an opportunity w¥cn.
though perhaps requiring you to pay your own way, could increase both
your finances and status over the long run. Travel and education opem
opportunities you've never had before, and new input from old friends €>$
other trusted advisers can help you to follow your ambitions and expand
your horizons. If relationships change much now, it is likely to be for t:lie
better, and careful growth and expansion is now possible in business aili€1
job concerns. All of this is motivated psychologically by SJlbde but persistent feelings of inadequacy, quite possibly based on dissatisfaction over
your social class or your upbringing, but you're able to turn these relatively
negative feelings to good account and thus to overcome them to so~e
extent. If you're a strong individualist, this period may see you workit:J: Vênus more within the system and attuning your ambitions to conform more to
the status quo. JUPIT E R TO NA T.AL URANUS
Excitement, intellectual stimulation and idealism fill the air as Jupiter
touches the planet of surprises and inspired thinking. You tend to talte
more risks than usual, and one of them could pay off handsomely, sinee
speculation and gambling sometimes succeed quite well during this short
period of time. However, don't spend the rent and grocery money, and
try to put at least some of your winnings aside. You are able to think fum
a truly original fashion now, perhaps turning your mind towards inventie, Vênus 288 JUPITER: FULL SPEED AHEAD or creating something of a technological or intellectual nature. Sudden
changes in your life direction which happen now are usually favourable
and tend to accentuate your individuality and uniqueness. The more radical
and heterodox opinions which you might have kept hidden from others
become stronger and are powerfully expressed for all to hear and see, as
you feel less constrained by responsibility and more inclined to go to
idealistic extremes where politics is. concerned. This can be a time of
unexpected opportunities involving travel or dealings with people in foreign
co·untries. Your social circle becomes youthful, rebellious and more than
a little kooky in the eyes of some, but as you are less concerned with
approval and mote concerned with the free flow of inteiesting ideas you
find in such company, you are far from concerned. Involvement with
unions, public-interest groups and the like may become more important
in your life now, as you become more of an activist, impelled by either
the encouragement or apparent complicity of authorities. You adopt a
broader world view and a more cultured and worldly set of values. JUPITER TO NATAL NEPTUNE
Intense introspection centred on spiritual concerns occupies your attention,
and you may spend quite a bit of time alone, seeking to vislJalize the furure
and how it might. relate to your religious feelings or other inner needs.
This period is good for the experience of monastic or c0mmunal life or
other situations in which ideals and, to some extent, isolation are of paramount importance. Your desire to help others seems more important than
personal ambitions or aspirati9ns. Occasionally, long-term injustices can
be righted under this aspect, and moral authorities will generally look kindly
on you and your projects. There is some danger of optimistic self-deception
now, and feelings of exhilaration, hysteria or religious ecstasy, or a desire
to sacrifice yourself in some sense for others, should be closely questioned
lest you succumb to totally false and unrealistic hopes. If you find yourself
abusing drugs (prescription or otherwise), it is a sure sign that you are not
willing to face some reality in your life, and the 'revelations' which seem
to emerge from your introspective periods may be no more than thinly
disguised escapism. Still, spiritual awareness is possible now, and your
imagination, intuition and social insights can be highly inspired and deeply
significant. • TRANSITS AND PROGRESSIONS JUPITER TO NATAL PLUTO
This is apt to be a time that involves you in a battle between the concepts
of individualism and authority, and you may be required to formulate and
adhere more closely than usual to your own concept of what is right and
moral- often in the face of the implicitly superior opposition of a majority.
Yet if you are willing to fight, you may be proven right by events that
transpire now. This can happen through unusual good luck, thanks to
success in professional activities involving money, publication, speculation,
stocks and bonds, or through being rewarded for long, hitherto unappreciated effort in some area of endeavour. Opportunities for advancement
pr.e seat themselves as a tesult of someone else's departure or temoval, ·a nd
you may be freed from attachments, relationships or life interests that are no
longer appropriate. This transit presents you with an unusual opportunity to
sell possessions at a profit, to rid yourself of oppressive personal situations,
and to gain through conflict with the 'old order'. Power needs and
ambitions are sharpened, and conflicts of principle with those who stand
for establishment values should be expected. It may be best to avoid ditect
confrontations with authority now, for while you feel more alone and at
odds with society, you also see the advantages in such a posture, and
understand that by quietly capitalizing on what others reject, you can come
out way ahead. For some, fame, notoriety or sudden accession to power
may occur during this period. 24
Saturn: Responsibility
Is the l<.eynote This powerful temporary influence can last as long as one ~ye.a+, a period
du:t ing which ·responsibility b-ecomes a central issue in yout life, and events
and ·sitqa.ti.ons conspire to force you. to take on mote of it than you might
ord:inari1y be willin. Vênus to a<Zcept. Increased pr<~ssure is put on you at work,
in your hom~ i:n your sodallife and in most of the other basic environments
that shape y0ur e-xis:tertte, and though you may begin to fear your abilities
are irtadequate in.the face of such demands, this time can beyery important
in establishing your capacity to deal :with issues essential to your position
and power in society. Restrittion and ftustrations may force yam to trim
hopes and aspirations in order to deal with tires·0m.e and dreary day-to-day
issues, but this is only pat;f of the learning proc~ss you must undergo now.
Peopl:e often seem either unsupportive or hostile, but this is because they
sens.e ·the subtle ne.e d for .individual power and control that 'drives you
now, sornething~which dampens their o:wn desire to cooperate. .If you
willingly assume the many new responsibilities thrust upon you now, this will
simply seem to be a tim~ of hard work that produces slow, satisfying
progress t9>SV.al1~S r<ilis~ant Vênus <r>als. If you do not f~ce up to what yo.u must
do, hewever, misfortune and.ffi£:ficudty - particularly-in health, relationship,
career or family matters - may restrict your freedom until you are willing
to impose some· limits G:>n what you can e~pect to achieve. This }nfl.uence
often manifests itself in ilie guise of ha'r sh exte.tnal authorities o r through
various -ri:Iechahism-s ·which withhold ot withdraw material res'ources, s o
that dealings. in finarrce .and real estate .can suffer, ancl your parents or
others acting as surrogates for patental authG>J;ity can impe>se limitations
on y0u by requiring you to· undertake difficult tasks in order t0 receive.
what·you f"eel is, your due by right. Such tests of endurance and character
can later pro:ve ·es·s ential to yout understanding of the evblving purpose of
your life. TRANSITS AND PROGRESSIONS SA 'tURN TO NATAL SUN
At this locality you are likely to experience a time of unusual structuring
and self-discipline, encountering obstacles to your aspirations that are sufficient tO demand a COfl1plete rethinking of your personal priorities and
goals. Inappropriate ambitions will now be exposed as such and may have
to be given up; yet the difficulties you encounter under this aspect could
create a determinacion to succeed that can give you a more rna:ture andl
powerful grasp of who you are and Netuno .rhere you are headed in life. In
particular, projects and concerns that have personal acclaim or ego gratification as objectives will meet with serious obstacles, and success come&
not through lucky breaks so much as· through c;:u1tivacion of alll. awareness
of your limitations and the development of patience and perseverance.
Knowing what you cannot do will minimize wasting the few opportunities
that do present themselves and will allow you to Goncentrate on what you
can do. This is a time of responsibility and enforeed hard work, so thrut
patience, focus and self-knowledge are essential Health may not be at its
best, so stress and inadequate nourishment or rest should be avoided as
much as possible. Wishes can come true under this transit, but only if yow
realize that you have the power, determination and personal wherewithal
to bring them into reality yourself. SATURN TO NATAL MOON
You are likely to feel somewhat restricted, emotionally limited and even
depressed, and you are highly .sensitive to being suiDjected to high-handed
treatment from those in authoritative positions. Such actions injure your
most sensitive feelings, leaving you to vow that some day you will even
the score. Women especially may find this period of time frustrating and
debilitating, particularly when responsibilities seem to multiply beyond thei:~;
capacity to handle them. You should ·try not to become excessively selfcritical nor to accept others' judgements of your deficiencies unquestioningly. Even if you can now see your faults all too clearly, that doesn't mean
you should waste time despairing over them, nor adding your .~wn amens
and mea culpas to any list of your deficiencies compiled by others. Instead.
you should take advantage of such problems to develop your will-power SATURN: RESPONSIBIL;ITY IS THE KEYNOTE and control in order to build on the things you do well and to improve
the things you don't, You can be realistic and firm in your efforts at
self-appraisal, which is why, where your o:wn abilities are concerned, you
should rely on your 0wn judgement more than that of others.: Cravings,
feelings and an illlcre~s:ed need for aurturing and comfort are not at presce nt
likely to be satisfie<d t0 any great degree, so tura your thoughts towards
making a realistic appraisal of just what place those who normally provide
such things - family and friends - really should have in your life. SATU RN TO NATAL MERCURY
Wl!ille concetns witli w<:)rk, creative ide~s, Netuno ;our own self-deficitiotl. amd
health are apt to precleminate during this time, they will do so in an
atmosphere of compulsiota and necessity, as problems and responsibilities
present themselves, demanding to be dealt with. The acquisition of new
skills and a better equcation may in some sense be forced upon you,
perhaps requiring seri;ous, dedicated study in forbiddingly technical areas.
Such studies progre·ss only with extra effort, however, and though you
may feel that in some ways you are not up to .t he challenge, perseverance
'
can win the day. Health,
particularly when it .involves your resistance· to
allergens or infection, may be at low ebb,. a problem often exacerbated by
stress in work and personal life. The immediate environment may be at
fault in this, but battering your head against the wall won't change the
architecture much, so you will just have to take extra measures and precautions to keep yourself in trim. Habits of thought may restrict you now
more than they usually·do, so in some cases it is better to accept discipline
in work, and study that is imposed on you by others, than to tcy to do.
everything .i.t» yotli' own way. Your inclination towards over-serious thinking
and perfectionism may lead you to work long. hours to master difficult
mental disciplines· that others might see as useless or pointless, but which
ultimately may prove to be highly practical. This period of time often
seems tedious and purposeless, but behind the humdrum routine and
boring repetition, this transit offers many opportunities to master new
information and learn new skills. TRANSITS AND PROGR.ESSJONS SATURN. TO NATAL VENUS The social and hedonistic opportunities inherent in this zone under normal
conditions are restricted and tumed to more practical account. Social concerns and personal relationships, especially marriage, may seem disappointing now, and thus your need for love and affection may be
sublimated in activities that feed your material ambition and gratify your
desires to acquire power, money and influence. This is ~ poor time to rely
on any but the most practical of relationships, though perhaps because of
this you are able to eliminate those partnerships, possessions and social
responsibilities of which you have tired, while those which remain are
probably those that can be counted on most to be w0rthwhile. Whether
romantically or otherwise, you may find yourself most attracted to people
who are older than you, have a serious demeanour, or who have notable
problems of some sort, and you may tend to lose interest in people with
whom the sharing of pleasure is all you hold in common - and, in fact,
enjoyment itself seems less important now than getting ahead and acquiring
possessions. If you insist on pursuing a self-indulgent and luxurious lifestyle,
you may be constrained by lack of resources or by the disapproval of
some external authority. 'In this somewhat serious period of time, any
reassessment of long-term financial and romantic plans is likdy to hav~
stability and value as its prime criteria. Like the ant in the fable, you see
summer as just extra time in which to get ready for winter. SA TURN TO NATAL MARS Much of the boisterousness, zest for living, and risk-taking usually seen in
this locale may be moderated now, or made more difficult by reason 0f
outside pressures and responsibilities. Generally it's a poor time to begin
adventuresome or entrepreneurial projects, though it can be a very good.
time to lay the groundwork for them, do preliminary research or anticipate
the kinds of problems you might face in carrying these plans out. Thougl::l·
this zone is usually good for exercising your personal initiative in a variety
of ways, you seem low in energy now and make headway against obstacles
only with the greatest of effort. In the same vein, your sex drive may be SA TURN: RESPONSIBILITY IS THE KEYNOTE lower than usual, even though you may find yourself sought after as a
sexual 'object' in some fashion. Your sense that you're constantly battling
against an over-competitive and harsh social climate could ~ncline you to
temperamental outbursts, though such fits of pique only mask your insecurity about whether or not you can meet the challenges you face in an
adequate way. Men may see this period as particularly frustrating in personal
relations of all kinds, while women may find themselves dealing with men
who are unresponsiv·e, cruel or unkind. It is best to keep aspirations to a
minimum, as this influence can discipline your energy and financial
resources well only if you are not involved in too many projects. You may
set up situations in which others take out their anger on you, and it will
take all your effort to handle such negative feelings in an adult and outward
manner. Avoid taking foolish risks,. but most especially if they will put you
in any physical danger. SA TURN TO NATAL JUPITER
Any possibilities which you had hoped might bode well for an increase in
prosperity will probably come to fruition, or not, at least, just yet, ~d
even if they do advance, they .d o so slowly, through your own motivation
and determination. Business slows down, making this a good period of
time to plan future expansions rather than to institute plans already made.
In general, quite a few of life's ambitions have to be put on hold now,
particularly in the area of religious, cultural and financial interests. If you'-re
one of those people who get a great deal of gratification in conspicuous
consumption, you will find this period trying -and tedious; bills fall due,
and increasing costs rpeet decreasing income head on, meaning that even
if you are tempted to spend lavishly, you likely won't get the chance. The
self-reliant have far less to fear from this transit than those who depend
on 'going along to get along', and if you happen to fall within the latter
category, you should take steps to gain more personal control over your
financial life. If you can do this, then when progress towards prosperity
resumes, your life can move along in a more streamlined and efficient
fashion. Working to become more independent, self-motivated, individualistic and persevering is th~s the best course to pursue, as you learn to
. temper your enthusiasm and idealism with patience and reason. Long-term J·• TRANSITS AND PR0 G,R:ESSI0•MS plans conceived of now have an excellent chance for success through
carefully sustained growth, and you find that their tewards will be well
worth waiting for. , SATURN TO NATAL SATURN
The potentials of this zone are sharply and directly brought into awareness
now and you might begin to feel that. your plilrpose for being here at this
time is fully to experience and understand the true nature of Saturn. If
you happen to be around the age of twenty-nine, this cam truly be a
turning-point in your life, both a farewell to youth and an acceptance of
the powers and responsibilities of true <>adulthood. If you do not consciously
make decisions to assume greater responsibility in some major department:
of your life (most often career and power relationships in society), external
situations will tend to eliminate all other possibilities, forcing you to face.
directly what you ha:ve been trying to ·avoid. At other ages, this aspect will
either reiterate or anticipate in a lesser way this major understanding reached
at twenty-nine, as you are mote or less forced to assess your progress
towards personal self-sufficiency and autonomy, and you are made to
recognize your abilities and your weaknesses as you cope with new developments that affect your career or social position. An increased awareness
of your age, and to some extent of your mortft].ity, brings you face t0
face with those things in your life that will requite greater attention and
development over the next fdurteen years, while also making you admit
to yourself what needs to be discarded. This need to take stock of your
personal repertoire of skills and needs applies particularly to your self-image
in relation to your job, your permanent relationships, your lifestyle, and
health matters. Anything that goes wrong this year must be set right by
you, and you alone. SATURN TO NATAL URANUS
You find yourself strongly concerned with individualism and idealism, if
pnly as a means of resisting the pressures to conform that come frem
legal, social and political authorities. You may find yourself reacting powerfully and emotionally when on occasion you, or those you admire, mtlst SATURN: RESPONSJBILITY IS T,HE KEYNOTE compromise unalterable principles and ethical necessities for short-term
gain. Plutão .eep>le may not thank you much. for your input in such matters, eyen
when they feel that you're right, if only because you are forcing issues they
are trying to avoid. Your desire for radical change as a means of personal
evolution seems Saturno >lq.cked now by habitual defensive patterns you have
cl:ieated in yow: life, an.<d it may be difficult for you to come to the realization
that ch~ Vênus these old habits cannot be done any more quickly or easily
I
than changing other people's minds. Though it may seem to take forever,
change will come, often suddenlr and from an une~pect~d quarter. However, while you are working hard to buck the forces you feel are restraining
your personal freedom, once you have broken free, you will then need
work to create end:uring structures that will permit you to 'graduate' to a
pew stage of life. ¥o:u will at times have to wolik hard to keep belie:Wng
in that part of yow:self which makes you unique, apart from all others,
but if you can keep the faith through this tough and tempering transit,
you'll clearly have forged that uniqueness into an enduring and central part
of your personality. SA TURN TO NATAL NEPTUNE
For most, both Neptune and Saturn lines are already difficult, so this
period of time can be particularly challenging. You should be prepared for
confrontation with the realities of these two planets in various w:ays, but
most particularly on ·a mental level: you may tend to feel depressed, confused and uncertain more than usual now, feelings which should not be
taken at face value. Tending to dwell on the negative side of experience,
circumstances and your own moods can make you feel powerless and
distract you from the things that really matter. H ealth may reflect this
mental confusion, and it may be difficult to decide whether ephemeral and
inexplicable symptoms should be taken to the doctor, or ignored as just
hypochondria, though it's safer to take the former course. Habits formed
now may 'crystallize some of the negativity of cllls period, so be particularly
wary of establishing habits that might lead to physical dependence - everything from drinking too much alcohol to taking prescription medications
which could have risky s~de-effects if used over l0ng periods. On the
positive side, this time is one in which your feet may be more firmly on
the ground than usual, since most forms of imagination, from pure idealism TRANSITS AND PROGRESSIONS to misleading delusions, are likely to be suppressed 'both internally and
externally now. A sure knowledge of what you don)! want in life is likely
to be the most lasting legacy of this transit, but you may have to spend
some time after it has passed in rebuilding the knowledge of what you do
want. Solitude, music and the beauty of nature can be consolations now
and a source of inspiration which can make this period creative and fruitful. SATU RN TO NATAL Plutão LU TO While this zone is normally one of personal transformation that can deal
with fundamentals which include birth, death and regeneration, such processes ate slowed or inhibited during ~this time, restuting in a feeling of
spiritual blockage and frustration. You feel resistant to implacable change,
and a general malaise running through your daily life should not be allowed
to obscure the realization that these difficulties ate temporary and that
change will come, often with shocking rapidity, once this period is over.
The problem of coping with the fact of your own mortality may occupy
your thoughts now, and external situations (including financial problems)
may restrict you and make you all too aware of your limitations. Occasion~
ally, long-forgotten errors or transgressions are brought to light under this
transit, and you may have to deal with the authorities or police as well as
your conscience in putting these things to rest. However, for those willing
to assume new responsibilities, this can be a positiv-e period when your
place in the seheme of things is understood more clearly tharr at most
other times, and you can work to create a place for yourself in life which
embodies that view. 25
Uranus: Excitement, Change,
Nonconformity The -~strongest effect of this transit ,i s about eighteen months. The- totally unforeseen ~ thi,ngs that you would never seriously. eonsider happening seems to become almost a .daily oce,utrence now. Though: yoa may somehow feel that your life .fs ,altered permanently by events that occur under
a Utanian transit, when the dust settl:es you will probably find that things
have returned t<D tlie·way they were before, although you will have changed
somewhat, particillarly in yow: willingness to see the wo.rld as a mo(e
impro@able,. ex<;:iting and unpredictable place. Sudden travel, relocation,.
meetings with stra-ngers, and eventualities which could never have been
foreseen intrude ,o n your existence. It goes without saying that if you
happen to like J0ts of change and variation you ,should find this year
exciting and refreshihg, but if you are One of the more habit~bound of
earth's c-reatures., Netuno :ou could find it more thatt .a bit upsetting. as it tilts yo.a
this w:ay and that out of your safe little groove. These chan.ges should
remind you, however, of the vast potential and pow~r of your own ·uniqueness and prove to you that it is always possible tG overturn the most
entrenchecl a:nd re-s istant life routines. Any inhibitions you have are likely
to be abandoned, and you will also have to re-evaluate self-imposed restrictions that fnay have held you back. Just as the process of adaptation in
nature is often initiated through mutation .and radical change (a proces~
which can at times produce a certain percentage of useless abnormalities),
every life needs periods like this year in which you are forced to grow and
adapt to unforeseen and emergent circumstances. It -is likely that most of
what happens now simply refleCts inner change·s that have been seething
within you (though artfully repressed) for several years intra the past. Now
you will be forced· to give 'them free reiri to see jus-t wh at they will produce.
At the. end of t he. transit, you ·will have a .better idea of who you truly
are, apart from your personality and ac.complishments•in society, ·and the
knowledge coUld well surprise you. You will feel more aligned to counter- . TRANSITS AND PROGRESSIONS cultural ideas and people, as mainstream conformists seem as dangerously
inflexible and outdated as the mastodons in the tar pits. URANUS TO NATAL SUN Self-expression undergoes evolution and transformation, as public attention
- even notoriety or fame - that comes to you now often forces you to
act on the spur of the moment, as if by instinct. You become bolder, even
outrageous, in expressing who and what you are, and are less concerned
with social opinion and its limitations on your demonstrations of individuality. Your opinions and ideas get caught up with your identity, and both
are defended against what may seem others' venality and self-interestS'
(both of which are very likely negative projections of yom own problems).
Your interest focuses on anything original, anti-establishment, technicaL
and heterodox, which- along with unforeseen travel to. unusual places 011
meetings with extraordinary people - can make this an exhilarating tim~
Your true identity, once all your attempts to conform to others' expectations are put aside, shines forth now in almost irritating clarity, and the
life structures upon which you have relied heavily chahge unexpectedly;
leaving you more reliant on yourself and your own resources. Old friends
may quickly tire of your one-person revolution and move on, but trying
to hold on to remnants of the past is hopeless now, and you will eventually
understand that some things and people in that past have inhibited yot'l~
personal growth. Even though you often embrace (and more often cause).
change, this still can be an upsetting period of your life. Despite this, afte~
it has passed, your sense of who you ate will be sharper, clearer and fa:r
more in keeping with your true self. URANUS TO NATAL MOON Unforeseen events can make you very much aware of your needs, dependencies and emotional attachments, largely because of changes in these
life areas. Your public image, your standing in the community and you'!
family relationships may undergo drastic transformation, sometimeS!
occasioned either by a need for relocation or upheavals in family patterns
and structures. Appetites for variation and adventure increase, and in par300 URANUS: ~XCITE¥ENT, CHANGE, NONCONFORMITY ticular intense , but bri~f romantic affairs betray an awakening of erotic
desires which you may ·have been suppressing up to this point. Perhaps
most interesting, you may be put in touch with a philosophy or group
whose ideals make you more awa(e of your needs and ·capacities for selfnurturing and your ability_to take care of others. Your personal needs are.
at times rationalized by seeing them as related to the larger society in some
way, and you could emerge from this period feeling that you. have a perfect
right to fulfil your desires direcdy, in all their thunderstorm intensity.
Relationships with the opposite sex can be tempestuous, but they are also
likely to be exciting now - in particular, women undergoing this transit,
may rebel against traditional roles associated with gender. Relations between
parents and children are also under pressure now, meaning that if family
structures don't change ·to accommodate fuller individual expression, they
could be in danger of breaking. It is an unsetded period, so that frequent
moves or neighbourhoo.d disruptions ensure that home Life is far from
tranquil; but, at least for now, you probably prefer it that way. URANUS TO NATAL MERCURY
• The many changes likely to happen in your life now centre on your work,
vocation, the educational goals you pursue to meet these ends and the
maturing of your intellect in general. Áries ou:r mind is awakened to new
horizons of communication and study now, some of which may take
in areas of inquiry considered unorthodox among your peers, including
forbiddingly technieal knowledge, Utopian political theory and even astrology. Work becomes the scene of changes which may even involve some
form of idealistic confrontation. You grow impatient and rebellious against
religious and educational institutions, professionals and academics, or
others who tend to espouse what 'everybody knows'. Your own curiosity
is extreme, as you become aware that common knowledge may be neither
common .sense nor uncommon - or at least not an interesting - truth.
Your mind reaches for new ideas in hopes of discovering that new .truth,
but also as a way of seeking a key to your own identity, which you may
now perceive, perhaps for the first time, as unique and powerfully individual. Though your insights may well be lost on others now, you strive
to develop more powerful communication tools in hopes of converting
them to your world view and sharing your new insights. Do not, however, TRANSITS AND PROGRESSIONS J expect too many ~people te> agree with you, and if your thinking has hlthertr0
been overstructured you should expect some resistance against your 'reeducation' even within yourself. Travel and exposure to new ideas are both
very stimulating to you now, as your life becomes .mor~ .mobile, worldly
and exciting. As a consequence, feelings and attachments, including materiail
concerns, may be left by the wayside for the time being, as ideas are what
count most for you at present. URANUS TO NATAL VENUS Unexpected developments and numerous changes should be expected in
your relational and romantic life, with the focus OJ;l extra<Drdinary: s<Dc::ial
contacts and fasdnating relationships. It's time to kick up your heels as
you meet exciting, glamorous and unusual people who open options in
relationship and eroticism {Qr you that you might not have imagined possible up to this time. Your irrepressible desire for novelty and variation
may, of course, tend to upset existing relationships, so at some point you
may have to consider whether the long-term effects of this transit will be
as happy as the short-tetm effects. Your tende11cy to seek out unorthodox
so.cial situations has the neighbours whispering for now, but you couldn't
care less, since Netuno €>U're having too much fun. Even if you've been rathel!
conservative up to this point, you may find yourself falling in and out of
love every twenty minutes and willing at least to consider exploring the
furthest boundaries of your personal erotic expression. This 'J,Jill certainly
make life mote exciting and unpredictable than ever before, but it could
also give it a hint of scandalous colour that's not your usual shade. Your
long-term relationships undergo just as much change as the short-term
ones, or at least they had better do so if they are to retain your interest.
In particular, the habits and routines of marriage can be challenged now
in a way that requires them to be reformed and renewed. Far beyond
tomance, any kind 'Of partnership is likely to prove unpredictable and could
be frequently upset, as much because of the people you choose to relate
to as to your own restlessness and instability. Artists and the creatively
inclined will be inspired with new ideas and new directions in their wonk,
and anyone may look back on this period as extremely exciting and
stimulating. IJ;RAN:O S :r· Sol , ill:'TJVf.A L M' tA":&S . The-e~dtement and chlrng~ 11.m.cl€r this ttansit'ma, Netuno . ha~e yo11li:viBg life ·On the·
·edge in a way Netuno .ou 1ifatl'n'ttitdaited·d'G befote. ~li9:ug¥ thls ean be eXhilarating, it
.Gan also Rut Netuno ;o.l!l in wme- very -dieej sitUations, an<il ~ake you subj.e ct to
m.Qre ~a~~ a: few '<d<Dse sba'V:~S., ~o;u $Jlay aq,mal.Ly-p.ot .be conseiously aw;ate
0.£ ·XQlilr ,meed tG tem.pt fate· 1:epeate91~ by p1:1shing Netuno ;our luck.c.:a nd ta:~flg
unne~essary risks, .a:n;d whlle thi:s migh.t,make you ~<D.nfidefl.t in .situatiohs.
where 0thers might io.se~.,tiheir ~p,, it.als0 represents.~a loss>of G®'fltro:J that
could m:ake yo'll:-'ydur :0wn: worst enemy. In dri~ Vênus , operating maehillety
er engaging if~: any a:Gti>Vi'll. Áries of t4is cype, you shoulcl. m6rk ver;r hantl. t0
i.inp0se on yourself an e>~~a matgip of caq;ti.Gn. Dofug so w;ill make yout
life dyna.Wc ~G). ll>t0<1!uctiv:e:; n_o t <1k>i.t1g s~ may ~impl; Netuno . make. yo11 waste ,all
your titne. 0.l:eaning ;qp the tesJ:llti.:llg m~sses. Men are·par;tioula.rly affected~
and their ·Se~uaa ·demands can be<::IDffi<MJ.uite intens:e, o'ften takin; Vênus :lincomr.enti0nal f@t.ms. Mm: Saturno of Netuno :om .rteecl for e*cite.ment ·may be fuelled hy s·tlp.).'!lte'ssed anger, eand you sfie·uJ.cl expe-ct yout:self to b.e more eo~peritiv~,
quick-tempered and ita.scible now. Findiag co{!structiv:e p utlets £or tha,t.
ang~r, such a$. physical acti¥ity, will pqt you in better comm~lil.cd o'f y0urself .
and y0ur Glestino/,:, no.t to m~ntioR making Netuno :o\l a better per.s on to he with>..
People ,oftce:lll .fe.atr· .a:nge~ heGalits·e the¥ fear lesi~ Vênus c01i):<trol - but learn.ing
·how to ehanrtel arn.d focus it will make· you .less fearful .of its p0wet. Thlis
petio8: 'is good for pursuits- that re.ql:lire'. cG>tiLtage, dariing: and t:edinical
expertise, but don't put yourself in peril just to prove how brav.e yo.u
ate. Eqgi.a.~e.n§c and tech.nici.a:fls:..may overeot:r).e problems in a .creativ-e a,ncl
imno:vativ:e w~ n0w, and the ex~jtemep::t1 .of clU$ peri0d resJ;J.lts ip.initi,'atj:ves
tm:~ta1:ds ~ neW"'a.nu more pow.erflli semsy- ~£ self -for everyone, n<::> matter
wh:at theit seeeiality or interest.
. I ~ ; " IJRANlJ$ TO NATAL JUPIT'!3R You >a~~ liable to encounter o.pportuniti:es· $ ·a t _pr{9mise t.o ·further you1:
pr0sp.erity,. help y0u attain Sl:(G~ess ;it:J: Netuno .o\JW ehGsen -endeavours and bring.
.
-soc.ial acceptance ·'ftem. lilfiexpected .·quarter~·. :A complete change in s0.cial
statitls can occur fbr you ,n0w, inv<Dl:ving ttav:el~. edne::ational possibilities or
eve~ drastic (th<Dugh .often tempotary) change in financial position upward TRANSIT·S AND PROGRESSIONS or downward. This is an exciting and unorthodox time, when new ideas
and intellectual stimulation enable y0u to break with the mainstream and
to seek your fortune in an original, individual and self-determined fashion.
You will question conventional wisdom in both your personal and professional life, and can outgrow unquestioning attachments you may have
had to social and religious institutions. Your thinking about how the world
works is fired by an infusion of idealism, perhaps stemming from an
exposure to original thinkers or outrageous nonconformists. Because of
this, you come to see your own life's purpose as self-fulfilment and self~
actualization, and this in turn promotes a more live-and-let-live philosophy
in regard to others. Financially, this period is somewhat unpredictable; yolfl
might consider playing the lottery more than usual now, as long as you
don't bet more than you can easily afford to lose, and you also might:
feel free to take more risks regarding your job or your social situations.
Opportunities involving publication or techn0log;r could offer you sped~
opp ortunities to increase your income; be careful that you don't lose whatever you gain through overconfidence~ however. The end of this singularly
exciting period should find. you way ahead of where you were when iL
started. URANUS TO NATAL SATURN As this transit proceeds, you will probably find yourself involved in am.
ideological battle that sets you against either society or, well, yourself.
Normally, this Samrn zone moves your thought and action in the direction
of conservatism, as you work very hard to build and maintain permanent
life structures - though often to the detriment of freedom and individual
expression. During this year, however, such structures (and the people
who symbolize them) may be totally changed or even destroyed, and those
which do endure may in the end seem less suitable to your own needs.
This is probably a time of considerable tension and irritability, as it's hard
to know where your life is heading, and change is the one certainty in your
daily existence. Your career and your position in society may shift, impelled
by idealistic considerations, and those whom you consider unquestioned
authorities in your life, parents particularly, may see their lives change alon~
with yours. But the major importance of this period is likely to be social,
resulting in a redefinition of yourself. as more socially relevant than at any URANUS: EXCITEMENT, CHANGE, NONCONFORMITY other period of time in your life. Somehow, issues of yoar own growth
and liberation seem to parallel those of your society, so attention may
focus on you as the representative o.r exemplar of some larger pattern.
You may be called upon to act ·out important social conflicts in some
constructive and crea;ri;ve way, pl!ltting you in the position of solving prolDlems which may p.rove to be .of benefit to others. If at times you feel like
the proverbial voice crying in the wilderness, you should be assured that
at some point that v:oice will be heard. URANUS T O NATAL URANUS In a sense, your reas(i)n for residing here could be to experience the true
strength and depth of this potential. Particularly if you happen to be around
forty years of age, you shouldn't plan on getting much d9ne in a structured,
·orderly way this year, since you will likely be catapulted into some experience of maximal emotional intensity that will demand all your atteation.
What this might be is not really predictable, except that it might be something you would least expect. The structures and patterns of your life
suddenly could seem intolerably confining and repressive, and your friends
may shake their heads in wonder as you · act out the most individualistic
and eccentric of all the potentials listed above. If you can, take a sabbatical
this year - leave yourself free to be blown by the winds of change towards
possibilities and interests you'd never otherwise consider. Your life will
likely still be there if you want to come back, and what you experience
now may set standards for commitment to idiosyncrasy (if, indeed, there
can be standards in such a situation), and could have important ramifications later. You feel the need to define yourself outside the patterns and
structures of society- who you are apart from your career, status, name
or even personality. Particularly if in middle age, near forty, you acutely
feel 'time's winged chariot drawing near' and suddenly realize that life is
a limited quantity; at other ages, you rebel from constraints and seek a
more honest and personal expression of who you are than that demanded
by authorities, institutions and other representatives of convention. TRANSITS AND PROGRESSIONS
) URANUS TO NATAL NEPTUNE During this transit, idealistic and social issues are likely to take a great deal
of your time and energy. Visions of Utopia, your hopes for the world and
your feelings of kinship with humanity are focused with intense clarity, so
that you feel personally empowered and obligated to implement them in
some way. Involvement with an idealistic community, political party or
religious movement is quite possible now, or you could find a spiritual
guide, guru or philosophy to which you are willing to devote a gaod part
of the rest of your life. Such ideals are more easily grasped when felt rather
than thought, but now yout mind is full of powerful opinions, whose
bases, though illogical, may be entirely unquestioned. Implementation of
these opinions may tap into collective visions and ideals that are stronger
than your own ego, and you can find yourself caught up in something far
beyond your control, or even your powers of comprehension, as social
movements and the conflicts sparked by them seem to consume you. Your
world view is quite original now, and you seem to ·have the ability to put
into words and actions what others only vaguely feel, tapping power that
seems to come almost from humanity's unconscious. You might become
the spokesperson for some ancient idea or belief, or perhaps seek to
live life in a community that adheres to such beliefs . . Drugs, especially
mind-altering ones, can have unusual and powerful effects on you now,
so any experimentation with such should( be undertaken with great care;
if at all. URANUS TO NATAL PLUTO The intensely cathartic and critical potentials of Pluto are apt to manifest
in a direct and forceful manner for you here. Fuelled by a newly kindled
idealism and motivated by a powerful desire for freedom and personal
autonomy, you are apt to rebel against anything or anyone that you feel
prevents you from becoming who you truly are. This aspect of intense
individualism impels yo\.l to seek new relationships and a new peer group
that will unquestionably support your rebellion and your search fot individual self-expression. Long-held resentments boil to the surface now, and
changing circumstances allow you to let go of ideas or people that ~ou ;o6 URANUS: EXCITEMENT, CHANGE, NON CONFORMITY long ago outgrew. Rebellion for rebellion's sake seems to be the order of
the day for you every day, as you associate with elements on the edge of
society as a symbol of your own determination to be uncompromisingly
true to the deepest standards of individuality. As financial, home, family
and career situations can change drastically, this period could mark the
beginning of a new epoch in your life and establish a lifelong pattern of
individualism and radical transformation. This is one of the most intense
possible times to be in an area that already promises powerful change, so
about the only way to avoid cataclysmic upheaval is consciously to surrender
self-concepts and future plans to the unknowable precesses at work here. 26
Neptune: Go with the Flow The effect of the movement of the planet of diffusion, confusion and
imagination to an angle at a particular locality can last as long as two years,
bringing with it a profound sense of uncertainty and lack of direction.
Though strong, this influence is a subtle one that is about the worst possible
for any sort of tangible, concrete and ego-directed accomplishment. Will
and purpose seem diffused, the world doesn't operate according to rules
that follow any rational pattern, and other people seem to look right
through the real you, seeing you only as the projected illusion of what they
lack, rather than who you really are. None of the structures upon which
civilization and society depend - schedules, consistency, predictability seem to work very well now, and the more attached you are to ideas of
who yeu should he and what the world is, the more trouble you are likely
to have. Beware of impulses to rescue the world, as more often than not
your altruistic ideals in this regard will be based on a combination of
self-dislike and false romanticism. Likewise, beware an attraction to the
sort of charismatic leader who capitalizes on others' sense of sin or guilt,
as the threat of victimization hangs heavy in Neptunian air, along with the
potential for addiction, as well as for involvement in scandal.. However,
this transit should not simply be seen as an inevitable exercise in frustration
and personal belittlement, because a transcendent reality, the kind often
only accessible in meditation or religious ecstasy, actually demands recognition underneath the decay that seems to beset you now. If you can go
with the flow of this reality, and not resist by trying to l;>e over-rational in
situations that call for feeling, your sacrifice of ego and 'self-concept can
be rewarded with a new view of the world that positi¥ely sparkles with
rich insights. Artistic, musical and religious inspiration obviously wait for
you on the positive side of this Neptunian river. NEPTUNE: GO WITH THE PLOW NEPTUNE TO NATAL SUN
Your self-expressive and creative side looks inward now, heightening the
possibility for intuitive and mystical awareness. This is a time when you
will be out in the world exploring the local environment, with your personal
quest for meaning demanding extroverted immersion in the world and its
problems. Instead you look inward, with a great need for solitude in Mercúrio .t:der
to contemplate the tenuous grasp on practical matters that seems to have
caught you unawares. Sensitivity and empathy for those experiencing cruelty
and injustice are central concerns for you, as these things seem emblematic
of your increasing feeling that you yourself are victimized by the world.
Artistic abilities increase, especially in music, but a sense of aimlessness
and lack of direction makes applying your creative insights in a useful way
very difficult. You may fiBd that you're attracted to mystical religion,
communallivimg or drugs, or even to work in institutional €nv.ironments
now, but expect these attractions to wane when the temporary influence
passes. Where idealism and Utopianism jncrease, gullibility often follows~
s0 beware of attaching yourself to unorthodox gurus or movements until
this transit is past. NEPTUNE TO NATAL MOON
The emotional, security-seeking and possessive instincts normally active in
this area become more diffuse, and otherworldly, lacking any firm direction.
Your feelings are intense and unpredictable now, and your family matters,
as well as your hopes of establishing personal security in life, seem threatened by feelings tl:iat intrude on your life ftom the least accessible parts
of your unconscious. Your sensitivity may increase to an intensity that is
hard to handle (this is especially true for men), so confusion and vacillation
seem to dominate in any area of your life in which practical judgement
and realistic decisions are called for, including finances and relationship
matters. Your tendency tO' unrestrained exdta:bility and to hypersensitivity
to the more mysterious and illogical aspects of life makes it easy to get
caught up in the moment, or to be dominated by other people and their
ideals. Drugs and alcohol could pose particular problems, but the same
things which make you sensitive in a physical sense also make it possible TRANSITS AND PROGRESSIONS for you to intuit what others want and feel, enabling you to anticipate
trends and fashions. In the best of circumstances this can be a particularly
difficult period in a zone that tends to ups and downs anyway, and much
of it could be spent in some sort of confinen:ent (self-imposed or otherwise), in which you are forced to come to terms with your feelings and
attachments to the people and ideas you hold most dear. The more personal
aspects of your life are likely to be neglected now as you contemplate ah
overdrawn, baroque world of fantasy and feeling, full of dragons, maidens
in distress and magic. NEPTUNE TO NATAL MERCURY
The normally logical, youthful, communication-orientated concerns highlighted by this zone become tangled up in diffusion, confusion and strangely
illogical happenings; work, study and health concerns encounter mysterious
problems that defy analysis, and mobility is challenged by aimlessness and
constant, unforeseen impediments. Intuition works better than logic now,
and abol,lt the only communication that proceeds well is that which is
inspirational, poetic, musical or artistic. Attempts to organize your life will.
encounter n ebulous obstacles, and the best idea is to ego with the flow',
allowing your unconscious to give direction to your life through hunche-s
or inspiration. The world of practicality seems to have been taken over by
denizens from The Lord of the Rings, making it nearly impossible to contr<:>l
or predict the outcome of even the simplest activities. Investments shoulcl
be avoided, or at least very carefully considered, and business opportunities
should be closely scrutinized for deceptive aspects. It's difficult to trust
your ears or to rely on most information now, so important decisions
should be postponed until such time as this transit begins winding down.
Beware especially of matters that seem imbued with mystical importance
and subtle (magic', as they are most apt to be falsely perceived. Interest in
psychism and mysticism increase, as do your skills in prophecy, dream
interpretation and psychology; the problem is, your insights may see deep
and your rendering of them be so complicated that no one will understand
what you're saying. po NEPTUNE: GO WITH THE FLOW NEPTUNE TO NATAL VENUS The romantic, social and acquisitive nature ·of this zone is modified by
increased sensitivity; romanticism and idealism, so that sacrificing your
interests for love and feeling hew heights (and depths) of relationship axe
likely. Your artistic receptivity increases, as does awareness of the nuances
of colour and form, so those who· are artists may experience intensely
visionary inspiration that takes their creativity to new plateaux. Relationships are fraught with deceptions, however, and your desire to 'reform'
your lover or spouse, or to sacrifice your own interests for those you
love, should be carefully scrutinized for the pitfalls of self-deception, false
humility and hypocrisy. You are also more apt to suffer from the negative
effects of religious idealism and escapism, as a result of the seductive
consumerism and venality that can run rampant in this zone under Neptune.
You are able to see the beauty in the most commonplace of peqple and
situations, but may at the same time overlook even glaring or exceptional
flaws. If possible, avoid legal involvements, partnerships and marriage now,
and expect your life to be peopled with colourful and often disreputable
characters. You can enjoy the play, but you don't have to buy the theatre: NEPTUNE TO NATAL MARS The aggressive, self-promoting and assertive aspects of your personality
will not manifest as openly or as obviously as they might at other times.
Instead, this period of time is one in which you might feel overwhelmed
by unseen and enigmatic forces and thus less able than usual to act in your
own defence. For men, this can be an extremely disturbing influence, as
any initiative you make seems to evaporate under a torrent of frustrating
obstacles, and your will is challenged at every turn by circumstances. illnesses can take hold here that normally would not affect you at all, as
your resistance is compromised, leaving you prone to allergies, venereal
infections and chronic~ unpleasant irritations. You may be tempted to
become entangled in petty criminality or the use of dtugs now, but such
ventures turn 0ut even worse than one would expect. An attitude of
detachment and a suspension of your need to meet' specific goals will help
you through this period, and it is generally a poor time to seek completion
311 TRANSITS AND PRO·GR:ESSI0NS of projects or personal advancement - which is to say that it's best t0
limit your ambitions to avoiding conflict and responsibility. You may feel
called upon to sacrifice your own self-interest for a cause, or to do something to liberate others from their chains, but success in practical affairs
will most likely elude you now. NEPTUNE TO NATAL JUPITER This locality's expansive, self-promoting and optimistic aspects become
more spiritual, as you take up a search for inner, rather than outer, meaning
and accomplishment. Partly this may be because things are not going well
.in your material and business life - income and prestige may dwindle, anlll
the more structured parts of your life will be reduced to· their true value.
Any · sort o£ hype or optimistic self-aggrandizement will not work at a:hl
well now, possibly because of negative publicity, betrayals or just bad luck.
Yet in reflecting on such setb~cks you will find that you can perceive a
deeper meaning and purpose to your life, and you may even experience a
philos0phical, religious or spiritual breakthrough of some sort. Simplistic
religion and world philosophy are abandoned now, as you begin to perceive
the depth of ut1lty that binds human consciousness to the cosmos. Idealism
guides you, so though business may be bad and money may be tight, your
can still find a way to stretch your meagre funds in helping others. But
your judgement is poor now, and what you see as a highway to heaven,
paved by inspiration, might be seen by someone more pragmatic as a road
to hell paved with no more than the fuzziest of intentions. NEPTUNE TO NATAL SATURN Stability, hard work, self-knowledge and pragmatism become servants to
illusion now, making it difficult for you to achieve anything of a practical
nature for the time being. This is a particularly difficult time, as what
structure there is in your life may evaporate, leaving you uncertain, aimless
and unmotivated. Low vitality adds to the difficulties, so any health problems you suffer should definitely be checked out medically. Society itself
seems bent on subjecting you to victimization or unfair harassment, something that is only aggravated by youJ; complete lack of insight about exactly.
312 NEPTU·NE: GO WITH THE FLOW what is happening to you, and why. Your instincts now are to spend time
alone and to -retreat into settings of natural beauty, isolation or solitude,
though this is not likely to happen under most circumstances. You are
attracted to those who seem most victimized by society, perhaps since you
feel you are in much the same position. Those who do not have a fum
grip on their self-identity are likely to undergo the greatest change now,
as you find that the props and crutches you have been using to keep
yourself standing ·are firmly planted in Neptunian quicksand. Any stress
· multiplies the disorientation you feel now, as since it is hard to understand
where it is coming from, it is nearly impossible to deal with; ungrounded
fears, dread and hysteria may prevail at this extremely difficult time, but
when you come through it, you will realize that there is a depth of life
beyond the self and its illusions. NEPTUNE TO NA TAL URANUS Human concerns and a Utopian vision serve to give your bent for idealism
and individuality a more realistic focus, an odd twist for a transit by the
planet of illusion. You tend to enjoy solitude in natural surroundings,
finding that this gives you a time and space in which to contemplate the
universal rhythms and philosophical truth which underlie your quest for
personal uniqueness. You are· easily caught up in th,e social currents that
swirl around you now, and your own life and personal struggles somehow
seem part of larger social problems. Because of this, you may be drawn
to some philosophy or religion which strongly prohibits activities or ideas
that are actually rather attractive to your inner nature. Since you find .it
more difficult than usual to stand up for what you believe, you may soon
find you.tself swept along in an ill-chosen movement that soon becomes
more oppressive than inspirational. Gurus and spiritual leaders may promise
to relieve you of your need to deal with your identity, but this only works
for a little while. Much of what you once believed unquestioningly is likely
to be dissipated now, and in its place grows an intuitive and transpersonal
sense of belonging to ·something larger than yourself, though that something is nebulous, enigmatic and just beyond your reach. TRANSITS AND PROGRESSIONS NEPTUNE TO NATAL NEPTUNE During this transit, you may begin to feel acutely that you have forgotten
the ideals you grew up with, and that they have been superseded by thos€
of a newer generation and its values. However, the understanding that the
effects of idealism are often ephemeral doesn't keep you from feeling
alienated and somehow out of touch. Your need for privacy, solitude and
meditation is heightened now, and sensitivity, intuition and artistie
sensibilities are all enhanced during this time of psychic receptiveness and
genera) impressionability. It is hard to rely on pe.tceptions n0w, as the
ideals underlying your values are going through modification, but you can
be artistically inspired, and the inner world seems more real and important
than the outer. This is a stage most of your contemporaries will be going
through at the same time, so .social support from those your own age is
important. NEPTUNE TO NATAL PLUTO Your tendencies towards isolation and individualism are moderated by
an increasing mystical awareness of yourself as part of a larger human
consciousness and collective awareness. Concepts of finality, birth and
death, and of the destruction of self and ego, give way to deeper awareness.
of the transcendence of the soul and how the laws of universal balance
make the perpetuation of this personal ego unnecessary. For those unwilling
to accept this sort.of mystical redefinition, however, life can deal you some
nasty surprises now, and you may find to your dismay that the tricks and
stratagems you once used to set yourself apart from the crowd are being
used against you. Your autonomy is challenged, but it's hard to see just
exacdy who or what is doing the challenging. Paranoid fears tend to surface
!low, made all the more irrational by the absence of any clearly. defined
adversary. Friends, financial obligations and practical matters are difficult
to pursue, as a feeling of despair closes in on you if you don't take a moire
universal view of things. 314 27
Pluto: The Beginning of
the Rest of Your Life Long-standing inner changes and repressed grow.th may erupt outwards
with a force that transforms your life and your self-concept. Attachments,
relationships and possessions are usually the first to undergo change that
includes separation or abandonment, among other things. People on whom
you have relied may pass out of your life at this time, as you discover the
limitations of even the deepest commitment and come to realize that a
higher law of transformation, birth and death (literal or figur~tive) applies
to everything and everyone, including those you hold most dear.
If there is something in your life you have tried to keep hidden, you
could be in for some nasty shocks, as secrets and clandestine activities
rarely remain hidden for long unqer this transit, and these secrets include
those you have tried to keep from yourself, whether consciously or unconsciously. Your self-concept, physical appearance, career, family ties or major
relationships at first undergo what may seem needless disruption, but as
the changes proceed (or perhaps after they have been completed), you
could realize that they signalled a necessary unburdening of your time,
energy and psyche in order to allow new growth and evolution in your
life. The intense volcanic changes in your outer life are likely to make
you uncomfortably aware of pressures from your subconscious mind as
hard-to-control emotions boil to the surface in a seemingly irrational way
in the course of your day-to-day life. Psychoanalysis, growth therapy or
similar methods of self-exploration may lessen the stress of this process
of personal rebirth. The more you resist the"process, trying to forestall the
inevitable death and evolution of your inmost essence, the more serious
your outer problems are likely to be. Oddly enough, loosening your grip
on those things you do not want to let go of in your life is the best way
to re-establish some control, and how and when to let go is itself a lesson
to be learned now. TRANSITS AND PROGRESSIONS PLUTO TO NATAL SUN
The self-promoting, expressive, creative energies normally dominant here
begin to take unusual forms, and you may make other people uncomfortable by giving birth to your new self too publicly at a time when those
around you would rather tend to more trivial pursuits. However, you
shouldn't let yourself be affected by such negative feedback, as if you do
not undertake reform of your selfhood consciously now, you could be
subject to rather intense experiences, and coercion, or at least intense
confrontations, await those who do not willingly undertake a necessary
psychic house-cleaning. You are likely to have unusual charisma and personal power, with your true identity manifesting for all to see, and freed
from others' expectations. In fact, the honesty with which you are fon:ecl
to live your life serves to point out to others the illusions under which
they live theirs. Relationships with parents can terminate or transform, and
in the course of this, the security and comfort of your ego and self-image
may be violated. This rather upsetting period, once you have lived through
it, serves as the cornerstone of a more aware selfhood and a more realistic
self-image. PLUTO TO NATAL MOON
Your needs for security, family and home are strongly altered by events
and by your own personal growth. Monumental changes in your relationships with family and security structures are possible, as well as permanent
separations from people you held dear. This is an emotionally trying peri0d,
as yout feelings are deep, and since they are often (at least in your estimation) impossible to share, they could serve to make you isolate yourself
from other people. Even when you do open up, because your needs at times
seem so exaggerated and impossible to satisfy, their expression becomes
overwhelmingly insistent, perhaps frightening off those very people who
might offer consolation and security. Powerful emotional experiences serve
as a way not only to act out your present needs, but also as a means of
expressing l0ng-forgotten injuries that have not been healed ov:er time. It
is important not to become fearful in the face of the need to express these
very deep feelings and long-stored-up resentments - by learning to act • PLUTO: THE BEGINNING OF THE REST OF YOUR LIFE them out you begin to take some power over them, even though at times
you may fear they have taken you hostage. You will emerge from this
period better able to create your own self-nurturing environment and more
mature in your understanding of your needs, but don't expect the process
to be easy, fun or entirely under your control - people build the best sea
walls after the greatest storms. PLUTO TO NATAL MERCURY As with any transit to the planet of communication, your mental abilities,
work and interests in development of skills and techniques are the focus
now, as they undergo profound change and evolution under pressure from
the planet of transformation. You may find yourself fascinated by an
introduction to a forbiddingLy technical and bizarre area of thought, perhaps
being motivated to spend hours poring over abstruse formulae or obscure,
scholarly sources. Such obsessions parallel your unconscio-us preparation
for a major creative event, as you fertilize your mind now with ideas that
will only bear fruit far in the future. This doesn't make it ar.1y easier for
people to understand you, and this in turn can make you feel isolated and
alienated. Rebelling against conventional educational structures, you insist
on autonomy in pursuing your· interests, but since at the same time you
are likely to communicate in an unnecessarily abstract fashion, this is likely
to result in your at least feeling restricted in your efforts to explore new
intellectual territory. You could be less · than graceful in expressing your
fn!stration at the lack of response to your enigmatic utterings, and in
contrast to your abstractness in some areas, your sharpened tongue and
direct wit seem ever ready to perform psychic surgery on your friendships.
While your views in those areas you concern yourself with might be heterodox and difficult for some to understand, nevertheless they are probably
'
correct. Have some confidence in this and try to understand that time will
remedy what you cannot, which is to say that your points will sink in
eventually. On more abstract levels, this period is one of innet, almost
alchemical transformation, as you explore the limits of your mind, finding
that they are deeper and wider than you thought possible. The result of
this understanding can be at least the beginning of true self-transformation,
the creation of a new identity. • 317 TRANSITS AND PROGRESSIONS PLUTO TO NATAL VENUS Radical change and transformation come to you mainly in your romantic
and social life, often affecting your material concerns as well. This could
represent a-watershed time in your understanding of your romantic and
affectional nature, as you meet people likely to transform your most firmly
held ideas about relationship, sexuality and eroticism. 'Firsts', 'lasts' and
'roosts' come to you almost daily in these areas of your life, as you seem
to move between extremes of possessiveness, obsession, jealousy, frustration and sublime ecst-asy. Though this zone is usually one of the least
stressful you can experience, this is far from true now, as you purposefully
put yourself through the most exacting and intense emotional expe:riences
possible. Existing relationships enter a period of cathartic growth and
change or else are abandoned as being too shallow for your tastes; artistic
expression takes on a more sombre and serious hue, with trite and trivial
themes discarded for those with more immediate impact, including birth,
death, abandonment and isolation. This is perhaps the most powerful
p eriod of activity you'll ever encounter in a place characterized by a climate
of relationship and pleasure. Don't fight the compulsiveness, intensity and
p owerful feelings; though it seems impossible, life will someday return to
its humdrum normalcy, l~aving you with memories of the ecstatic and a
glimpse of the eternal. PLUTO TO NATAL MARS This zone is rarely the easiest for most people, so the intensity and depth
of the feelings and ·changes engendered by this transit can be quite trying.
Your need to fight for the acceptance of what you believe in and to defend
the p eople and things you care for most is activated by external or internal
threats and challenge,. and the pace is so hectic that you may at times feel
as if you're starring in an action movie. Though you have to deal with
destruction and violence on some level, this needn't be personally dangerous if you are willing and able to push your physical and emotional limits
to their very limits. The tasks you set yourself now are formidable, so if
you can't (or won't) commit to the course of action you must take, it's
better to move away from this zone for a time. Tremendous energy wells PLUTO: TH E BE·GfNNING OF THE R:EST OF YOUR LIFE up from within you, perhaps saved up from all the contests you ever l0st
or the other frustrations you ever experienced. Finding a way to direct this
energy is your most pressing task, as otherwise you will tend to waste it
by being irritable and unpleasant to those around you. Women particularly
will find this time difficult if they do not rationally assess the importance
and valid place of power and strength in their lives. There is no reason
why you can't acquite personal power and learn a lot during this period,
but be ready for all that is written between the Jines above. When it's over,
you're ready for a miracle, which _you'll have had the energy to create. PLUTO to NATAL JUPITER Few people would willingly miss the excitement and stimulation of this
particular transit The world of mortal creatures is ruled by the law of
death and rebirth, which decrees that nothing may endure and that all
value must be passed on to others in some form; at this time you may
benefit from this universal law, acquiring money or value through inheritance in its broadest sense - anything from a legacy to a promotion
occasioned by someone else's death or retirement. Your concept of your
place in society undergoes radical change - no longer content to be evaluated by others, you begin to create your own rules and ethics and to live
by them. Any form of publication, self-advertisement, even speculation or
gambling, can succeed far better now than usual, as this is the aspect of
the odds-defying long-shot winner. It's not so bad being an outcast when
you're convinced you're better than anyone else, and at times it may be
hard to convince yourself otherwise, because of the wealth, influential
social connections and other resources that seem to come your way. Expect
miracles during this most singular of times in this fortunate area, and even
if yc;m can't walk on water, you may meet someone who does. PLUTO TO NATAL SA TURN This serious transit is likely to make you all too aware of your limits and
deficiencies as extraordinary events challenge you in your social and personal life. D epending on your reaction to these challenges, you might
remember this year either as the time you first learned just how vulnerable 319 TRANSJTS AND PROGRESSIONS and injury-prone yow: ego can be, or as the time when you transcended
those limitations through personal growth. You may well have to deal with
some of the basest of human instincts now, as battles for power, victimization of scapegoats and the sacrifice of individual rights in order to assuage
collective needs (and fears) take place around you, perhaps with you as
participant. Yow: resistance to change and towards the acceptance of some
limits to your abilities can orily be overcome by conscious effort on yow:
part, though the will for this may not be easy to muster. The things you
cling to most tenaciously are the very ones taken away, but despite the
many personal burdens being sloughed off around you, you will not be
liberated from them until you actually let go of them inside yourself. This
process is rarely much fun, but it can at least be made easier if you can
cultivate the right attitude towards what is happening. In the end, ym1
come out ahead, even in spite of your own resistance. Like when a diseased
tooth is extracted~ though the wounds and memories of pain and humiliation won't eyer be among your most cherished mental possessions, you
can face a new day without the unwanted burdens of the past to hold you
back. PLUTO TO NATAL URANUS External and social forces seem to conspire to force you into a position
of alienated individualism, from which you do battle with the unthinking
and unfeeling forces of society. You will almost certainly retain and increase
your awareness and consciousness in this process (indeed, you can't afford
not to), so that you can go beyond the foolish 'rebel-without-a-cause'
idealism that can prevail sometimes at .this location. Still, you should beware
of anyone who tries to channel your potent social power for his or her
own ends now, and you should heed the inner voice that compels you to
strike out on your own, leaving the past behind. Those who cannot accept
their own individuality and whose lives do not afford them the opportunity
to rebel will probably find themselves surro';llded by social chaos and
upheaval acted out by others. Change is inevitable now, whether from
within or without, so to benefit from this most intense transit, you must
learn to be the master of it, rather than the recipient. For the young, this
may be difficult, as a more or less trivial rebellion and dissatisfaction against
parents and authority can distract you from a true course. It's open season .PLU'I'O: THE B'EGINNING OF THE REST OF YOUR LIFE .
en your ill1.1sions ro.ow, and you 0ruy get extra points if you: didri't have
any illusions in the first place.
. Plutão :UUTO 'TO NATAL NEPTUNE This transit is an astrological event in the life of everyone born after 1940,
occurring typically in the mid-twenties, and representing a time.when the
myopia of youth gives way to the perceptions of how the world 'really'
works. Modern rnedi~, which have taken over much of the education and
socialization done by parents and schools in the past, have never been
very honest in their reporting of the disappointing aspects of human nature,
so in maturity many of us come to realize that real life is much deeper,
more real and less idealized than it seemed when we were children. A
similar transit occurring to people in their mid sixties is associated with
recognition of the disillusionment of our mortality; as the proximity of
our own demise becomes pretty obvious by this time. In b0th types of
transit, the death of ideals can he a ·p rofound disappointment, yet from
this mpurning cah spring a more realistic and vital world view, allowing
you truly to savour life - shadows, imperfections and all - released from
the vulperability created by defending :unrealistic expectations. Frequent
cha·nges of residence are us'Qally part of this rather long process, but as
everyone go;es through some :f orm of it at about the same age, it is 0ften
easier to deal with than other Plutori.ian transits. PLUTO TO NATAL PLUTO
Pluto strongly aspecting.its own .Place on a local angle means you will have
to deal with mortality·- friends· ot relatives may pass away, or you yourself
may nave a close shave, reminding you that the ego's illusions of eternal
life can't last long when the body 1n which they are housed is transitory.
Mu<:: Saturno of this process has sodal overtones - the distribution of wealth and
'
.
the glorification of the efforts qf a few at the· expense of the many is a
w~ Netuno for society to grant advantage to those whose personalities and talents
are most needed by humanity at large. Such criteria change, arid people
who hold too tightly to beliets
ideals will find themselves alone in a
seemingly hostile world. You \Vill have to surrender some of your beliefs arrd -3 21 TRANSITS AND PROGRESSIONS now, and even perhaps some of your prestige, power and financial advantage, as a sacrifice to the times and to the needs of society to adapt. Y01.'1
should find that you have the maturity to accept such charige and growth
as necessary and can now make plans for your own future security with
such knowledge in mind. Life without growth and change lacks vitality
and eventually becomes a victim of its own inertia. This p eriod assures
that this won't happen to you . • 32·2 Appendix: Historical and Technical
Notes on Astro*Carto*Graphy Though Astro*Carto*Graphy is very much a child of the computer age,
the fundamental idea of planetary angularity which underlies it is perhaps
one of the oldest concepts in astrology. In their comprehensive survey of
twentieth-century reseru-ch, Recent Advances in Nata/Astrology, Geoffrey Dean
and Arthur Mather found that, unlike many other areas of astrology, from
zodiacs to house systems, the view that planets are at their greatest strength
when either rising or setting, or at upper or lower culmination (points
which astrologers refer to collectively as the 'angles' of the birth chart), is
accepted by a wide variety of astrologers. Though opinions do differ with
respect to how far and in which direction these power zones extend from
the angles, there seems to be general agreement that an area five to ten
degrees on either side' of the angles represents the strongest point in a
chart for an individual planet, and it is the centre of this area that the
planetary lines on the ACG map emphasize.
D espite its ancient roots, the mapping of planetary lines is thoroughly
modern in its emphasis on angularity, since controversies over which zodiac
or house system to use, combined with the results of modern scientific
and historical research, have tnoved some astrologers away from zodiacs
and houses entirely, and towards an emphasis on planets. As one example,
the main feature of most of the techniques iavented or described by the
late Cyril Fagan was planetary angularity, and in fact many who use thes~
techniques today often do not even use Fagan's sidereal zodiac. Jim Lewis
himself was probably influenced in his thinking on angularity by exposure
to the ideas of Fagan, and fellow siderealist Donald Bradley, the latter of
whom he was acquainted with personally, though Lewis firmly rejected the
sidereal zodiac itself. Interestingly, and unbeknown to Lewis, Bradley in
r Mercúrio 56 had probably drawn the most complete early version of one of these
maps (though earlier versions with one or two planetary lines rendered
can probably be found elsewhere), for a mundane forecast in the 1957 APPENDIX: HISTORICAL AND TECHNICAL NOTES American Astrology Digest. Occasionally aftet that, Bradley would draw partial
maps that indicated only a few planets or focused on a particular locality,
though again these were always done to illustrate points about mundane,
not natal, astrology.
As with Bradley, all early uses of the mapping technique known to this
writer were applied to mundane work, possibly deriving the notion from
the eclipse path maps used by astronomers. Though Fagan (and perhaps
others) at one point suggested using this technique for natal charts, nothing
comparable to Lewis's original articles on the subject, let alone the comprehensive system he derived from this simple idea, seems to exist in astrological literature before his time. The reader bombarded by an ever-growing
number of locality-mapping programs and interpreters should keep this
fact in mind, and should also be aware that very likely none of these
products would be available today had Lewis himself not had the energy
and pertinacity to develop and learn t;he subject by drawing such maps by
hand, both for his own studies and for client work, for several years before
the process was finally computerized. Claims for earlier natal maps than
Lewis's may be true, but only Lewis carefully considered the ramifications
of the map itself, both astrologically and philosophically;, and provided an
interpretive framework for it.
Technically, the culminating (MH) lines on an ACG map represent
those places on the earth at which, for a given Greenwich Mean Time,
the sidereal time equals the planet's right ascension; the anti-culminating
(I C) lines on a map are those places at which the sidereal time equals the
planet's right ascension +r8o degrees. The MH and IC lines are the same
for all latitudes from pole to pole, but the rising and setting lines vary
from latitude to latitude, based on a standard equation:
ST rise = RA - SA ST set =RA + SA where ST indicates sidereal time, RA indicates the planet's right ascension
and SA is the planet's 'semi-arc' for a given latitude. This last is derived
from the equation:
cos SA = -tan lat x tan dec 324 APPENDIX: HISTORICAL AND TECHNICAL NOTES with 'lat' representing the latitude of the place for which the calculation is
_done, and 'dec' indicating the planet's declination; and 'cos' and 'tan'
indicating to.sine and tangent. A full ACG calculation plots a planetary
line as a set of points from the equator to the planet's co-latitude,
incrementing the latitude by varying amounts, depending on how fine a
rendering is needed, the plotting equipment being used, and so forth.
A careful look at an ACG map can be very instructional, so the reader
is invited to ex-arnine those in this book and note the following:
o at the equator, rising and setting lines are always exactly 90° on either
side of the MH and IC lines.
o the rising and setting lines 'peak' at high latitudes. In fact, this hap~ens
at the co-latitude of a planet, which is found by subtracting the declination from 90°.
This means that each rise/set 'line' is actually a continuous, symmetrical
curve showing those places around the globe at which a planet is found
on the horizon, with the height of that curve (i.e. the distance af its highest
point from the equator) equal to the co-latitude for the body in question.
Though little interpretive significance can be attached to any of these facts,
being aware of them does help to give a general sense that the lines
we concern ourselves with on an ACG map are actually part of a larger
whole.
The important idea of latitude crossings in Astro*Carto*Graphy may
also have originated from Lewis's awareness of Fagan's writings. I n a chart
drawn for a particular location, these crossings (which are found at any
latitude at which rise/set lines for one planet intersect the Midheaven or
IC lines for another) would be -called 'paranatellonta' (par~m), a Greek term
which Fagan defined as the simultaneous appearance of two planets on
the meridian and the horizon (one on the former and the other on the
latter). (As recent translations of ancient texts from Project Hindsight make
clear, the original meaning of this term referred only to bodies that rise at
the same time. Fagan's definition of the term is entrenched in modern
usage.) Another term for a paran is a mundane square, and the relationship
is usually interpreted by those who use it as a neutral aspect that simply
blends the natures of the two planets. M<1re often than not in regular chart
interpretation, a paran is considered to be potential more than actual, since
the relationship is thought to be there even when the two planets ate not APPENDIX: HISJ'ORICA,L AND TECHN ICAL NOT·ES actually on angles at the time of the chart. In other words, what is important
is the f~ct that the two planets could he simUltaneously on ru;1gles at some
future date were the chart either rotated diurnally or viewed from another
locale than the birth place.
H owever, as Lewis used them in the world map setting of Astro*
Carto*Graphy, parans are considered to be 'actual' in their effect all along
the entire latitude at which the lines cross, with an orb on either side of that
latitude as well. Crossings are not considered to be quite as strong as th<:l
rising, setting and culminating lines themselves. Thus, underlying the lines
plotted on an ACG map is an invisible web of crossings which can be used
to enhance the interpretation. 'This web of connectio.A.s should not be overemphasized, however, as the core of Astro*Carto*Graphy interpretation is
still the focus on those places where rising, setting and culminating occur.
What orbs to use for these lines - an important consideration - was
worked out empirically by Jim Lewis, both through personal observation
and by considering feedback from Astro*Carto*Graphy clients. The following orbs were applied:
o natal rise, set, MH and IC lines: f4°
o ptOgressed 'Cyclo*Carto*Graphy' rise, set, MH and I C lines: ± Júpiter :0 alone,
exact when contacting natal lines
o· line crQssings: +1° ASPECTS, SYNAST RY AND SECTORS
A whole range of more advanced techniques is possible with Astro*
'
Carto*Graphy, and in fact anything that can be done with one (or more)
charts can also be done with an ACG map, as long as it can be expressed
within the two coordinates of right ascension and declination. Some things
astrologers do with their charts are not so easy to apply in this setting;
however. One example of a traditional chart tool that cannot be used with
an ACG map is standard aspects, as these do not translate· easily into this
frame of reference. Aspects, after all, are measured along the ecliptic, in
the single. dimension of longitude, while the planetary lines of Astro.?t<
Carto*Graphy are mapped out through the use of two entirely different
coordinates related to the celestial equator. A planet's lqcation in right
ascension and declination can be translated mathematically into ecliptic . terms,, b:ut it still re<;J;uires two. ·rumel'l:sions - both·. l<:>f!giwqle and l'at,l:tude,
In Sol .rder to pcr,flder on how diffe£~fol$ a 0..ne;,dim<msi<irFi~ ~spt:ret is f:t;0tn ,~
tWo-dimensional aspect, 'tR€1:eader mrght censider that, if w¢ allow.an .orb
0f one <il<e:gree (p11~tty ti~ht·lhy astt6logica.J. stahda.1fas}, Ml9ntteal, at 7 3W 34,
ee-ml8 be' consrderea "iS ·'cxD.tijunct' New Ymrk (7 fW s,7? in geographic longitude. On the othen -hand, as we can see from a ma:p, tne two cities afe
sepa1!ated by- neady five cl:egtees of latitude ( Júpiter )Np versus. 4eN4<~) ana a
great dlsta:m:ce ·in f;):iileso.
The closest al).alogue :to ecliptic aspe<i:tS tln.at can.be se,e n on an..Ac;;;O
ru:ap would. ble the· toa.j.u.nc:tion .and the oppositi0l\l, as any tw:0 planets
foun:a on MH Gin lG: .R.t:ies a:t the same· pla:cie a.~re hl. a conjune.ti0n ln r.ight
'Clseen..rlo'n, aRd w0tdd ptoh>ably' be fonnd ·Wiitilirin orb of a cenjnnctioiD. 1in
l0ngitude 1n a horoscope .fo! the oi.rth plaee as. well. The S-3:!iiTe c€mld be
said of ~airs· ·0 f planets in whiehl one was .0n the:Midhel!.w:en and fhe ~ther
0n tbre IC, whiGh·w-ould pv0babl~ pui!. them wtthin .erb pf atJ. oppositioa
in lcmgitude in a -reg¢ar birth: chart. However; the ~m:!in:dane. square' which
is seen at these locations wheJ:e MiGlheaven/1€ !lines eros& rise/set lines_,
mi:ght app<!!ar as anyt±tiag fr0m -a cenjunctio£ to a :Square ~®t ·n o aspect a:t
all) when ohly lomgitude is lo0ked at,..as in a .sta:ndatd birth chairt. Though
it is ce.vtainly pos_s·ibJe to cphsi'der pla.netaty position§ on a mip in terms
of l0ngitudes cmly (and thus, for example, to find a: pla:ee on eat'th t: Saturno ;:~:t
J.111':i;ght be sextNe in lopgktude to ·a particular nata1 planet), it Saturno >eeomes a ·ver, Netuno complicated mattetr to reptesemt visuailly,. and also becomes sbme:thit!l,' Vênus cmcirely different from Astro*Gattoi!<Graphy, itsdf. 1rt othet 'words, while
all tb.ib.gs may be p0ssible astmlogieally, or map-wise, this· does rtot rmtan
they are either right ot neGess::j.ry.
Olle largely lJ.llexplored use. of Astt9*c:;arto:1<Gnaphy is that ·ef syrrastry.
ln an era when it has become m0re. or .less commonplaGe for people to
relocate several times ·i n a lite? most. of us ·are likely to have obse;roed the
cl.ifferin: Vênus effects a change in location often seems· t® ha: Áries 'e on. two individual's . People who fa!ll iE love and marry in one place may ~vorce in
~@ther, and the reaso£ for the ch4n.ge often can?t be t.l:a;eed t~ ob¥ioU:§
local faetors SJ..wh as the c.linrate 9i: the locit <;:Wtutte. 'Beople cha;nge and
ck4:£t apart,
so the eonventiorra,i wisd.mn goes, and.
. that is often s.e en as ~e
®nd 0f it. Astrok>gically, hx~w::ever, Bfie reas®n to~ tiliat ehan:ge could be
that S®me new and p.e:thaf"s ·c~mradi:eto:f. Netuno fa:cets orf tHe·' individuals in
question nave be.e n emphas:i:zed at cl1J.e' new l'dcality, o!l:! .perhaps tha;t the
underlying dynamii!!S of the syiiastdc €01ltaets have changed. APPENDIX: HISTORICAL AND ~ECHNLCAli. NOTES In considering this afl.d other possibilities, we can look ·a t pairs of ACG
maps in either of the following two ways:
As two separate charts, by considering the differences ill angular plane'ts,
line crossings and so forth for each individual between the place of meeting
and the place of relocation.
z. Viewing each map's relation to the other in the same way that transits
or progressions to a natal map might be viewed in Cyclo*Carto*Graphryr.
1. The first is analogous to casting two standard locality charts and treating
them synastrically, and the kinds of contrasts possible in this case should
be obvious. F0r example, suppose a person whose natal chart has Jupiter
rising at the place of birth should meve to a place at which Saturn is rising
and Jupiter has mpved far away from the angles. With such an obvious
change, the emphasis in both personality and life interests would shift in
a noticeable way, with a person wh0 might tend to ~e on the eheetry side
becoming more circumspect, and someone who had before sought to
associate himself with 'the best' in a social sense perhaps becoming mote
orientated towards authority figures, generally emphasizing power mone
than social concerns. No matter what the particulars, the contrast between
Jupiter and Saturn is sucll that, all other things being equal, over time this
person would change quite a bit in the new locality. Given this, it wouldn't
be too much to suppose that a spouse or lover whose chart showed a
strong attraction to Jupiter types would tend to be mote easily attracted
to this person at the Jupiter locati0n than at the Satut? Saturno Urano >cation. A strong
bond formed under Jupiter could well last under Saturn, but the nature of
the relationship would change. Adjustment would be demanded on both _
sides, and if either partner couldn't manage this, the relationship itself
might begin to falter.
More interesting is the second possibility, which can be looked at fairly
easily for a single locality with the 'bi-wheel' option on most computer
programs -using one chart's planets and house cusps as base chart, with
the sec0nd chart added in an outer wheel for comparison. When done as
an .ACG map, the second chart would simply be set for the same sidereal
time at Greenwich as the chatJt it was to be compared with. As an example,
consider someone whose natal Venus happens to be conjunct the local
Ascendant of someone else, perhaps in a place where both are attending
school. Under this classical t0mance and marriage contact, passions might APPENDIX: HlSTORl'CAl.. AND TECHNICAL NOTES be fired, and as long as the twQ' remain in the area and the ebb and .flow
of transits and progressions is not too demanding, they should experie.Qce
a nice time together. On the other hand, suppose they move a gteat distance
to a place at which the Venus person's Saturn is now on the other's
AsGendant. Th01.~gl:rr Gertain Saturn contaets can be helpful f0r marriage,
Saturn in one person's chart to the lights or angles of the other could
easily make the relationship seem a dead bore to the pers~m receiving the
Saturn contact, who will very likely also feel himself or herself under heavy
pressure from the Saturn person much of the time. At the very least this
would make for some problems in the relationship.
More inter~s-ting tha1!1 simple contacts of a planet in one person's chart
to another's local angles is the situation in which we. consider the complete
astrological context of the planet 1n question, including sign, house position
and aspects. For example, what might be the effect in the example just
given if Saturn happened to be a shadowed planet in the second person's
chart? In this case, that second person might feel the contact in the same
way as a transit of the shadowed Saturn, so that far from simple boredom
and restriction, she (using the feminine for the sake of the example) might
find tha-t interaction with the first person at this new location now calls
up demons from the depths of her psyche, forcing her to face issues in her
life and personality that she might rather avoid. H ere, while the strongest of
relationships could manage to survive and grow, the weakest would surely
be in danger of failing, unless the person being 'transited' happens to be
just at the prope,r stage in life to benefit from his or her ~ shadowed planet
being brought out into the open. 'There is a rich field here to be mined
for those ready to explore it.
As one final interesting future application of Astro*Carto*Graphy, consider the connectiotl often noted by Jim Lewis between the fundamental
premise of his creation and the work of Michel and Frans;oise Gauquelin.
Though Lewis had developed standard 'orbs' to use in gauging the effect
of planetary lines, the work of the Gauquelins suggests that their statistically
derived definition of the angular 'power zones' might be used with Astro*Carto*Graphy. A precise definition of these zones takes into account the
.daily motion of fast-moving planets, but it is an allowable approximation
to use the planets' positions at the time of birth only, as we do in both
standard birth charts and in ACG maps. If we applied this to a set of
lines for an individual planet, it would bring about two major changes in
the orbs usually used in ACG work. First of all, the orb would encompass a small ,area. to the west of ·the line in question and take in a larger area
(about thtree times as large) to the east of the Line: Secondly, the orbs for
locations where a planet either rose or set would :vary with latitude, taking
ih a greater geographic distance at the equatot and a,.smaller dist~nee m
higher latitudes, with the ·orb for a rise/set: 'line reaching a mathematical
vanishing ·point at the co-latitude, the place at which the rise/set lime
crosses either the Midheaven or I Cline. Interpretation in this case wouli'il
depend less .on the elements of standard astrology used in ACG work
(such as the differing meanings of each _of the anglesj an@ more on a pute
blend of the planet's natures·.
In su.<>: Saturno suggested extensions of Astro*Carto*Graphy .as these, and in
other extensions that might be suggested in the futUt"e, the main thing t0
keep in mind is that theplanets (and. the planets in two climensions,. n0.t
simply ecliptic ·longirude) should remain central: to whatever is proposed,
Though Astr-o*Carto.*Graphy has gained the astrological world's' attention '
truough the appeal and beauty of its maps:, and through its promotion of
the idea that we are not limited to our birthplace, its real core is the pianets~
In that sense, while Jim Lewis's appealing idea has provided us with new
vistas, it .has also taken us back to basics, back to the plaflets that are the
11:eart. of as:trQlogy.
' . Notes and Sources CHAPTER 1: Space and Time in the Horoscope
I. See for example, Michel Gauquelin, Nco-Astrology, A Copernican Revolution, Penguin Arkana, 1991. Chapter 2 is particularly pertinent in the case of angularity. Frans:oise
Gauquelin's Psychology of the Planets makes the case for the connecti~n between the
original Gauquelin findings and. personality.
2. Note from Kenrteth ltving: 'Though this quotation is consistent with Jungian
psychology, I have been unable to locate the exact source of it either in Jung's
writings or in any of the material from Jim Lewis used in the preparation of this
book. Even though I have not been able to track it down, and thus to verify the
exact wording, I have left it here in quotation marks since that is the way it appears
in Jim's notes.'
3· Paraphrased from Robert Bly, The Little Book ofthe Huf!Jan Shadow, Element Books,
1988. Júpiter · 5 January 1893, 8:38 Plutão .Ivl. LMT, Gorakhpur, India. 'A' data from the American Book of Charts. 5· 29 May 1917, 3:oo1>.M. EST, Brookline, Massachusetts. From mother, according
to the Blackwell Database.
6. 2.6 July -1875, Kesswil, Switzerland. According to Blackwell, either Jung or his
daughter gave various local times from 7:20 to 7:3-2P.M., around sunset.
7· See Chapter 5, 'Winds of Neptune, Fires of Mars', for data and sources on Jones.
8. These remarks are true for a birth time of 27 February 1932, 7:56P.M. BST,
London. Neither this nor any of several alternative times seem very reliable. CHAPTER 2: Lines and Crossings
1. The cross-indexed archives of these personal testimonies collected by Jim Lewis are for the present stored with a small library of his personal papers available for
researchers to use, by appointment. Fot curtent location, contact Association for
Astrological Networking, I-8oo-n8-AFAN, 8306 Wilshire Boulevard, Suite 537,
Beverly Hills, CA 90211, USA. NOTES AND SOT:JRCES CHAPTER 5: Winds of Neptune, Fires of Mats I. Jim Lewis unknowingly visited his some years ago and, one evening, was merely chased through the streets by a lunatic waving a knife. While this did not make
international headlines, he never made any effort to return to that location!
2. Quoted in Randy Shilts, The Mayor of Castro Street, The Lift and Times of Harv~
Milk, StMartin's Press, 1982.. Other quotations relating to Milk and White were
also found in this book.
3· 2. Júpiter November 192. Mercúrio , Júpiter :ooA.M. PST, San Francisco. Birth certificate according to
Blackwell. Júpiter · Jeff Mayo, AstroiogJ: A Key to Persona/if), Penguin Arkana, 1.995, pp. Ito and
I 19.
5· At sundown for Jonestown, Mars was at 17° 2. Júpiter ' and Neptune at 17° 2. Mercúrio ', while
on the date of the assassination in San Francisco they were at 1 8° 48' and 17° 3 3'. CHAPTER 6: War Lines across the World
I. Júpiter July 1872., Mercúrio A.M. LMT, Plymouth, Vermont. Data from father, according t0 Modern AstrologJ, cited by Blackwell.
2 . 30 January t88z, 8:45 A.M. LMT, Hyde Park, New York. From father's diary,
cited in biography Gracious Lady as sayimg 'at a quarter to nine my Sallie had a
splendid large baby boy'.
3· ir A~gust 1874 at rz:oo A.M. LMT, West Branch, Iowa, from Blackwell via
David Burner, Herbert Hoovetj A Public Lift, based on records in Friends Church,
West Bt:anch. Date contradicts ro August, which is cited in many other sources. Júpiter · r October 192. Júpiter , 1 A.M. CST, Plains, Georgia (32Noz, 84W2. Júpiter ). Birth certifieate
by various sources, according to Blackwell.
5· 8 May r884, Júpiter Plutão .M. CST, Lamar, Missouri, from family sources. Blackwell.
6. See note 5 to Chapter t.
7· 2.7 August 1908, at about 5:45 A.M. CST, near Stonewall, Texas. Given as 'daybreak' o.r 'sunrise' by family sources according to Blackwell.
8. Mercúrio January 1913, f):35 Plutão .M. PST, Fullerton Township, California. Recorded by
attending nurse. Photo of birth record shown in Henry D . Spalding, The Nixon
Nobody Knows, cited by Blackwell. Mercúrio · 2. Júpiter July 1913, 12.:43 A.M. CST, Omaha, Nebraska. From Ford's 'baby book',
according to Fo111/er's Compendi11m, cited by Blackwell.
ro. Jim Lewis used Carte~s Mars lines to time the troubles of his administration,
first in 'Astrology Predicts the Next Likely War Zones' in the July 1978 issue of
Dell Horoscope and then in 'America at War in 198o?' in the April 198o jssue of
American AstrologJ. In the first article he singled out Iran as a likely trouble spot and NOTES AND SOURCES in the second said: 'Mars, which turned retrograde in January, in close square to
Carter's' Jupiter (Mars-Jupiter again), April 7th, makes its direct station in exact
opposition to Carter's Mars (t' of arc orb). Considering tlie previous stress on the
President's Mars- a solar eclipse, the station of Uranus, as well as its involvement
with the US and the other relevant charts- this looks ominously militant in nature.
It is probably the final stage of the crisis (though these aspects repeat, in lesser
force, in July and November of this year), one marked by considerable tension,
and perhaps military involvement.' On 7 April, the .United States cut diplomatic
ties and imposed economic sanctions on Iran; on I 7 April, Ca.,rter announced that
military action was the only option if the hostages were not released; and on
2. Júpiter April, he anaounced the abottive rescue attempt.
xx. Times from his mother and other sources· are given as between ti :oo A.M. and
Noon, according to Blackwell. CHAPTER 7: Prisoners of the Horoscope No More
x. Helen Boyd, The True Horoscope of the United States, ASI Publications Inc., I975·
2. It was, in fact, this symholism that made Jim Lewis an early adherent of the Boyd chart. Ken Irving sent the chart to Lewis for rendering as an ACG tnap,
though only with the mention that it was a proposed US birth chart. Lewis returned
the map with a comment to the effect, 'I'm converted ... tell me more!' Incidentally,
proposiag that a particular national chart is radical is not the same as saying that
it is the on!J chart applicable. On the other hand, radlcality must involve some
element of historicity, ~hich (at the risk of offending many American readers)
seems to be totally lacking where the time for the Gemini-rising chart for Júpiter July
I 776 is concerned. Though he has been unable to find a reference on this, author
Irving recalls that an effort some years ago to track down the source of the
Gemini-rising chart resulted in the information that it had been 'rectified' (i.e.
speculated), perhaps by H. V. Herndon. 333 • Definitions of Some
Useful Terms angularity,: ProximitY to any of the four 'angles' of the birth ·chart - Ascendant,
Midheaven, Descendant and lm'Um Coeli. The orb to allow has been a subject
of dispute among astrologers, though most would generally agree that an area
approximately five degrees on either side of an angle is the strongest placement.
The work of Michel and Frans;oise Gauquelin addresses the concept of angularity
directly and suggests a more specific pattern for angularity that agrees with this
idea in part, though it places the strongest areas clockwise after the angles, so
that they fall in the 12th, 9th, 6th and 3rd houses.
Ascendant (ASC): The point of the ecliptic on the eastern horizon at the time of
birth.
aspects: No aspects in the standard sense are used in Astto*Carto*Graphy, as conjunctions, trines, sextiles, etc., are measured along the ecliptic and are defined in
only one dimension, not taking latitude into account. The positioning of planetary lines is defined in relation to the equator, not the ecliptic, and is twodimensioil:al as well.
Astro'~<Carto*Grapf? Netuno : A registered trademark for a kind of locational astrology generically known under names such as locality mapping, astra-mapping or astralocality mapping.
declination: A planet's distance north or south of the celestial equator. A planet's
declination can be seen on an ACG map by finding the zenith point, represented
as a circle on the MH (Midheaven) line. Planets whose zenith points are the
same distance north or south of the equator are either parallel (both on the same
side of the equatot:) .or contraparallel (each on a different side of the equator),
depending on the orb allowed.
Descendant (DSC): The point of the ecliptic on the western horizon at the time of
birth.
hour angle: A planet's distance from a given location as measured along the equator.
The hour angle of a planet at a given moment for a given place is defined as
the right ascension of the planet minus the sidereal time at that location.
!mum Coeli (IC): The point at which the ecliptic intersects the lower meridian. The
4th-house cusp in 'quadrant' house systems such as Placidus and Koch.
line crossing: The crossing of one planet's Midheaven or I C line with another planet's 335 DEFINITIONS rising or setting line. The latitude at which this happens is considered to be
influenced by both planets. This is the same as a 'paranatellonta', or paran, as
defined by Cyril Fagan (see Appendix, page 325).
/ocational astrology: General term for any method of studying the difference between
astrological effects at the birth place and another location. While use of the
term sometimes includes comparison of the birth chart with local charts, such
as, for example, the chart for a city to which the native is relocating, it usually
only involves analysis of the birth chart as it would look if the native had been
born at the new location. Locality mapping such as Astro*Carto*Graphy is a
two-dii:nensional and global form of locational astrology.
Midheaven (MH): The point on the ecliptic which intersects the upper meridian. The
roth-house cusp in 'quadrant' house systems such as Placidus and Koch.
nadir: The point directly opposite the zenith at any location. Not to be confused
with the IC.
right ascensio11: A planet's distance from the vernal point, measured eastwards along
the celestial equator.
rise: The location of a planet on the eastern horizon. Astrologically, a body's rising
is considered to take place when its mathematical centre is on the horizon
(rather than the upper limb, as in astronomy), and it is not corrected for local
observational conditions such as refraction, temperature and dip of the horizon.
set: The location of a planet on the western horizon, with astrological setting
differentiated from astronomical setting in the same way astrological rise is
distinguished from astronomical rise.
shad01ved planet In Jim Lewis's Astro*Carto*Graphy interpretations, a planet which
may be difficult for the native to integrate into his or her whole personality.
Any planet which is debilitated by sign, house position or aspect in a standatd
chart has the potential for being a shadowed planet. Furthermore, masculine
planets in the charts of women, particularly Sun and Mars, or feminine planets
in the charts of men, particularly Moon and Venus, have shadow potential
zenith: The point direc~ Netuno overhead at any location. Not to be confused with the
Midheaven. Index American Astrology Digest, 324
angles of the chart, 5, 323
house structure and, 28-3 I
Aquarius, Sun line and, 105
archetypes, self vs. not-self, I 5
aspects in Astro*Carto*G.raphy,
24 5-6, p6- 7
assimilation: see planetary archetypes,
emergence of Astro*Ca.rto*Graphy
definition, 3
transits and progressions, 5
astronomical principle underlying, 5
differences from standard
horoscope, 19
Astrology: A K'!J to Personality, 74, 3320
Bly, Robert, I 2, 33In
Boyd chart for USA, 92
Boyd, Helen, Mercúrio 2
Bradley, Donald, 32.3- Júpiter Britt, Harry, 69
Bush, George, 22
planetary links to Jimmy Carter, 84
transits and progressions to war
lines, 8 5
Gulf War transits and progressions,
246
Cancer, Sun line and, 105
Carter, Jimmy, 22
Mars, J upiter and 'Iran, 43
Caruso, Enrico, Sun line of, 64
circumstantial problems defined, 34 D ean, Geoffrey, 32.3
denial: see planetary archetypes,
emergence of
Eisenhower, Dwight D., 8I
exemplification: see planetary
archetypes, emergence of
Jimmy Swagga.rt as example of, 38
Fagan, Cyril, 32.3- Júpiter quoted on Sun-Mars contacts, 6o
fated occurrences, relation of to
projection, 37
Firebrace, Roy, 92
Ford, Gerald, 22.
war lines for Vietnam, 8I
Gacy, John Wayne, 64
Gauquelin 'power zones', 32. Mercúrio - 30
Gauquelin, Michel, 33In
Gauquelin, Michel and Fran5=oise, 5
research findings on Mars, 79
Gemini, Mercury line and, I45
George ITI, 92
Grace, shadowed planets in chart of,
40
shadowed planets and houses, 44
Greene, Liz, 2.02
Hiroshiffia
Boyd chart Pluto line and, 97
Mars-Pluto conjunction and, 98
'Hots pur in Wales' problem, I 2. 337 IN DEX Hussein, Saddam, 22, 85
Imum Co eli, meaning of planets on, I Mercúrio Johnson, Lyndon B., 2.2
war lines for Vietnam, 81
Jones, Jlm, 19, 59-65
Jung, C. G.
concepts relating to astrology, 8, Io
stages of life, 10
self vs. not-self, r I
suppressed modes of consciousness,
tt-I2
Pluto line and Zurich, I 8
'shadow' and progressed Sun to
Saturn, 2. 5I
Jupiter line
fame, 24
differing reactions to, 43
Jupiter MH line, 22
Jimmy Carter, Iran, 84
George Bush, Beijing, 8 5
Karamanli, Pasha Yusuf, 96
Kennedy, John F., 2.2.
Saturn zenith point and Cuba, 32.
Pluto line and Dallas, 1 8
war lines for Vietnam, 8I
Ktishnamurti, 2 I 8
Sun line of, 64
Kuwait, invasion of, 2.2.
latitude crossing
definition and orbs, 32
Moon MH-Saturn ASC, 55
Sun IC- Mars DSC , 6o
Sun-Mars and 'intense assertion', 65
Mars - Jupiter, 84
Mars-Jupiter, 8 5
relation to paranatellonta, 32 5
Leary, Timothy, Sun ASC line of, 64
Lewis, Jim, 323 - Júpiter library, 332n Libra, Sun line and, Io5
line crossing: see latitude crossing
locality as activator of shadowed planet,
42
locality astrology, 3
Manson, Charles, 64
Mars ASC line, 22
D an White,, birthplace, 7 5
Franklin RQosev:elt, Pearl Harbor, So
Jimmy Carter, Iran, 84
George Bush, Beijing, 85
Boyd chart, Richmond and
Washington, 93
Mars DSC line
Charles Manson, southern
California, 64
Jim Jones and, 6o
John Wayne Gacy, Chicago, 64
projection as source of violence, 64
Gerald Ford, Saigon, 81
George Bush, Panama, 8 5
Boyd chart, Saigon, 96
Mars IC line
H arvey Milk, San Francisco, 74
Harry Truman, Korea, So
George Bush, Europe and Africa, 8 5
Mars line
war and, 22, 79
assertion and courage, 24, 78
differing reactions of men and
women to, 43
well-placed Mars and, 7 5
debilitated Mars and, 7 5
Mars MH line, I Mercúrio Boyd chart, Berlin and Tripoli, 96
Boyd chart progressed, Hiroshima,
98
Mars-Jupiter crossing, Jimmy Carter,
Iran, 84
Mars-Neptune conjunction as trigger
for Mars-Neptune lines, 76
Mars-Saturn-Neptune line, 27 Mathex, Arthur, 32 3
Mayo; Jeff, 7c4, 3:p nThe Mayor OJ Ca~trb Stree" The; Life and
Times ·qf Han;ry Milk, :; 3zn
Mays, Willie, Sun line of; 04
Milk, Harvey, 59, 6_6-77
as 'The Mayor of Castt\o Street',. 67
murdered by Dan White, 69
Moon line emotions, 24
Moon ASC Line, r8
Moon I C line, 2 5
Moon MH line, USA, Moscow and
McCarthy era, roo
Moscone, G~<Drge, 59, 6.8- Mercúrio ·
murdered by Dan White, 69
nadit point, 32
Neptune ASC line, Dan White, San
Francisco, 7 5
Neptune DSC line, Harvey Milk,
birthplace, 74
Neptune lC line, Richard Nixon,
Cambodia, .8-1
Neptune-MH line
Richard Nixon, Washington DC, 81
Boyd chart, Eura.pe, 96
Nixon, Richard M., Neptune. for
Washington and Cambodia, 8r
not-self~ planets of, 40
Olive Branch Petition, 92
orbs for planetary lines and latitude·
crossings; 3z
People's Temple, 59, 66
Pisces, Sun line and, 1 o 5
planetary archetypes, emergence of,
1}-14
denial phase (pr~jection and
repression), 13
inner situations as 'fate\ .J Júpiter exemplification phase, 1. Júpiter assimilation phase, 14 denia)., 36-7
assimilation, 37 - 8
·pr0jection, 37
repression and denial phase fot
Grace, 46
planetary lines
~travel transits) vs. residence, .24
orbs for, 32, p6
plane.tary polarity
Uranus- Jupiter, I I
Merc,ury-Jupiter, 1 3
Uranus - Jupiter, 13
Uranus-J upitet, r 3 .
Pluto ASC line
Herbert·Hoover, Nicru:agua, 79
Harry Truman, Hiroshima and
Nagasaki, 97
Pluto I C line
psychologic~ transformation, I Mercúrio Gerald Ford, San Francisco, 84
Pluto line
war and, 79
US Presidents and Nicaragua, 79.....:.so
Pluto MH line
political assassination, .r 8,
sexual awakening, 2 5
awareness of mortality, 2.5_, 91
George Moscone, San Francisco, 77
Calvin Coolidge, Nicaragua, 79
Franklin Roosevelt, Ni~aragaa, 79
Jimmy Carter, Central America, 8o
John F. Kennedy,. Dallas, 8.11
Boyd Cl::lart, ,Hiroshima, 97
polarity reve.11~al of Carter and Truman
Mars-Jupiter lines, 84
polariZation of consciousness,
male- female, r 2.
Price~ Leontyne, Sun lin.e of, 64
progressed sidereal solar return, 93
projection: see planetary archetypes,
emergence of
al-Qaddafi, Muamrnar, 96 339 INDEX Reagan, Ronald, z.z. Recent Advances in Natal Aslrolol!), 3z. 3
relationship as activator of shadowed
planet, 41 - z
repetitive problems, defined, 34
shadowed planets as root of, 36
as indicator of emerging archetype,
41.
rise-set formula, .324-5
Roosevelt, Franklin D., z.z.
planetary lines for war zones, 8o
Ryan, Leo, 64
Saturn ASC line
Harry Truman, Korea and Japan, 8o
Jimmy Carter, Nicaragua and
Panama, 8o
Harry Truman, Hiroshima and
Nagasaki, 97
Saturn D SC line, 5z.
Boyd chart, Saigon, 96
Saturn I C line
Saturn return, 26, 52
life-threatening illness, 26
debilitated I 2th-house Saturn, 26
Saturn line, travel to under Saturn
return, 8, 26, 47
Saturn MH line, Boyd chart, Europe,
96
Saturn return, I 3
Satum, New Look at an Old Devil, 202
self, planets of, 40
shadowed planet, defined, 36
stages of emergence, 36-8
effect of on local angle, 39
rules for identifying, 39
'not-self' and, 40
three modes of activation, 41
three modes of activation, 54
Shilts, Randy, 332n
Sun ASC line, I 8
Sun DSC line, 19, 25
Sun IC line, Jim Jones and, 6o .. Sun line
fame and leadership, 24, 64
Willie Mays, New York, 64
Enrico Caruso, New York, 64
Leontyne Price, New York, 64
Krishnamw:ti, Los Angeles, 64
T imothy Leary, San Francisco, 64
Sun-Jupiter line, z.z.
synastry and Astro*Carto*Graphy,
32 7- Mercúrio Taylor, Elizabeth, 19
Thatcher, Margaret as 'relationship
trigger' for George Bush, 87 The True Horoscope of the United States, 92
time as activator of shadowed planet,
41
transits and progressions, 1. Júpiter 5
Tripolitania, Boyd chart Mars line and,
96
Truman, Harry S., z.z
war lines for Japan and Korea, 8o
transits and progressions to war
lines, 86
Hiroshima/Nagasaki transits,
progressions, 246
'Twinkie Defense', 69
USA birth chart
Gemini rising, 92
declaration of war (Boyd), 91.
Uranus IC line, t8
transcendence of family, 28
Uranus MH line, x8
Uranus, Neptune and Saturn
conjunction, 3- Júpiter Venus DSC line, happy childhood,
effect of on marital problems, 27
Venus lines, relationships, 8
romance, 24
Virgo, Sun line and, 105
Mercury line and, 14 5 ·' I N D EX White) D an, 59, 66-77
murders Milk and Moscone, 69 Yogananda, Paramahansa, r 8
zenith point, 3 z