Vettius Valens The Anthology
Book Gêmeos , Part 1
Translated
by Robert Schmidt
Edited
by Robert Hand Project Hindsight
Greek Track
Volume VII Vettius Valens Anthology
Book Gêmeos , Part 1
Translated by
Robert Schmidt
Edite d by
Robert Hand Project Hindsight
Greek Track
Volume VII The Golden HindPress PROJECT Hindsight is funded entirely
by the astrological community through subscriptions and donations. ©Copyright 1994 by
Robert Schmidt Published by The Golden Hind Press, Plutão .O. Box 002,
Berkeley Springs, WV 25411. Table of Contents Introduction to Vettius Valens' Anthology, Book Gêmeos by Robert
Hand.
i
Whole-Sign Houses .i
The Use of the Lots . ii
Predictive Periods in Vettius Valens. v
Ascensional Times . v
Planetary Periods. v
The Use of these Periods. vii
Translator's Preface.
x
General Note.xi
Genesis.xi
Daimõn. xii
Second Book of the Anthology of Vettius Valens of Antioch .... 1
1. On Trigons . 1
2. The Differences of the Trigons, and Rulers, and Co-workers, and
the Sects of the Sun and Moon by Day and by Night ... 2
3. Concerning the Lot of Fortune and the Ruler. 6 Júpiter . Concerning the Star Allotted the Hour or the Lot. 7
5. The Place of the Evil Spirit—Many Figures.10
6. The Place of the Good Spirit—Many Figures.10
7. The Midheaven.11
8. The Place of the God of the Sun, the Pre-Midheaven, 9th from
the Hõroskopos—It Has Many Figures.11 Mercúrio . The Eighth Place, Of Death—All Sorts of Regards.12
10. The Setting Place .13
11. The Sixth Place of Ares.14
12. The Fifth Place—Many Regards.15
13. The Fourth, Subterraneous Place.15
14. The Third Place of the Goddess of the Moon.16
15. The Second Place—Called the Gate of Hades.17
16. Names of the Places .18
17. Triangular Judgments of the Stars in Relation to Happiness or
Misfortune—Triangular and Hexagonal and Diametrícal
Figures .18
18. Concerning Hour-Markers of the Lot of Fortune.28
19. Concerning the Exaltation of the Sun and Moon in Relation to Happiness.....29
20. Conceming the Lot of Fortune and of Spirit in Relation to
Happiness and the Prevention of Actions .30
21. Conceming the Place of Fortune in Relation to Happiness
.31
22. Illustrations of the Chapters Abo ve . ... 33
23. Conceming Estimable and Notable Nativities, and, with the
Same Considerations, Conceming Disreputable Nativities and
Those That Come to Naught.42
24. Conceming the Lot of Debt.46
25. The Lot of Theft .
46
26. The Lot of Treachery .47
27. Illustrations of the Above Places .
50
28. Conceming the Propitious and Unpropitious Times of Life from
the Pivot Points and the Post-Ascensions . . . . ..53
29. On Being Away from Home, from the [Writings] of
Hermippus .54
30. Conceming Being Away From Home.55
31. Conceming the Predeceasing of the Parents, with
Illustrations.62
32. Conceming Parents from the [Writings] of Timaeus .... 65
33. Conceming the Bereavement of Fathers .66
34. Conceming the Separation of the Parents .68
35. Conceming Births Which Are Suitable to Freedmen and
Slaves .70
36. The 11 Figures of the Moon in relation to the Power of their
Effects.71
37. Conceming Injury and Ailment, with Illustrations for Each
Zõidion—for example, Aries Causes a Certain Injury or
Ailment, and so forth.74
Appendix I — Translation Conventions .87 iii Introduction to Vettius Valens’ Anthology, Book Gêmeos by
Robert Hand
This volume contains most of Book Gêmeos of the Anthology. We had
originally intended to put out all of Book Gêmeos in one volume, but its
length precluded that. Fortunately the material that we have omitted
from this part of Book Gêmeos is on subject unrelated to the ones covered in
this part of Book Gêmeos . The remainder of the Book Gêmeos will be issued along
with the whole of Book III in the next volume from the Greek track.
With this volume we begin to get to the meat of Valens' technique.
I believe that some of the material in this volume may be among the
most important that has yet turned up in Project Hindsight. Among a
vast array of details and specific delineations, we fmd three matters of
great importance, the use of whole-sign houses, the elaborated use of
the Lots of Fortune and Spirit (among many other lots), and a method
of using planetary periods and the ascensional times of zõidia for
computing the approximate dates of major events in life. My introduc¬
tion will focus on these three major issues. Whole-Sign Houses
We have mentioned these in several other works, especially Paulus and
the Liber Hermetis. This is the oldest house system of all and is still in
use in índia. It is a very simple system. Whatever sign (zõidion) may
be rising, 0o of that sign becomes the beginníng of the first house. The
original function of the Ascendant was not to establish the cusps of the
houses, but rather the house-meanings of the signs. The signs
themselves were considered to be the houses, topoi, or places. There
was no problem of house-division at all. And not only could the
Ascendant serve as an Hõroskopos and establish a first house, so could
the Sun, the Moon, and also, as we shall see, the Lot of Fortune.
Ironically the system has survived in the West in sun-sign astrology
where the Sun's sign from 0C to 30° is the first house and all of the
other houses are also complete signs. While the usage for popular
astrology is modern, the ancients did something similar in their own
practice when they used the Sun as an hõroskopos.
In Valens we see that this system was not merely a crude
approximation of the system that later evolved. We see it as a powerful
system in its own right. All of the house references in this work are to í zõidia and their relationships with each other. While I am not exactly
advocating that modern astrologers stop using their various quadrant and
other house systems, I do think that we must pay more attention to this
old, simple, and very efficacious system. The Use of the Lots
We have already seen in the various works of both the Greek and Latin
tracks that the Lot (or Part) or Fortune was considered a much more
important point by the ancient astrologers than it is tòday. And the Lot
of Spirit, a point we hardly even use today, much less understand with
any degree of depth, was only slightly less important.
The modern view of these lots is more like that of James Wilson
in his Dictionary of Astrology which might be regarded as an extreme
view, but not one that is wholly unrepresentative. “Part OF Fortune, an imaginary point in the heavens, supposed
as a moderator to contain equal power with the luminaries, but
which is really nothing but a phantom hatched in the figurative
brain of Ptolemy, which has no signifícance whatever, except
influence can arise out nothing.”
This qúotation contains two statements that must be regarded as
misconceptions if there is anything to the material that Vettius Valens
presents us with in this volume.
First of all, the Lot of Fortune and all of the other lots are of
course not planetary bodies. But then neither are the Ascendant,
Midheaven, or the nodes of the Moon. The Lots are in the category of
sensitive points rather than bodies. The idea of a sensitive point without
a planetary body seems less hard to accept today than in Wilson's time
because of the extensive work done with midpoints and other sensitive
points by Witte, Ebertin, and other workers in the tradition of the
Hamburg School (Uranian System) and Cosmobiology. In fact Witte is
reported to have derived his methods ffom what he knew as the “Arabic
Parts.” However in Wilson’s time astrology was afflicted by much of the
same mindless materialism that dominated the rest of the culture. But
even he should have seen the relationship to such points as the
Ascendant, etc. And of course it to these points that the Lots should be
compared, not the luminaries. ii Second, the Lot of Fortune, to say nothing of the other lots, was
not an invention of Ptolemy's. Here we have one of the more serious
manifestations of what might be called Ptolemaic fundamentalism, to
wit, the idea that if it is not in Ptolemy, it is not correct astrology!
Ptolemy was of all of the ancient Greek era astrologers the one who
emphasized the Lots the least, mentioning only the Lot of Fortune. Even
he, however, considered it to be on a par with the lights, and the major
angles of the chart. Under his influence the Lot of Fortune became one
of what the Renaissance astrologers called the fíve hylegs, points which
were in involved in determining the hyleg or giver of life, and points
whose primary directions were considered to be especially vital to
prediction. However, Ptolemy or someone who edited his text, seems to
have seriously damaged the efficacy of the Lot of Fortune by
advocating its computation using the same formula both day and night.
All of our other ancient writers and most of the Medieval ones as well,
reversed the positions of the Sun and Moon in the formula at night.
Nor were the lots the invention of the Arabs. Anyone who has read
any of the works in the Project Hindsight Greek track or the Liber
Hermetis in the Latin track, must be aware that the use of the lots are
among the oldest of astrological techniques in the West. The Arabs did
add extensively to their numbers, but they did not create the technique.
It also seems on the basis of what we are learning from Vettius
Valens that the Arabs did not use the lots in the same way as the
Greeks. I suspect, although much more work needs to be done on this
matter, that the Arabs may have obscured the usefulness of the lots by
the change they may have made in the methodology of their use. I will
return to this subject below.
For the ancients the Lot of Fortune and the other lots as well were
not merely sensitive points. They were hõroskopoi, that is, points whose
function was to mark a house or zõidion as a first house from which to
count all other houses. Of course to an extant all planets and points can
be and have been used as such, but the lots were especially important.
A zõidion could acquire significance as a topos or ‘place’ by one of two
means. It could derive its house-signification from its relationship to the
Zõidion of the Ascendant, the primary Hõroskopos, or it could derive its
house-signification from the lots that fell within it. Valens States the
following:
“For some have mystically established the general Hõroskopos and iii its squares to be the cosmic pivot points, but the Lot and its
squares to be the genethlialogical pivot points.”1
The Ascendant establishes the general houses, but the Lot of Fortune
(and all other lots) establish particular house relationships that are
unique to the individual chart.
The later usage of the lots as apparently begun by Arab era
astrologers changed them into the sensitive points with which we are
familiar, points which could be aspected and could occupy houses.
However, in both the Liber Hermetis and Valens we see that lots
established zõidia as first houses of house Systems relating to particular
issues. The relationships between these “lot houses” and the Ascendantbased houses created a complex web of relationships that could be used
to reveal important issues within a chart, all with an incredible
simplicity.
In other works, such as Paulus, we have seen that the Lot of
Fortune relates to material prosperity, one's fortune in a literal sense.
But in Valens we have the houses or places of the Lot of Fortune used
as the primary indicator of one's wealth, and one’s bodily organs. We
have also seen that the Lot of Spirit relates to mental and spiritual
concems. In Valens the houses of the Lot of Spirit relate not only to
spiritual and mental concems, but also to illnesses, both of the body and
the mind. And both lot Systems find a wide variety of uses in
diagnosing many qualities and life pattems in the chart. All of these are
illustrated by the first part of the largest collection of birthcharts ffom
any ancient source. It is through these sample charts that we begin to
see the power and flexibility of the method. The reader might be
interested to know that early experiments into Valens’ methods with the
lots indicate that it is a method well worth pursuing. And I eamestly
recommend that the reader use these methods with the whole-sign
system rather than equal houses or some other modem system. It is
surprisingly effective. It is an indication that our modern concern with
astronomical precision and correct geometry might be. . . just might be.
. . missing the point. 1 Section 18 of Book Gêmeos .
IV Predictive Periods in Vettius Valens
In this book of Vettius Valens we are introduced to one of the most
elaborate and fully worked out Systems of period calculation to be found
in the Western astrological tradition. The periods are derived from two
different sources, the rising times of the zõidia, and the periods of the
planets. The logic of these are quite different and will be taken up in
turn.
Ascensional Times — These are simply the number of degrees of R.A. that must pass over the meridian in order for a particular sign or zõidion
to rise. In modern astrology this can be computed using standard
spherical trigonometric formulae, by which one computes the O.A. of
both 0o and 30° of a particular sign, and subtracts the first O.A. ffom
the second. However, as has been pointed out in the introduction to the
first book of the Anthology, and in note 1, page 30 of our edition,
Valens did not use these formulae, as they had not yet been developed.
Valens used a combination of Babylonian systems to derive rising or
ascensional times for the various zõidia. A table showing these for
Babylon is repeated here from that note. S- m n-r> o-/ C? Modern 20°29' 23°49' 29°40' 34042- 36°00' 35°20' Valens 20°00' 32°00' 36°00' 40°00' 1 T-H T17 - — In this system each rising time is computed by adding whole number
constants to the value of the previous rising time, in the case of the
table above, 4o. The reader will also notice that the rising times of
opposite signs add up to exactly 60° giving six pairs totalling 360°, an
orderly system but not very accurate. Nevertheless this system gave rise
to a system of ascensional times which in turn gave rise to periods of
time indicated by each zõidion at the rate of Io per year.
Planetary' Periods — These we have already encountered in Paulus Alexandrinus, among other places. He gives two sets of periods, a set
of small or minor periods and a set of large or greater periods. To these
were at some later point added a set of mean periods computed by v adding the small and large periods together and dividing by two. A
table of these follows: 5 Mercúrio O O* Small 25 20 8 19 15 12 30 Mean 66.5 48 45 69.5 40.5 45.5 43.5 Great 108 76 82 120 66 79 57 The small periods are derived from recurrence cycles, cycles at the end
of which the planets conjoin the Sun in approximately the same degree
of the zodiac. These are derived as follows:
The Sun's value of 19 years is actually the metonic cycle of 19.0
years at the end of which an eclipse occurs in the same degree as at the
beginning. Here 254 lunar (tropical or sidereal) months equals 19 years
(tropical or sidereal).
The Moon's value is derived from a relationship between the
Egyptian year of exactly 365 days and the lunation cycle. In 25
Egyptian years there are exactly 309 lunation cycles. In fact dividing the
number of days in 25 Egyptian years, 9125, by 309 one gets 29.5307
days which squares superbly with the modern value of 29.5306 days in
an average lunation cycle. Or to put it another way, 309 lunations =
24.9999 Egyptian years. This gives an error of 0.04 days in 25 years.1
From the practical point of view, using the Egyptian calendar, every 25
years the phases of the moon would occur on the same days of the year.
Note that both the Sun and the Moon derive their cycles from their
relationship to each other.
Mercury's period is also derived from the relationship of a synodic
cycle to the Egyptian year. 63 Mercury-Sun synods = 20.0005 Egyptian
years. Again, as with the Moon's period, every 20 years conjunctions
with Mercury would occur on roughly the same date. This produces an
error of 0.18 days in 20 years.
Venus's period of 8 years is its recurrence cycle with the Sun. 1 Neugebauer in his introduction to Greek Horoscopes gives the equation
25 years=409 lunations. This must be a typo or Neugebauer is seriously in
error!
vi Using Egyptian years one gets 5 Venus-Sun synods = 7.99889 Egyptian
years. Every 8 years Venus conjunctions would occur on the same
dates. This cycle is also very close to 99 lunar months which equal
8.009 Egyptian years. This is an error of 0.41 days in 8 years.
Mars' period of 15 years is its recurrence cycle with the Sun. Seven
Mars-Sun synods = 14.9577 Egyptian years. This is not as precise as
the previous examples but after all Mars is slower. This is an error of
15.44 days in 15 years.
Jupiter's period of 12 years is its recurrence cycle with the Sun. 11
Júpiter synods = 12.0212 Egyptian years, an error of 7.727 days in 12
years.
Satunfs period of 30 years is its recurrence cycle with the Sun. 29
Satum synods = 30.0402, an error of 14.67 days in 30 years.
Obviously with Satum, Júpiter, and Mars the recurrence is with the
signs rather than the degree. But the Sun, Moon, Mercury and Venus
are very close to the degree.
■
• 1 '
The great periods are not derived from actual astronomical cycles,
but are the sums of the degrees allocated to each planet in both the
system of terms according to the Egyptians and that of Ptolemy, at least
for the planets. The Sun’s and Moon's Maximum periods have a
different origin. Among other things the period for the Sun is the period
of life in the Hindu Vimshottari Dasas while the Moon's period is the
same as the period of life in the Ashottari Dasas. However, the actual
origin of these periods seems to be derived ffom the belief that the
greatest possible semi-arc1 of the Sun was 120°within the bounds of the
civilized world. Since such a semi-arc corresponds to a latitude of about
49° this is a reasonable value for the civilizations of that time. The
Moon's great period is derived from this. It was reckoned that the Moon
had to be at least 12° from the Sun to be visible at sunset. The Sun's
semi-arc minus that 12° gives us 108, the great period of the Moon.
The Use of these Periods — The most common use of periods of these
kinds elsewhere is to assign rulerships to periods of time such that
during a particular period the ruler is predominant over the other
planets. This use of periods is found with the Seven Ages of Man 1 The semi-arc is the distance that a planet or star traveis between rising
and culminating, the diumal semi-arc, or between setting and anli-culminating,
the noctumal semi-arc.
vii system, the Hindu dasas, and the Persian Firdar. But the use of these
periods is different. These periods trigger effects when they expire. For
example if the Moon's period of 25 years is in effect conceming some
matter in the chart, then effect of the Moon's symbolism will manifest
at the end of 25 years.
These periods may be used in various combinations, but most
commonly he uses the period of the zõidion along with the small period
either of its ruler or of a planet that occupies it. If more than one planet
occupies a zõidion then the periods of all those planets will be used. For
example in one of the later charts in the Anthology, Neugebauer L 102,
XII, 14, the native has Ares in the twelfth place ruled by the Sun which
is also its triplicity ruler and in trine to Ares. For this reason Valens
assigns the periods of the Sun and Mars, 19 and 15 years respectively,
to time a twelfth house event. This is used to explain the native's being
sent to work in a quarry as punishment at the age of 34 years. Then at
the end of 36 years, derived from the ascensional time of Leo, he was
released from confmement. Also in the ninth house, the place of God,
was Zeus in Taurus trining the Hõroskopos. Taurus gives an ascensional
period of 24 years plus the period of Júpiter 12. This gives 36. Also the
ruler of Júpiter, Venus, is in Capricom. Venus = 8, Capricorn = 28.
Again we get 36 years.
The basic outlines of the system are given in chapter 28 of Book Gêmeos presented in this volume. Unfortunately the examples that illustrate
this methodology are given for the most part in Book VII. This leaves
many points unciear. However, from a perusai of the examples it is
clear that Valens does not merely combine ascensional and planetary
periods haphazardly. The periods of the planets and the ascensional
times of the zõidia used to time an event must be directly related to the
nature of the thing being timed, most commonly by house and houserulership. The general disposition of a planet, for example that the
Moon rules women, Mercury Communications, Venus love, etc., does
not figure strongly in this estimation. Both a zõidion and a planet derive
their disposition primarily ffom the houses, although the nature of the
planet can certainly effect the nature of the outcome.
The elements that can be used to derive an event timing-period then
are these:
1. The ascensional time of the zõidion that occupies a place or
house. viii 2. The small periods of any planet occupying that place or house.
3. The small period of the planet that rules the zõidion.
These first three seem to be a about equal in importance. In addition
there do seem to be two more sources of period timing. Júpiter . The ascensional time of the zõidion occupied by the ruler of the
zõidion that occupies a particular place.
5. The small periods of a planet aspecting a place ruler, especially
if that planet has some general signification relating to the matter
ruled by the place.
As mentioned previously, combinations of these may also be used to get
longer periods.
Strange as it may seem to astrologers used to modern methods,
preliminary experiments with these techniques show considerable
promise. I hope to present some worked out examples at a later time.
For the present, however, I believe that we need to get further into
Valens and his explanations of the techniques before we can be clear
about exactly how to use these methods.
As usual the notes in this volume, except for those in this introduction
are those of the translator, Robert Schmidt, unless marked with [RH].
Those notes are by your editor. IX TransIator's Preface
This second book of the Anthology of Vettius Valens is somewhat
better organized than the first. In general, it has to do with the topic of
happiness, prosperity and well-being, although there are still some
blocks of text that seem to belong elsewhere (for example, the aspect
delineations in section 17).
In this book we see Valens beginning to bring many of the
atomistic astrological concepts together in his delineations. Concepts
such as intervention, superior position, one's own face, etc. are
repeatedly brought in as qualifications or enhancements of the basic
signification. Furthermore, it seems to be characteristic of Valens to
concatenate his delineations, bringing more and more planets into the
basic configuration, and making more and more specific predictions. In
the earlier translations we have done, the astrologer would usually list
the contributions of each planet or aspect separately, leaving it up to the
reader to assemble them together. However, Valens unites these “atoms”
into complex structures that we might liken to “molecules.”
One wonders whether these “molecules” might really be the
immediate active units in astrological prediction, rather than the “atoms”
themselves. After all, the chemist does not try to predict the behavior
of bulk water from the mere presence of hydrogen and oxygen atoms
and their behavior in isolation. Instead he tries to understand the
behavior of the water molecule ffom the nature of the atoms themselves
and the structure that they create, and then the behavior of bulk water
(high or low boiling point, good or bad solvent, viscous or not, etc.)
from the nature of the molecule—and any further bonding or
concatenating that the molecules may undergo amongst themselves.
But on the other extreme, perhaps we would err by attempting to
synthesize the entire chart “holistically,” as if it were one big molecule.
Perhaps it is not a compound, but a mixture. In a mixture, we must
understand the compounds that are merely co-present with one another
and not linked at the molecular levei to be the primary active
ingredients, and not the mixture itself as a totality. Different agglomerations of these same ingredients would indeed have somewhat different
effects, but they would not be as fundamental as different ingredients.
It seems to me that this “molecular” stage may be missing from the
reflections and attempted verifications of astrological phenomena.
However interesting this might be ffom an astrological point of x view, this concatenating procedure of Valens complicates the translation
process. Often times Valens lists all the relevant “molecules” known to
him pertaining to a certain subject as concise aphorisms. In the text, this
is done without paragraphing or clear divisions. It is frequently difficult
to know where one ends and the next begins. Is it a new “molecule” or
a further concatenatíon of the first one? This confusion results because
the basic Greek Connective kai can mean either ‘and’ or ‘also.’
Furthermore, the other basic conjunctive particle de coüld connect either
introduce another “molecule” or else be joining another “atom” to an
existing “molecule.” When you add to this the fact that the subjects of
Greek sentences must frequently be understood from the number of the
verb and context, rather remarkable ambiguities can arise. I have noted
a number of these, but in many cases I am not yet sure whether I have
disentangled the parts correctly.
In passing, we should also mention that we have in this book
several more references to “mystic” procedures or concepts, both in
Valens own discussion and in his assessment of others' work. It is still
not clear to me whether this term refers to some esoteric methodology
or merely to text that is written in a cryptic manner.
This translation of the second book of the Anthology has also been
made from the Teubner edition of the Greek text by Pingree.
General Note
Genesis—This is the basic Greek word for a birth or a generation, and in earlier translations we have routinely translated it as ‘birth.’
However, in Valens we often find the genesis as the subject of the
prediction, that the ‘birth’ will meet with a violent end. In the context,
this always means that the native will meet with a violent end, and not
that the childbirth itself will end in tragedy. The word genesis, then, is
being used with a certain abstractness to refer to the life of the native
bom at that birth, the beginning of the life standing for the entire life.
Because of the very concrete significance of our English word ‘birth,’
we have begun to translate genesis by the more abstract and traditional
word ‘nativity’ whenever there is any ambiguity. Incidentally, the Greek
word genesis does not seem to refer to the chart as a symbol of the
birth, as ‘geniture’ sometime does, but to one concrete moment of
existence as a symbol for one's entire existence. xi Daimõn—This word means many things in Greek: lesser divinities, mind, ghosts, spirit, etc. In fact it has almost exactly the same range of
meanings as the German word Geist. The traditional translation in an
astrological context is ‘spirit.’ In Paulus, we translated it as ‘divinity’
as in the Lot of Divinity. However, since we find it so clearly
associated with mind in this book, we now think that the traditional
translation ‘spirit’ is better, Incidentally, it is the root of the Greek word
for happiness, eudaimonia—the general theme of this chapter. No
wonder the Lot of Spirit, along with the Lot of Fortune, plays such an
important role in the determination of happiness. Second Book of the Anthology of Vettius Valens of
Antioch
In the first collection, then, we have explained the hortatory1 and
didactic arguments, and the effect-description2 for commixture, bome
along not so much in a poor imitation of argument as with the actuality
of experience. Now it is in keeping that we subjoin material about
universal supports3 and the difference of places. 1. On Trigons
When we have ordered the zodiacal circle by difference and by
property, we fmd two sects—a diurnal and a nocturnal sect of the Sun
and of the Moon respectively. The Sun, being truly fiery, was associated
with Aries, Leo, Sagittarius, which was named its diurnal trigon and is
also fiery by nature. The Sun attached to himself Zeus and Kronos as
co-workers in his own sect and as guardians of what is accomplished
by him—Zeus as the imitator4 and proxy of the king himself,5 the
chooser6 of good things, the bestower of reputation and life; Kronos as
the promoter of ills and oppositions and as the depriver7 of time. Of the
trigon in question, then, the Sun is master by day, the star of Zeus is 1 protreptikos. A protrepticus was a classical literary genre whose intention it was to tum the reader toward a certain study. Aristotle wrote a (lost)
protrepticus for the study of philosophy, and lamblichus imitated it. The first
book of the Tetrabiblos contains much material of a protreptic nature, possibly
deriving from an earlier astrological protrepticus by Poseidonius. The text to
which this seems to be referring is missing from the first book of this
anthology, which in its present form begins rather abruptly with delineations of
the planets.
2 apotelesmatographia.
3 hupostasis. In an astrological context, Valens and other astrologers seern to use this important philosophical word meaning ‘substance’ or ‘foundation’
with the sense of support from the chart. Júpiter antimimos.
5 diadoxos. Literally, ‘the one who succeeds or relieves another.’
6 hairetês. From the sarne root as ‘sect’ hairesis.
1 aphairetês. Again, a word from the same root verb as ‘sect’ hairesis. 1 master by proxy by night, while Kronos cooperates with both.
Next, the Moon, as she is near the earth, took as her lot the
rulership of the following trigon—Taurus, Virgo, Capricom—which is
truly earthy. She has Aphrodite and Ares as co-sectarians—Aphrodite,
suitably enough, for benefaction and to distribute reputation and time;
Ares for looking askance1 at nativities.2 Whence, at night the Moon
stands in the forefront, Aphrodite in second place, and Ares in third.
But in diurnal nativities, Aphrodite is advanced, the Moon cooperates
in second place. Ares in third.
Next, Kronos will be master of the airy trigon, Gemini, Libra,
Aquarius, by day, while Hermes will cooperate in the second place, and
Zeus in third. But by night the star of Hermes is advanced, and the star
of Kronos is in second place, the star of Zeus in third.
Next, the star of Ares will maintain the rulership of the watery
trigon Câncer, Scorpio, Pisces by night, with Aphrodite in second place,
and the Moon in third. But by day the star of Aphrodite is advanced,
after which is the star of Ares, and third the Moon.
Yet the star of Hermes, since it is truly common, does its utmost
to assist the two sects in relation to the good or the base and in relation
to the property and figure-description3 of each star. 2. The Differences of the Trigons, and Rulers, and Co-workers,
and the Sects of the Sun and Moon by Day and by Night
This will be clear by examining the difference of the trigons in question 1 parableplõ.
2 The actual words used are various forms of genêsis which literally means
‘birth’. However, the Greek is usually more abstract than the English, including
not only the notion of the actual birth but also the life that follows as indicated
by the astrological conditions at the birth. The word ‘nativity’, an English word
derived from the Latin nativitas, has much the same meaning in referring to the
actual birth and the life that follows. But the reader should be aware that the
English words ‘birth’ and ‘nativity’ are used here to translate the same word in
Greek depending upon the context. See the Translatofs Preface by Robert
Schmidt for a more extended discussion of this issue. [RH1
3 schêmatographia. Often, but erroneously we believe, translated as ‘chart’
in the sense of birthchart, this word seems to refer more to the context in terms
of aspects, etc., involving these planets. See also Paulus chapter 24 and notes.
2 and the happiness or middling condition in relation to the nativity of
each [person], Now, for those who are bom by day, it will be necessary
to consider in what trigon the Sun is found, and the ruler of this trigon
by preeminence, and the co-worker of this trigon, whether they are upon
a pivot point at that time, or post-ascensional or declining, rising or
setting or in their own zõidia, and whether they are witnessed by
benefics or malefics, and to make the declaration accordingly. For if
they should be marking the hour or culminating or should be found
upon another of the advantageous zõidia, they will show beforehand
nativities that are fortunate and bright. And if they should be found in
the post-ascensions, they will show them to be middling. But if in the
declines, depressed and unfortunate. We also need to look at how the
Sun is situated and by what stars it is witnessed. And for those born at
night, it will be necessary to consider the Moon in a similar fashion,
and the ruler by preeminence of its trigon, and the common ruler of this
trigon, with regard to how they have been figurated, just as we have set
out abo ve.1
For if the ruler by preeminence by day or by night should fali
amiss2 upon the badly situated zõidia, while the ruler by proxy3 should
be found upon a pivot point and well figured, then after the native has
had his ups and downs in his early years until the ascension of the
zõidion or until the return of the circular period, Júpiter he will later be active, 1 The methodology described here is nearly identical with that of
Dorotheus of Sidon, probably lst cent. C.E., and with the medieval Arabic-era
astrologers, Masha'allah (c.740-c.815) and Abu 'Ali Al-Khayyat ( c.770-835
C.E.). This establishes the triplicity methodology as being one of the
mainstream of Greek astrology and not something merely peculiar to Dorotheus
of Sidon. And this methodology survives up until the 17th century! But it did
not get passed to the English school which was the most influential in
determining what survived into modem times.
parapiptõ. This is a general term for a planet that is badly situated. [RH]
3 put note here. Júpiter We cannot be completely confident of this interpretation, however this
seems to be its meaning based on the methods used in the sample charts given
by Valens. He routinely computes periods in two ways. First he will use the
minor or other period of the planet that mies a particular zõidion, or use its
ascensional time, i.e., the number of degrees that must pass over the M.C. while
the zõidion rises. We have to conjecture that the zõidion in question is either the
one occupied by the triplicity ruler, or the one it mies. More often in the sample 3 except that he will spend his life without stability and in fear. But if the
principal ruler should fali well, while the following ruler should fali
amiss, then after having been carried forth well in his early years, he
will later be reduced from the time of the ascension of the zõidion in
which the following ruler has fallen amiss.1 We will explain how to
judge the times more precisely at the proper moment. And if both
should fali well, the circumstances of good fortune will persist and he
will become estimable (unless a malefic should have opposed it or
should have a superior position), nor will the circumstances of the
nativity reverse. But every star, when it has the rulership and is actually
in decline, will become an impediment and a despoiler.2 For, it makes
those who are subordinate to others, those who have ups and downs or
those who are reduced in reputation, those who encounter injury and
suffering and accusations or want of livelihood.
If, then, for those bom in the day, the Sun should be found in
Aries, Leo, Sagittarius, it is better for it to be upon a pivot point. If its
co-sectarians should likewise be found upon the post-ascensional places,
while Ares is not opposing or squaring, it will be judged indicative of
good fortune. If they should be the reverse, impediments will result.
And if the Sun should be found by day in Taurus, Virgo, Capricom, it
will be necessary to seek for the star of Aphrodite in the first place, and
for the Moon in the second, and for Ares in the third, how they are
figured and what they are witnessed by. Similarly also, when the Sun
is found by day in the following trigon—Gemini, Libra, Aquarius—it
will be necessary to consider the star of Kronos and that of Hermes and
that of Zeus. In the same way also, when the Sun is by day upon
Câncer, Scorpio, Pisces, it will be necessary to consider whether the star
of Aphrodite and that of Ares and the Moon are upon pivot points, and
in this way to show the decisive one. Also, in the same account it
behooves us to consider the Moon by night. charts a period will either come from a planet, or from the sign it rules, but that
introduces ambiguity into the situalion in that most planets mie two zõidia.
Therefore in this usage, it seems more likely that he would use the ascensional
time of the zõidion occupied by the triplicity ruler. The next sentence reinforces
the latter conjecture. [RH]
1 Here Valens explicitly States that it is the zõidion occupied by the
triplicity ruler that is the giver of the period. [RH]
2 parairetês. This word also means ‘out of sect.’ Júpiter It is better, then, for the diumal planets to be found upon pivot
points in their own trigons or in profitable places, and similarly for the
noctumal planets. But if they should be found to be in another's trigon
or out of sect, the circumstances of happiness will become less and he
will be subject to fears. When the rulers and co-workers1 fali amiss, it
will be necessary to investigate the Lot of Fortune and its ruler. For if
they should be found to be upon pivot points and post-ascending while
being witnessed by benefics, the native will partake of good fortune and
reputation, and though at times he will undergo irregularities and
impediments, he will not be met with impasse. But if these should fali
badly, medíocre and most austere circumstances will be adjudged; for
such will be ineffectual with regard to plots, needy, in debt, those who
blaspheme in divine matters. And if the Lot of Fortune and its ruler
should be witnessed by malefics, such will be full of troubles,
vagabonds, prisoners, subordinates, living a hard life, liable to injury,
insecure. But if while the Lot and its ruler have fallen badly, benefics
should somehow bear witness, they will live through the pity of others,
or at a certain time they decently cease being taken in by others after
obtaining a share in work or trusts or gifts, except that they do not go
through life free of confusion or reproach.
It will be necessary, then, to consider the testimonies of every ruler
and the disposition of the figurations, whether they should actually be
congenial or opposed. For if the star of Kronos should be found in a
diametrical or square position for those who are born at night, it
produces impediments and reductions, dangers and sufferings, and those
who are slothful about intrigues.2 But when the star of Ares is so found
for those born by day, it produces those who are rash, deceitful,
unstable in their affairs and livelihood; for they encounter constraint,
trials, insults, cuts, burns, bloodshed, falis. But when they are
congenially figured and in their own sect, they happen to be effectual.
Whence they are not adjudged malefics, but rather even the bestowers
of goods, and especially whenever Kronos should happen to be well 1 The ‘rulers’ are the first triplicity rulers, the ones that have are in sect in
the chart. The ‘co-workers’ are the other triplicity rulers, the ones not in sect,
or the participating rulers that have effect day and night. [RH]
2 The precise meaning of this is unclear. It is quite probably an
undocumented idiom. It seems to mean that the native is either slow to response
to intrigues, or has been disabled and slowed down as a result of these. [RH] 5 witnessed by Zeus and the Sun by day while having a relationship to
the rulership, it produces those who are very rich, estimable, those who
are beneficiaries from deaths, lords of foundations, of bodies, stewards,
those who are set over the affairs of others. But when it is well figured
by night and has the relationship of rulership, it will become an agent
of the above, but the throwing away of what has been acquired and the
reduction of reputation or disenfranchisement will result. Let the same
be supposed for Ares. For by night it entrusts leadership and generalship
and popular rank in public affairs. But when it is still in profitable
places by day, it does produce the above, though it also involves them
in oppositions and controversies and fears, and makes the leadership
factious and frightened; for it opens the channels for hostilities and
brings on insurrections of the crowds and multitudes, pestilence and
famine due to war, violence, conflagrations, dangerous opportunities.
Similarly also, the benefics will have the manner of malefics
whenever those that rule fali badly. And if they should be upon pivot
points while the ruler is declining, they will be too weak to furnish any
good thing in it.
For every kind it will be necessary to investigate the ruler of the
ruler, how it should happen to be and what it is witnessed by. For if the
universal ruler should fali amiss, while its ruler should be well figured,
the native will have help and support for life and reputation in
accordance with the place-positioning1 of the star. 3. Concerning the Lot of Fortune and the Ruler
For him who wishes to ascertain the matter of happiness more exactly,
I will retum to the Lot of Fortune, which is the most necessary and
sovereign place, as the king2 mysteriously3 explained beginning in the
13th book, saying,
“or for those who are bom in the day, it will next be necessary to 1 topothesia. That is, what place (house) it is in.
o Nechepso, the Egyptian pharoah who presumably wrote an important
astrological textbook along with Petosiris (mentioned a few lines below) in the
2nd century B.C.E.
3 mustikõs. 6 count distinctly from the Sun to the Moon and back from the
Hõroskopos1 to prescribe an equality,2 and for the resulting place
to see whatever star it meets with, and what or which are in
relation to it—the squares or triangles, all in all, as it was placed
among the stars. For from this consciousness3 of places you can
make a clear judgment beforehand of the circumstances of those
who are brought forth.”
Petosiris4 also explained the matter similarly in the Boundaries, though
others have treated it differently, which we will also set out in the
appropriate place along with other guidance for clarifying the argument
concerning happiness. But for now we must discuss the method in
question. Júpiter . Concerning the Star Allotted the Hour or the Lot
When Kronos is allotted the Hour or the Lot,5 if it marks the hour6 but
is not opposed by Ares, such a one will be accounted happy in the
activity apportioned by Kronos. And if it should be witnessed by Zeus,
[the happiness] will be double. If by Aphrodite, it will be through a
woman or one without progeny. But if the star of Ares should be with
it or should be opposed to it—such a one will have troubles and
oppositions. If the star of Hermes should mark the hour along with
it—such a one will be hampered in his ears. 1 This amounts to the formula } - O + Asc which is of course the same
as our formula Asc + 3) - O. The reader should note that this formula is for the
day only according to the text. [RH]
2 This should be forward in the order of the signs as his numerous
examples make clear. [RH]
3 sungnõsis. Júpiter See page 6,note 2 above.
5 As will be seen in section 18, Valens regards the Lot of Fortune as an
analog of the Hõroskopos (Ascendent), and the origin of its own house system.
Throughout this section the two will be delineated together.
6 This phrase and similar ones that follow, means that when a planet rules
the rising zõidion or the zõidion of the Lot of Fortune and is in the Hõroskopos
of the rising zõidion or the zõidon of the Lot of Fortune, it has these effects.
[RH] 7 When Zeus is allotted the Hour or the Lot, if it marks the hour, it
produces complete happiness from youth. If Ares should be present or
upon the same pivot point or if it should be trine, such a one will
advance in magnificent military campaigns, and he will acquire a living.
If Kronos should be there too, they will come into preeminence. If
Aphrodite is also there, still more. If Hermes is also there, they will
engage in receipts and disbufsements.
When Ares is allotted the Hour or the Lot, if it marks the hour, it
causes an impulse toward the military. If Zeus should bear witness also,
such a one will advance in rank. If Aphrodite also, they come into no
ordinary rank. If Hermes alone should be present, he will decline to
accept a trust. If Kronos also, he will acquire many things from many
sources, and after his death it will be dispersed for the royal interests.1
When Aphrodite is allotted the Hour or the Lot, it signifies great goods
and causes great reputations. If Hermes is present too, it makes for
those who are musical. With these being so, while Kronos opposed
them or was superior2 to the ones present, it deprived such ones of their
possessions.
When Hermes is allotted the Hour or the Lot, if it marks the hour,
it causes good fortune. If the star of Zeus should be present as well or
should make a square, they will have the rulership of tribunais and
wars. If the star of Kronos should also be present with these, they will
have twice the rulership and honor and goods and advancement.
When the Sun obtains the Hour or the Fortune as his lot while he
marks the hour, if the star of Zeus should be present as well or should
bear witness as a square, he who is brought forth will be fortunate. If
the star of Hermes should also be present with it, such a one will
advance by means of discourse. If the star of Ares should also be
present or should make a square3 with the star of Zeus, he will be great
and will have authority over life and death. And if, while these are so,
Kronos should make a square or a diameter, they will meet with
accidents and losses. f eis basilika chõrêsei.
2 kathupertereõ. This is the technical term meaning ‘to be in the position
to cast an aspect ahead in the order of the signs.’
3 Here and elsewhere Valens does not seem to regard the square as
inherently malefic. [RH] 8 When the Moon obtains the Hour or the Lot of Fortune as her lot,
she will make those who are great, especially in her own trigon. And
if the star of Aphrodite should be present or should happen to be in a
square, such a one will be considered worthy of great honor. If the star
of Ares should happen to be with the Moon, he will have authority over
life and death. If the star of Kronos should also, he will lead many
countries. If the star of Zeus should also be present or should make a
square, they will become great kings. And if, while these are absent, the
star of Hermes should be configured with the Moon, the advancements
will be from discourse and skills.
If the star of Ares should be present with the sovereigns1 or should
make a square with them, it makes great men. If Ares should make a
diameter with the Moon apart from the benefics, it makes those who are
exposed; but if a benefic should be present with Ares, he will be reared
even though exposed. Likewise, even if Ares should appear in a square
or if it should be found to be superior, it will involve [him] in
wanderings or captivities or else ups and downs.
If the star of Aphrodite should make a square at a pivot point, they
will be wronged by women. If Kronos should be present as well in a
licentious zõidion, they will waste their substance in brothels. If the star
of Ares should also bear witness to them, they will prostitute their
women to others.
If the star of Kronos should square the Moon or should make a
diameter at a line equal to it,2 the native will have claim to nurture
[even though] he will be unallotted parents. If the star of Hermes should
make a square or a diameter with the Moon, such come to be at cross
purposes and of two minds, and they become subject to slanders and
accusations from their superiors. And if a malefic should also bear
witness with Hermes or should be configured with it, it will make for
disfigurement and condemnations. And if the star of Zeus should lie
opposite the side of the Moon, it will cause a deprivation of children
and oppositions from those who are superiors.
In general, when the malefics look upon the lights and the
Hõroskopos apart from the benefics, they make for short li ves. When the ruler of the Hõroskopos is suitably situated or in his own sect, he turannos. Presumably, the Sun and Moon. This seems to mean that the diametrical opposition arises from two
successive sides of a square.
2 Mercúrio becomes the distributor of the years of life. And if it should be
somehow configured with the master of the Lot, such a one becomes
very old and fortunate. But if it should be found subject to the setting
place, he will be short lived. And if a malefic should be present with it
as well or should be superior to the Moon, the foetuses will come to
nothing. 5. The Place of the Evil Spirit1—Many Figures2
If the malefics should happen to be in this place, they will produce
great injuries and calamities, especially if they are in their own faces.3
And if the Lot of Fortune should be there, and some [malefic] should
have authority over it, there will never be anything beneficiai in the
transits; for they were enemies from the outset, from the moment of
birth. Júpiter And similarly, when the benefics happen to be in this place, they
do not distribute their goods. And whenever the three stars should fali
in this zõidion,5—-the lord of the Hõroskopos, of the Lot, and of the
Spirit —they make those who are unfortunate and disfigured and in
need of daily subsistence, and many will have their hands held out.6 6. The Place of the Good Spirit7—Many Figures
If the benefics should be suitably situated upon the zõidion occupying 1 The twelfth house. [RH]
2 We do not know what this means. [RH]
3 From the verb form idioprosõpeõ one would not think that this was
decanic face, but rather the condition in which a planet has the same relation
to the Sun or Moon that its house has to their houses. Cf. book I, section 23 of
Tetrabiblos. However, compare the parallel construction in the next section,
where adjective and noun are used in a way that rather suggests decanic face. Júpiter ektropê. Literally, ‘making a tum outward.’
5 From this occurrence of zõidion, it is clear that we are here dealing again
with whole-sign houses.
6 That is, they will be beggars.
7 The eleventh house. [RH]
10 the Good Spirit1 or should be in their own faces,2 they make those who
are notable and wealthy ffom youth, and more when they regard the Lot
of Fortune in a triangular division and the Hõroskopos by a hexagon.
They fumish the most and the greatest goods in a hearing or seeing
zõidion. And if one of the benefics should appear on a diameter to the Good Spirit while the ruler is present there, they will produce great
goods and greater advancements.
But if the malefics should be present with the Good Spirit, they will
not have the power to do anything evil. And this is all the more
necessary if the ruler of the Lot and of the Hõroskopos and of the Spirit
should happen to be at rising, or most of the stars are present with them
as well or bear witness to them in advantageous zõidia; for they
produce those who are esteemed and wealthy above measure. 7. The Midheaven
In this place both the benefics and the malefics rejoice, especially when
obtaining the Lot of Fortune or the Hõroskopos or the Spirit as their lot.
And if each of the [benefic] stars should fali in this place when it is
rising or when it has an application of the Moon, sovereigns or kings
are made, those who are leaders of countries, or they will be renowned
in many places. When the ruler of this place is well situated, it makes
those who are effective; but when it is poorly situated, those who are
unsuccessful. If it happens to be upon the setting place and a malefic
should be present with it or should make a diameter, it makes evil-doers
or those who are barren or childless. 8. The Place of the God of the Sun, the Pre-Midheaven, 9th from
the Hõroskopos—It Has Many Figures
If the benefics should occur upon this place, and they obtain as lot3 the 1 This translates agathodamoneõ, which is a verb derived from the noun
for ‘Good Spirit.’
2 Here we apparently have decanic face, although compare the parallel
construction in the preceding section.
3 i.e., rule. [RH]
11 Hõroskopos or the Fortune, the child will be blessed, pious, a prophet of the great god, and he will be listened to as god. But when these are
absent, and Hermes alone bears witness, they become subject to
oracular warnings,1 and they interpret their experience to the crowds,
and they become royal scribes from the time of their middle years.
But when the malefics are present and ha ve authority o ver the
places in question—of the Hõroskopos and the Fortune—or when they
regard the Lot, the child will be tyrannical. He will found cities, destroy
others, and impiously disenfranchise many of many things. And if the
Spirit or the Fortune should occur in the zõidion which is the Evil
Spirit,2 and the planets ruling the Lot or the Hõroskopos should be
found in this place, he will undergo the greatest afflictions and exiles,
and he will squander all that he acquires. Or they become recluses
engaged in sacred rites for the sake of suffering and pleasure. Mercúrio . The Eighth Place, Of Death—All Sorts of Regards3
When the benefics are present in this place, they are ineffective, weak,
and unable to impart their own goods. If they should also have authority
over the Hõroskopos and the Lot, they are found to be even more
ineffective and irregular.
If the malefics are present there, having authority over the Lot, the
natives will be wanderers; and if they should acquire something, they
will squander it. If the Lot should fali in this place while the malefics
are present and rule the Lot, the native will be needy, unable to clothe
himself. If they should also have authority over the Hõroskopos, he will
be a disgrace for his whole life. And if the ruler of the Lot or the Hour
should also happen to be under the beams, the native will be one to
hold out his hand and beg.
If the star of Hermes alone should be present upon the zõidion and
should have authority of thought over what is called Spirit, it makes
those who are dull and unintelligent, and those who are tongue tied and
illiterate. And if the Lot of Fortune is also, along with being 1 en chrêmatismois ginontai. This could perhaps mean ‘to engage in
negotiations,’ but given the context, it seems that the original oracular sense of
chraõ is intended rather than the later mercantile sense.
2 en tõi kakodaimonounti zõidiõi. See page 11, note 1 in chapter 6 above.
3 We do not know what this means. [RH]
12 unintelligent, he will be out of his senses and a beggar, especially when
it happens to be under the beams. And if, these things being so, the
malefics should be present as well, he will be out of his senses and
mute.
The Moon alone, in the increase of her light, seems to rejoice in
this zõidion. And if the star of Zeus should occupy the Good Spirit,1
such a one will be fortunate and successful and versatile. And if it
should also be lord of the Lot of Fortune, he will be wealthy and happy.
And if the star of Hermes should be present with it, he will be an
administrator for kings and will be gladdened with children. 10. The Setting Plaee2
When the benefics and those ruling the Hõroskopos or the Lot of
Fortune are present here, they signify good things for the natives, for
example inheritances and the unforeseen acquisition of other belongings,
and they signify something good ffom a death. If they might be in the
places of others, such will be less successful, yet they will not be totally
at a loss.
If Hermes alone should be present here while being in its own
face,3 he will have profits in old age and will be trusted with cities and
the affairs of kings.
And if malefics should be present in this place and have authority
over the Hõroskopos or the Lot while being in their own face, he will
have an irregular livelihood, especially in old age, yet he will not be
totally at a loss; for he will squander what he obtains with calumnies
and evil words. But if the malefics, while being both in anothefs face
and out of sect, should rule the Lot, the native will spend his old age
poorly, and a few will even land in prison for a while and experience
sickness and disease.
But if the star of Zeus should regard it, they practice priestly rites 1 This would be a square, but is again not regarded as malefic. [RH1
2 The seventh house. [RH]
3 We have the same problem with this here as we did in sections 5 and 6
above. The verb form suggests the Ptolemaic concept, although the reference
in the next paragraph to being in anothefs face (alloioprosõpeõ) would more
suggest decanic face.
13 on aecount of sickness, and they are also troubled with hemorrhoids and
experience suffering in their private parts or finger. And if the star of
Hermes should happen to be with Ares upon the setting zõidionhe will
consort with robbers and murderers, on which account they are later
cleansed with an evil death.1 2 When the malefics are setting in another's
zõidion, they cause violent deaths; but when the benefics are so setting,
they [produce] those who have much experience and have good fortune
in old age. 11. The Sixth Place of Ares3
If the benefics should happen to be in this place, whatever the native
should acquire he will waste, and property will not remain with him.
After advancing in youth, he will be reduced by fines in old age.
When the Sun is present upon this place and has authority over the
Lot of Fortune or of the Hour, he causes the native to be condemned by
a great power. If the star of Kronos is so situated, he will be a wanderer
and ready to take offense, and he will flee his own fatherland in distress
to procure a living. And if the star of Zeus should have authority over
the Lot or the Hõroskopos, he will waste his life in public affairs. And
if the star of Aphrodite does, they will levy fines on account of disputes
with a woman, and they will also become those unlucky in love, those
not possessing grace. And if the star of Ares, it produces injury and
suffering corresponding to the member of the zõidion, but it makes foot
soldiers, beggars, those who have their li ves tumed around for ill. And
when the star of Hermes has authority over the Lot or the Hour, it
makes those who are ill intentioned, thieves, maledictors, and those who
are reviled among the crowds. And if the Moon should also be present,
he will be a slave and powerless, if indeed the remaining stars should
also be present along with the Moon. For if the other stars are well
situated while the Moon chances to be ill situated, they are capable of
becoming freedmen and gentlemen. 1 More evidence that Valens also uses whole-sign houses.
2 The subject of this last clause is not clear.
3 Mars (Ares) has an inherent connection with the sixth house according
to Valens. [RH]
14 12. The Fifth Place—Many Regards
If the benefics should happen to be allotted the Hõroskopos or the Lot
of Fortune, the native will be great and will be a leader of the crowds
and will institute laws. Aphrodite gives the greatest favor when it has
authority o ver the Hõroskopos or the Lot, especially when it is in its
own face or in its own place—it produces those who are wealthy,
honored. The same also for all the stars; for if they have sway over the
Hour or the Fortune, they will cause good things in accordance with the
application of the nature of each and the specific property of the Good
Fortune.
And if the star of Ares should happen to be at the place in question,
they will rule over regions in every direction; for they will either be
commanders or sovereigns and have authority over life and death, not
only of the least but also of noteworthy men. And if Kronos should
additionally be present upon the place, [it produces] those exceedingly
rich in land and masters of quadrupeds, those who build villages and
locations. And if the Sun should be present additionally, friends of the
great, those near to kings, leaders of priests. And if the star of Hermes,
advancements by means of discourse and those deemed worthy of the
most money.
And if, when the Moon is well figured, it should be allotted the Lot
or the Hõroskopos while it happens to be upon the zõidion with its
ruler, they become long lived and grow old with another in happiness.
The benefics, then, assist a great deal during transits; the malefics
do not have the power to hinder. 13. The Fourth, Subterraneous Place
If the benefics should have authority over the Hõroskopos or the
Fortune and should be present, such will have their living in priestly
matters. And if those which are ruling should also be allotted the
archetypal Lot‘ while being in the subterraneous place, they will receive
messages from divine visitations and phantoms of the imagination. And
if the star of Ares should be co-present with them when it is allotted the
Fortune or the Hõroskopos, he will have a life full of ills by his ' Evidently, the Lot of Fortune.
15 unseemly behavior, and after acting villainously together with others, he
will suddenly change his circumstances,1 and he will die a violent death.
One must observe closely that this place causes praises after death and
legacies for one's family. When malefics happen to be in this place, the
[natives] bequeath their property to whom they wish. 14. The Third Place of the Goddess of the Moon
In this zõidion, if the Moon should happen to be allotted the Hõroskopos or the Lot while being in her own face, the native will be
great and will have authority over many good things. He will rule over
cities, and he will command many, and he will be followed and have
the authority over treasuries. And if the Sun should be present along
with it and should be making its rising, the native will be a priest or
priestess of the greatest goddess and will have a life that lacks nothing.
And if the star of Kronos should be present along with the Moon, he
will be subject to god's wrath, likely to experience loss, one who often
goes to judges, and he blaspheme the gods much on account of the
matters that happen to him. And if the star of Zeus should be present
along with her, he will be a prophet, fortunate, wealthy, estimable, and
he will have authority over many goods. And if the star of Ares should
be present along with the Moon, the native will be effective but
impious, and he will steal what is entrusted to him; whence he will
make his living from the things of others and from murders and thefts,
and he will travei abroad a lot. And if it should appropriately happen to
be in its own faces, in keeping with the sect of the nativity, he will be
a governor of countries and cities, unjust, perjured, desirous of the
things of others, and he will be suddenly ruined by the wrath of the
authorities. And if Aphrodite should hold sway over the place of the
Goddess and the Lot of Fortune in her own places, especially in a
noctumal nativity, the native will be wealthy and will be well regarded
by a woman. And some will be kingly, those who rule over cities,
administrators through having been allotted the Fortune in addition to
the Goddess in the house of the Goddess. And if the star of Hermes
should be present together with the Moon in the zõidion of the Goddess
and should have authority over the Fortune or the Hõroskopos, the 1 eis peristasin peripeseitai. I am not sure of this translation.
16 native will tell the future for everyone and will participate in the
mysteries of the gods. 15. The Second Place—Called the Gate of Hades
The post-ascension of the Hõroskopos—in this zõidion the benefics are
of no avail, while the malefics produce those who are sluggish,
diseased, those unable to continue life up to the end. And if the Lot
should be present upon this zõidion, while malefics rule the Lot or the
Hõroskopos, the natives become guardians of the dead, living their lives
outside the gate.
When the star of Kronos, then, has authority over the Lot of
Fortune, being additionally1 present upon this zõidion, it makes those
who are spiritless, those who are sickly, and those who have the
experience of bonds for a time sufficient to complete the period of the
star. When the star of Zeus is additionally present upon the place, it
makes a waste of one's belongings all the way to the end so that
nothing is left to him, yet it grants him children albeit not fortunately.
When the star of Ares is present in this place, if it should rule the Lot
or the Hõroskopos, it makes those who are ready to take offense, those
likely to experience loss, those who are impeded; and some are taken
captive, and later returned. And if it should be allotted the Lot of
Fortune while being present in this zõidion, while being in its own
degrees or zõidia, they become jailers who make their living in prison
or those who spend their lives in prisons. And if the Sun should be
additionally present upon this zõidion while ruling the Lot or the
Hõroskopos in its own house or in the places of Kronos, the native will
ruin his sight in the times of Ares, and will be deprived of his
patrimony, and he will be beggar. And if the star of Aphrodite should
be additionally present upon the zõidion and should rule the Lot or the
Hõroskopos, it will produce public and disgraceful work, if indeed it
should happen to be rising in the moming. And when the star of
Hermes should be additionally present upon the zõidion, if it should be 1 The word ‘additionally’ used here and throughout this paragraph comes
from the verb epipareimi, which simply means to be additionally present.’ In
the context, the planets seem to be present in addition to the Lot, as mentioned
in the first paragraph.
17 under the beams of the Sun, it produces those who are stupid and
illiterate; but if it should become lord of the second lot (which is called
Spirit), it makes those who are dull or mute; and if it should be oriental,
the natives become meddlesome, those who try to do what they ha ve
not leamed, but able to succeed with mathematics. And if the Moon
should be additionally present upon the zõidion while Kronos is marking
the hour, altemations fof fortune]1 will happen; they will suffer from a
cataract or from glaucoma. 16. Names of the Places
God gives signs for the father;2 Goddess for the mother;3 Good Spirit
for children; Júpiter Good Fortune for marriage;5 Evil Spirit for suffering; Evil
Fortune for injuries; Lot of Fortune and Hõroskopos for life and living;
Spirit for mind; Midheaven for action; Love for desire; Necessity for
enemies.6 17. Triangular Judgments of the Stars in Relation to Happiness
or Misfortune—Triangular and Hexagonal and Diametrical
Figures
Zeus trine the Sun signifíes those who are great and estimable, whether
the Sun should be marking the hour both in the father and in the
nativity, or whether the Sun should be upon a pivot point in the father;7 to enallax.
The ninth house is the house of the father in Hindu astrology as well.
[RH]
3 We give the mother to the tenth house as a rule. Valens' third house is
quite different than ours. [RH] Júpiter Ptolemy also assigns the eleventh house to children along with the tenth,
the fourth, and the fifth. [RH]
5 We give the fifth house to love affairs but not usually marriage. [RH]
6 Presumably he is talking about the lots of Love and Necessity
respectively, not houses. [RH]
7 We do not know here if this refers to the actual chart of the father, or to
points in the native’s chart that refer to the father. [RH]
18 for, it signifies one who is estimable, but less if, contrary to the first
case, there is nothing noteworthy in relation to the birth—that is, unless
some other cause should be corrective. If Kronos is made trine the Sun
on the left1 while the Sun is marking the hour, the [trappings] of fame
will be much greater; for such will have many possessions and will
farm much land and will become rich. If the star of Ares should be
further added in along with Zeus, the figure indicates a tyrant;
especially when the Sun is marking the hour, they rule over many lands
and armies. And if the star of Kronos should also be added, the father
will be great among the soldiers and military leaders, though, if the
remaining planets should also cooperate toward the greatness, neither
tyrannical nor warlike nor terrible.
If Ares should oppose the Sun, while Zeus and Kronos trine it on
the right,2 the child will come into greatness and fame among the
multitude. If the star of Kronos should oppose the Sun in accordance
with what was said above, he will be opposed by his kin and his
friends, but he will prevail and make them subject. If the star of Kronos
and the star of Ares should be trine the Sun while Zeus opposes it in its
own degrees or zõidia, this makes one who is commanding and noble.
But if such a figure should happen to be upon a hexagon, he is less so.
Aphrodite sextile the Sun when she is rising in the moming3
signifies that the father and child are charming and notable. And if the
figure should be made upon the Good Spirit or the Good Fortune, such
a one will be deemed worthy by a woman of wearing gold and purple.
Kronos square the Sun on the left4 impedes the paternal income
even while the father is alive, especially in feminine zõidia or contrary5
degrees. If it is opposite [the Sun], much worse; it also involves him in
injuries and sufferings, and he will be betrayed by his relatives and
parasites. If it is square on the right, it becomes less. If this should
come about in the Hõroskopos or in the Midheaven, the impediments
will be less. Ares square the Sun, there will be evil for both the father 1 A sinister trine in which Satum casts its ray forward to the Sun in the
zodiac. [RH]
2 A dexter trine in which the Sun casts its ray backwards in the order of
the sign to Kronos and Zeus. [RH]
3 See note 1, page 22. Júpiter Kronos casts its ray forwards to the Sun in the order of the signs. [RH]
5 We do not know what this refers to.
19 and the offspring; for, it produces injury and suffering. If it should be
opposite in afflicted zõidia or degrees, it also produces injuries in the
joints. If Ares should be upon the right square (which is the tenth
zõidion), it will become worse, for besides these, they lose their minds.
Zeus trine the Sun in the obscure degrees1 or zõidia makes them odious;
for, it purges the good of the star and diverts it into its opposite. But
upon the notable zõidia or degrees, especially when upon a pivot point,
it makes them estimable, able to acquire possessions. But when it
happens to be opposed the Sun, most odious; for not only are its goods
quenched by it, but such men have the anger of their superiors and the
opposition of the crowd. The placements at the same degrees2 as
squares and diameters, then, are difficult.
Ares trine the Sun for a nocturnal birth, especially in feminine
zõidia, when it is on the right, signifies those who are great, estimable,
those who have the power of life and death, if indeed the remaining
figures agree in the nativity. If in addition to the.se, Zeus is in a right
trine, it produces great sovereigns, those in the front ranks in wars, and
those who are leaders of the crowds. If the nativity should be female
and Aphrodite should be present, she will be queen and have authority
over many lands, and such will become beneficent, insubordinate. If the
one star should happen to be in its own place3 and the other in its own
triangle in both masculine and feminine births, there is no obstacle; for,
kings arise from kings if indeed the one should rule, the other co-rule
or have mastery over the birth, and they should have authority over the
Lot of Fortune or the Hour. But if they should be in masculine zõidia,
the effects will become less and much worse. Hexagons are slacker in
relation to good and its opposite. Júpiter If, for a diurnal birth, Ares should become square the Moon on the
left side in degrees or zõidia belonging to others, it will be the cause of 1 This suggests the type of degrees found in Medieval sources and Lilly,
although we do not know at this point what type they refer to. [RH]
2 We believe this means partile aspects, i.e., in exactly the same degree.
[RH]
3 idiotopeõ. Because of the root topos (place), this probably means to be
to be in its own house (in the modem sense of the term, but bearing in mind
that Valens seems to be using whole-sign houses). Júpiter There is evidently a lacuna here: the treatments of Hermes and the Sun,
the Moon and the Sun, Kronos and the Moon, Zeus and the Moon are missing.
20 many impediments, and it will produce oppression and depression for
the mother, and some will be subordinates in the foreign Service; and
some become soldierly, laborious, and insolent. These result if indeed
the nativity is not also depressed with respect to its remaining
[conditions]—the master or co-worker or co-sectarian of the star being
present in zõidia unconnected to the Hõroskopos. But if these remaining
[conditions] should indeed happen to obtain, the natives become
captives and die at the hands of the public executioner. And if it should
become diametrical indeed with the same condition, the difficulties will
be more flexible and hard to escape. But if it should appear in a right
hand square instead, they will ruin everything suddenly. And the
[particular] square and the diameter makes a big difference; for if Ares
should come to be in Aries and the Moon in Câncer, the effects will be
turned around, and similar things pertain to the effects in relation to the
triangle. And similarly, even if Ares in Scorpio and the Moon in Taurus
should be diametrical, not only does it not set impediments to fortune,
but they become causes of advancement and reputation.1
Aphrodite trine the Moon in a noctumal birth and in feminine
zõidia makes those who are charming, happy; and some also lead the
crowds and are deemed worthy of purple and gold in accordance with
the grandeur of their birth; for they also become philosophers and
musicians and lovers of discourse and those who are within the sphere
of royal friendship. And if the birth is also indicated as kingly with
respect to the being2 of both planets—on the one hand the star that
rules, and on the other hand the master of the birth—the figure becomes
one liable to sovereignty; for, kings are made from kings, estimable and
kindly. And hexagons to each other become more moderate in power;
yet upon the Good Spirit and the Good Fortune they are not far from
the triangle [in power], especially if a tropical or equipartite zõidion 1 These two examples seem to indicate that a square or opposition between
planets in high dignity may be more benefic than malefic even when the planets
are malefics. This is a subject which has been debated throughout the history
of astrology. [RH]
2 tõi einai. This is the first time we have encountered this expression so far
in the Greek track, although the anaiogous medieval Latin expression, the esse
of a planet, is rather common. Here it would not seem to refer to what the
planet is or one of its own properties, but rather to the role that the planet plays
or the manner in which it actualizes itself.
21 should happen to be in the middle; and much more [in power] if the
figure should be contemplated in Pisces and Taurus.
Aphrodite square the Moon [makes] those who are prosperous and
wealthy and furnishes everything just as for the triangle, especially if it
should be present in its own zõidion or degree, but it does this with
irregularity; for what they fumish becomes mutable. And if they are
present in others' zõidia or out of sect or in contrary degrees, they are
set down as causes of outrages and instability and exposures by women,
and shameful actions. And when they are set thus diametrically, even
worse.
The Moon trine Hermes for a diumal birth, when it rising in the
morning,1 makes those who are inventive, practical, well-formed,
excited. And if the nativity should be more esteemed, it makes scribes
of kings, or those who rule over cities and countries, those fond of
discourse, orators, geometers. If it should be rising in the evening,
especially when the birth is noctumal, it makes those who are erudite,
philosophers, and those sharing in the mysteries. And if the nativity
should be exalted by the remaining stars, it produces those who are
well-shaped and those who are honored by the crowds and those who
are known to great persons and kings. When the star co-ruling the star
that makes the effect come about causes these things, but happens to be
unprofitably placed, it does not have the power to actualize any of its
own effects. And generally, for every birth it is recognized that
everything that each of the stars actualizes for the trines they also
produce by being together in the same zõidion. And when Hermes exists
in a hexagon to the Moon, it establishes the aforementioned, but more
faintly and weakly. And if it should happen to be square, it makes those
who are keen, ready of wit (their keenness is brought round to that
which is base). For they become those with bad habits, slanderers, those
who effect by cunning and attacks, those who take to heart nothing
healthy. And if it is diametrical, they become those whose intentions are
contrary to what they say, those who show themselves ungrateful in
what they do. Whence they are harmed by what accompanies their
actions.
Hermes trine Kronos, especially when they should happen to be in 1 heõios. Out of context, this might also mean “in the morning,” without
the reference to ‘rising’, but compare the paragraph after next, where in a
parallel construction says anatolikos heõios.
22 their own trigons, makes stewards of kings, or their viceroys or those
who are set over their fleets or economic matters or things like these.
And they become ready of wit, sagacious, willful. And squares to each
other make everything more blunted and sluggish and contentious and
willful, tardy in actions, those who raise themselves up by reproaches
and ambushes and cunning and attacks. And they become those who are
dumb and those who are hampered in their hearing. And if the star of
Ares should bear witness to Kronos or Hermes, it frees the aforementioned impediment of the voice, unless it should happen to be the case
that they are in their own houses or boundaries or have made an
exchange and that they regard the Moon or have its application, or that
they always rale or co-rule; for slight distinctions in this manner are
potent. And if they become diametrical to one another, they separate
sisters by death. Yet when Hermes is marking the hour or culminating,
it makes youths erudite and sagacious and polymaths, but they do not
take the fruits of their pursuits. For that which is accomplished by them
will be inactivated1 by the opposition of the planet. And if they should
be diametrical in accordance with an equal arc position2 to each other,
the effects endure much more, and it impedes both the hearing and the
voice. Also, they become those who are possessed when chanting in the
priestly rites, or those who go astray in their minds.
Hermes trining Zeus is indicative of great deeds, especially when
it is morning rising. For they become scribes or administrators of kings
or cities or the populace. If the star of Hermes should happen to be
altogether active and should provide the effectuation, it will cause
reputation and the acquisition of a livelihood, especially in the profitable
zõidia. And if they are hexagons, they produce the same things, but
less. And if they should be squares well-figured, they produce as many
things for acquisition and reputation, but with envy. But when they are
poorly situated, together with envy also friction and oppositions of
superiors. And if they should be diametrical, they make the slanders
greater, and those who are erratic and at cross purposes are made. And
if they should happen to be diametrical in the Evil Spirit,3 they will be
oppressed by a dire extremity4 and will have the insurrections of the 1 katapsuchõ. Literally, ‘cooled down.’
2 kata isogrammon stasin. This seems to refer to an exact opposition.
3 Twelfth house or place. [RH] Júpiter hupo mcgalês kephalês.
23 crowds, but they will have few brothers, and they will have hatred for
their brothers or children or relatives.
Hermes trine Ares or making a hexagon on the right is indicative
of diverse kinds of work: sometimes scribes, other times merchants,
interpreters, geometers, lawyers, philosophers, but all are malignant,
cunning, dever, false. And it also makes arms instructors or those who
juggle with weapons. And if the star of Zeus should also be configured,
especially in profitable zõidia, it makes those who are soldierly, and
often augerers, sacrificers, those who foresee the future, those who
perceive the odder things about men. And the square will make a
greater diversity of the aforementioned; for, it makes wizards, imposters,
sacrifícers, astrologers, those who court the mob, money-changers,
counterfeiters, forgers, those who conduct their business by villainy and
attacks and cunning. And they also become thieves and perjurers and
those who are impious and plotters of similar things, those who are
covetous, defrauders, those having simply no freedom, whence they are
tumed around by many evils and they have the experience of being led
away or flight or confínement. And especially when they happen in the
unprofitable zõidia or degrees, they produce worse things, and if both
should happen to be in the subterraneous zõidion or Descendant or if the
one should be setting while the other should be subterraneous, they will
bring about murders or they will be accomplices and make their living
by robbery. And some will be ffatricides, and their final end will be
violent, especially if they also help1 the Moon. For they become those
who die violent deaths and are unburied. If, then, they are bom in a
four-footed zõidion,2 they will be conquered by animais; in human
zõidion,3 by robbers; and in solid zõidia, Júpiter by heights or collapsing; in
fiery zõidia, by fire; in very wet zõidia, by shipwreck; by fighting in
single-combat in tropical zõidia. And they also cause these things when
they exchange and come to the same spot. And if the one should rule,
the other have mastery, Hermes in a hexagon with Aphrodite or together
with it make those who are bom be sagacious, charming, lovers of
music, fond of play, jesters; at other times poets, song-writers, singing
instructors, actors in mimes, in comedies; and sometimes also athletes 1 proslambanõ.
2 Aries, Taurus, Leo, Sagittarius, Capricorn. [RH]
3 Gemini, Virgo, Aquarius, and the first half of Sagittarius. [RH] Júpiter Fixed signs. [RH]
24 and physicians. Furthermore, they are productive of diverse kinds of
work. And if the nativity should be feminine, they become musicians,
promiscuous, those who spend their lives as consorts, lovers of
discourse, singing iristructors.
1 : --r 1;-, . , , Aphrodite trine Kronos produces those who are austere, gloomy,
supercilious, and severe and promiscuous in matters of love;
nevertheless they háve intercourse with inferiors or those who are
bought or those who are older, and some even with the women of their
brothers and overseers, or of their fathers, or even their own mothers.
The women among them are adulterers, having intercourse with the
slaves or friends of their men. Yet it is also necessary to see that some
differentiation frequently comes about from the variations of the zõidion
and degrees. For, the figure itself, if it should be together with
something,1 2 produces those who are more filthy, or those who are at one
time negligent and at another promiscuous, but often those who act not
out of love but rather out of pleasure only. The squares are much worse;
for, the collection discussed for the trine turns for the worse, although
they are also diverted from whores; and they become those who are
lacking in refinement and licentious. It becomes worse if the figure
should occur upon the setting or subterraneous zõidion. For, the
aforesaid are intensified for the worse, especially when Ares is also
present with them, or should be squaring or diametrical. Also, they are
taken captive and calumniated by the crowds, and often times for
scandals connected with these matters, or when they happen to be
caught in the act, they meet with an evil death. And if they should be
bom in servile zõidia, they will indulge in impure sufferings and
unnatural pleasures. Hexagons have the same effect-description to each
other as the trines, but also faint and weak. When they are moming
[rising] and in the east, they masculinize the women, not only in their
actions, but also they complete the process by sleeping with the women
of their men. But in the evening they feminize the men; for then the
complete the process by sleeping together with the men of the women.
And often times they are deprived of their generative [organs].
Kronos trine Zeus indicates that the figure is good. It produces 1 There is evidently a lacuna here. Aphrodite with Zeus, Aphrodite with
Ares are missing.
2 What the ‘something’ may be is not clear. [RH]
25 those who are rich in lands, lords of grainlands and vineyards,
grainfarmers and those who lay the foundations of houses, of villages
and cities, those are grave and supercilious. If the figure is more exalted
and Ares should be regarding, they make the commanders of expeditions, those who are the leaders of campaigns at land and at sea;
and they also lead some to kingship or sovereignty. And if the figure
should happen to be in the trigon of Kronos, especially when Zeus is in
Aquarius, Ares in aversion, [they produce] those who are humble-spirited, those who are afraid, those who do not shine in anything
or share in any leadership, but who are retiring and choose an idle life.
From the differences of the zõidia and the places the variations in the
activities also comes about. And they produce the same things and at
the same place1 in the profitable zõidia.
Kronos square Zeus blunts the good of the star, especially if the
star of Kronos is also more to the right and more oriental. For they
become those who advance with difficulty, who are penalized, those
who maintain themselves with toil and work. And they are also harmed
in the area of children; for, some become childless, others behold the
death of their children. The place concerning siblings is also more
harmful for them; for they separate with death those who are more
kindly and those who are more affectionate, while they cause enmities
and injuries for the remainder. And especially when they are outside of
pivot points, and when they are diametrical to one another, they are
more difficult with hardships and oppositions.
Kronos trine Ares signifies those who are unstable in their mode of
living and those unable to work, and it produces those who are sluggish
in actions and those who are violent, or those with few children or those
who destroy their offspring; furthermore, they are taken prisoner or are
injured. And the square is much worse; for, their children are destroyed,
likewise those of their siblings, or they are separated from each other
through enmity, or they become hard to reform, or they are injured. And
they are ready to take offense at every action, meeting with reversals
and being intrigued against by the enmities of great men. And this
figure encounters great dangers. For they die violent deaths by falling
in with robbers or encountering the raids of hostile enemies or meeting
with shipwreck. And some meet with captivity, while many are
endangered by fire and iron. And when they are diametrical to one i 26 homose. another, they produce the aforesaid even more strongly: in addition to
these, they become day-laborers, those who toil, unfortunate; and some
are used as beast of burden and do laborious and shameful work. And
there are also many differences in these figures not only from the
properties of the zõidia and degrees, but also from the greatness of the
nativides. For if the figure should go uncontemplated by Zeus, the
Moon and the Sun, they will make the nativity be of no repute. But if
they should regard it, and one of them should happen to be the ruler
while the other is the co-ruler, then the aforesaid results, with more
difficulty upon the God and the Goddess,1 and more dully and as though
in shadow upon the God Spirit and the Good Fortune,2 and worse and
indissolubly upon the Evil Spirit and the Evil Fortune,3 the idle and
shadowed place. But when the nativity is estimable and sovereign. . . Júpiter Zeus trine Ares, while one of them has rulership and the other has
mastery, signifies men who are great and commanding and sovereign,
especially in their own zõidia or trigons or degrees and upon the
profitable zõidia, or when they have exchanged dwelling places or
boundaries, especially when they have authority or rulership over the
Lot. For they cause great actions, making either kings or those who
advance in campaigns at sea or on land. those who are restorers and
break the ground for cities. And hexagons have less power just as for
the previous figures, except that when they are upon pivot points, they
signify that the aforesaid eviis do not become visible in the natives, but
rather in others. For they become improvisers at wars on the land and
naval battles, and they also become robber chiefs and leaders, violent
ones, those given to torture, those who punish without scruple, drinkers
of blood. And if the birth should be of the mercantile sort5 (for
example, an of an assessor or an advocate) they become informers.6
And if it should also adjoin the star of Hermes while the Moon is
applying to the star of Ares, the figure will be more difficult. For, such
natives are worse than animais.
Zeus square Ares—If the one should mark the hour while the other 1 The ninth and third houses respectively. [RH]
2 The eleventh and fifth houses respectively. [RH1
3 The twelfth and sixth houses respectively. [RH] Júpiter Lacuna in the text.
5 agoraios.
6 katêgorikas.
27 is culminating or occupying the Good Spirit, will be powerful. For, this
figure becomes more powerful than the square, especially if a tropical
[zõidion] should be in between. And when they are present in the same
zõidion, they ha ve a greater strength. For, the squares also produce the
same things as the triangle, but with dangers and oppositions. And the
diameters become more difficult in unprofitable zõidia. For if the
remaining matters of the birth should lead the native to a certain
leadership, he will encounter great dangers and will be betrayed by his
own kind and by enemies. And if neither of the stars should rule or
have mastery or be a co-ruler, the State of the triangles will be
middling. For they become soldierly. And if greatness of dignity should
be glimpsed also from the other stars having the power to work with
them or counteract them, the [natives] will be augmented in reputation.
For they make those who are leaders of cities and those who sit in the
court. And if the disposition should also be soldierly ffom the Sun,
Moon, and Kronos, it will make commanders of ten or a hundred men
of some small campaign and city. But if the disposition should be
depressed by the Sun, Moon, and remaining stars, or the trines of these
(those of Ares and Zeus), it will produce natives who are depressed,
slaves of those who serve as soldiers or subordinates of those who are
the leaders, but often times huntsman, gladiators, or armorers. And it
signifies these things by the alternations of the zõidia. For upon the
pivot points, they produce those who are great from youth, and upon the
post-ascensions those who are raised up from their middle years, but
upon the declines those who are low and depressed. 18. Concerning Hour-Markers of the Lot of Fortune
Having made an exposition of the triangular arrangement, I will again
pass on to the Lot of Fortune. Before all, it is necessary to place the Lot
of Fortune precisely and see in which part of the cosmos it [fell out],
whether upon the pivot points or upon the post-ascensions or upon the
declines; likewise, seek its ruler. For if it should mark the hour by day
or should happen to be upon one of the other profitable zõidia while
being witnessed by the Sun and Moon and the benefics, it will make the
offspring brilliant, notable, fortunate. And if it should happen to be
upon the remaining pivot points or upon the post-ascensions, more
toward the average. But if upon the declines, iet him be considered 28 abandoned, unreared.
In another manner, when you have come to know the place allotted
for Fortune, also consider the squares to it and the remaining figures to
be, as it were, upon the genethlialogical pivot points. That is, the Lot
itself will possess the power of the Hõroskopos, that of life; the tenth
Zõidion from this, the power of the Midheaven, that of reputation; the
7th, the power of the Descendant; the 4th, of the subterraneous zõidion,
and the remaining places will possess the power of the 12 regions. For
some have mystically established the universal Hõroskopos and its
squares to be the cosmic pivot points, but the Lot and its squares to be
the genethlialogical pivot points. They also make prognostications on
these grounds in their writings, saying,
“since the Lot obtains the sovereignty1 [possessed by] the pivot
points in various figures, indeed neither the tropical zõidia nor
the solid nor the bicorporeal will possess the same power
throughout. It is necessary, then, to consider the testimonies of
the stars or their co-presences in relation to the Lot in order
that, if a benefic should be upon it or should testify to it, it
will be prophetic of good things and a bestower of belongings;
but if a destructive planet, then it will become a cause of the
squandering of belongings and the wasting of the body.” 19. Concerning the Exaltation of the Sun and Moon in Relation
to Happiness
We have found a certain place to be mystical, and by experience we
take by day from the Sun at birth to Aries (which is its exaltation) and
by night from the Moon to Taurus, and equal amounts from the
Hõroskopos. And wherever it should leave off, consider this place and
its ruler. For if it should be found to be marking the hour or culminating, especially upon a pivot point of the Lot, this figure foretells one
who is royal, with the remaining stars and sects showing the support of
the nativity to be great.
In another manner, when the nativity is of good reputation and the
exaltation or the ruler is well situated, the offspring will be exalted by 1 dunasíeia. 29 command or by political or royal rulership or by some other reputable
trust. But if, when the support is mediocre, the ruler of the exaltation or
the place should happen to be ill situated, the offspring will be happy
in that area in which he is just then engaged in doing, either his craft
or his Science or his business. And the ruler itself and the zõidion will
foretell the kind of success from its own nature or from the nature of
the zõidion it is set upon. For often times those who are in a plight or
fail at doing something in their early years will be successful in other
matters in later years. 20. Concerning the Lot of Fortune and of Spirit in Relation to
Happiness and the Prevention of Actions
Whence the Lot of Fortune and the Spirit will have much power over
the imposing and turning back of actions. For, the one shows matters
concerning the body and handicrafts, the Spirit and its ruler matters
concerning the soul and the intellect, and actions through discourse and
through giving and receiving. It will be necessary, then, to consider in
what kind of zõidia the places and their rulers are, and to combine the
natures of these zõidia for the determination of action and fortune, and
for the kind of action.
Nativities from the Sun and Moon, then, while the benefics are
either upon or are inclining to the places or to the rulers, will be
considered to be brilliant and estimable and effective. Those resulting
from Kronos and Ares will be mediocre, obscure, reduced, and contrary.
It is better, then, to find the ruler of the Spirit upon the Lot of
Fortune or the tenth zõidion from this, which is the Midheaven;1 for in
this way the nativities become brilliant and notable. And if it should
happen to be in its own place2 or else upon a pivot point instead, they
will become effective, estimable to a certain extent. But if [the ruler of
the Spirit] should happen to be somehow in aversion to its own place
or declining instead, while being witnessed by malefics, it signifies
fugitives or those who disgrace themselves in a foreign land. And if a
benefic is co-present with it, or if it should be witnessed by benefics. 1 This musl mean analogous to the Midheaven.
2 idiotopeõ. The lexicon has “to be in a congenial place in the zodiac,” but
the root topos would suggest that it means ‘to be in a congenial house.’
30 they will spend much time in a foreign land living a varied and irregular
life; but if a malefíc is co-present with it, they will become those who
live poorly and in want, having the experience of accusation and
constraint. Similarly, if [the ruler of the Spirit] should be opposite to the
place, it foretells those who dwell in a foreign land and undergo
troubles. Often times such do not inherit from their kin, but they do
inherit from someone else. 21. Concerning the Place of Fortune in Relation to Happiness
We have also found the 1 lth place from Fortune to be an acquisitive
place, a bestower of belongings and goods, and especially when
benefics are upon it or are testifying. For, the Sun and Zeus and
Aphrodite furnish gold, silver, and ornament, and greater property, and
gifts from superiors and kings, and they appoint [them] to virtuous
missions for the multitude and make them benefactors of many.
The Moon and Hermes cause waxing and waning and irregularity
of one's life, and sometimes those who are liberal and generous to
others, other times those who are upset with poverty and loans, because
the Moon has the waxing and waning of its light, while Hermes is
common equally to good and bad [planets].
Ares takes away the things which are given or additional
acquisitions by producing diminishment, robberies, fires, trials, those
who are wasteful in regard to the public or royal affairs, or those who
are dismissed1 and accused in regard to them. This is so unless the
nativity should happen to be military or estimable; for then from such
a starting point of violent and dangerous actions and of theft, they will
come into acquisition, if indeed the star should happen to be properly
[situated], except that it will also effect something terrible and bring
diminishment.
Kronos, when it is suitably figured, appoints the lords of foundations, possessions; but when unsuitably or out of sect, it produces
losses, seizures, shipwrecks, poverties, debts. Kronos with Hermes and
Ares produces those who are threatened abusively with the infliction oí 1 The word here is autexousios, which literally means ‘being in one's own power’ or ‘being set free’, but here it would seem to have some figurative sense
connected with the malfeasance. 31 legal action on account of villainies or secret1 and violent affairs.2
Kronos, Hermes, Ares, and Aphrodite produce those who are wronged
by drugs or by female personages and those who encounter accusations.
Kronos, Ares, Hermes, Aphrodite, Zeus, and the Moon produce those
who are benefited by legacies and those who acquire money from
maritime and foreign or nautical [ventures].
Generally, then, Kronos and Ares, when they are culminating or
post-ascending the Midheaven of the Lot, and when they have authority
over [the place] of Acquisition, are indicative of loss.3
It is necessary, then, to preview the natures of each star and, for
each individual commixture and property, to reveal the [nature] which
it has in relation to every other. And it is not alone the stars upon the
acquisitive place that indicate the matters in question, but also the
zõidion itself will act both in relation to the nature of the star and in
relation to its own nature. 1 mustikos.
2 í am not sure I have gotten the exact sense of this sentence.
3 ekptõsis. It is interesting that this word also commonly means ‘shipwreck’
and every kind of ‘abandonment.’
32 22. Ulustrations of the Chapters Above1
We will make use of illustrations2 for the diagnosis of the
above matters, setting a notable
nativity at the beginning.3 Let
the Sun be in Scorpio, the
Moon in Câncer, Kronos in
Aquarius, Zeus in Sagittarius,
Ares in Scorpio, Aphrodite in
Libra, Hermes in Scorpio, the
Hõroskopos in Libra. Júpiter Since,
then, the nativity is nocturnal, I
seek the Moon. This happens
to be in Câncer in the trigon of
Ares.5 We found the star of
Ares to be post-ascending in its own house and trigon and in its own
sect; then we find the star sharing with this, Aphrodite, to be marking
the hour in its own house; third, the Moon to be culminating in her own
house. It is clear beforehand, then, that the nativity is an estimable one,
since the rulers are suitably figured. By seeking, I find the Lot to be in 1 All of these charts are to be found in Neugebauer and Van Hoesen,
Greek Horoscopes, Philadelphia: American Philosophical Society, 1959.
2 There are no illustrations in the original, only the text listing the
positions. The chart form used here may not be quite that of the original period.
We have no examples of the form used by Valens. This form is a type used at
least from early Byzantium on, about 500 C.E. It may have been used earlier.
The Hõroskopos is always at the left, with the angular houses on the central
cross. [RH]
3 This chart is No. L 50 in Neugebauer. He dates it to about Júpiter A.M. of
October 25, 50 C.E. [RH] Júpiter The character <í> stands for the Lot of Spirit. I have computed it for all
of the charts even when it is not referred to in the text. [RH]
5 That is, the triplicity of Mars. Neugebauer translates this as, “in trine
with Mars.” The word for trine and triplicity happen to be identical, so that it
would seem on the face of as either translation were correct. However, the fact
that Valens gocs directly into the matter of the positioning of Mars, and also
due to the fact that the discussion is primarily about triplicity rulerships, our
translation seems much more likely. [RH] 33 Aquarius. Its lord is upon this zõidion, occupying the Good Fortune in
its own house and trigon. Similarly also I found for the 1 Ith zõidion of
the Lot of Fortune, which is the zõidion for acquisition, Zeus. I also
took the Exaltation of the Nativity, which becomes 11 [zõidia] from the
Moon to Taurus and an equal amount from the Hõroskopos, Libra. ít
left off in Leo in the Good Spirit. The Sun, the lord of this zõidion, was
found to be culminating with respect to the Lot of Fortune. It made the
nativity even more brilliant and estimable.
Another.1 The Sun, Her¬
mes in Taurus; the Moon in
Aries; Kronos, Ares, Aphrodite,
the Hõroskopos in Câncer;
Zeus in Capricom; the Lot of
Fortune and the Exaltation of
the Nativity in Gemini. The
nativity was elevated from mediocrity and became authoritative and commanding. For,
the nativity being diurnal, I
found the Sun to be in the
trigon of the Moon,2 the Moon
and her companions Aphrodite
and Ares upon the pivot points, the Lot of Fortune and the Exaltation
to be in Gemini in decline (whence his fírst years were medíocre), the
lord3 to occupy the Good Spirit. 1 L 95, V, 18 in Neugebauer. He dates it to 10 A.M., May 18, 95 C.E.
However, Neugebauer believes that a copyist left “in Leo’’ out of the text after
Kronos. Otherwise the chart is undatable. Unfortunately there is no evidence in
the text to support or contradict this thesis. We have drawn the chart as stated
in the text. [RH]
The Moon is actually the noctumal ruler, but it is also the primary ruler
of this triplicity according to Valens. [RH]
3 Mercury. [RH] 34 Another.1 The Sun, Ares,
Aphrodite, Hermes in Aquarius; the Moon, Zeus in Scorpio;
Kronos in Aries; the Hõroskopos in Leo. The nativity
itself results in a commanding
and powerful fortune from a
depressed and medíocre for¬
tune. For, the nativity being
diurnal, we found the Sun to be
in the trigon of Kronos, while
Kronos is in decline (whence
the first years are medíocre),
its companion Hermes upon a
pivot point. And we also found the Lot of Fortune to be in Taurus and
the Exaltation in Libra and the lady to be culminating with respect to
the Lot, and elsewise upon a pivot point.2
Another.3 The Sun, Her¬
mes in Taurus; the Moon in
Aquarius; Kronos, Aphrodite in
Aries; Zeus in Virgo; Ares in
Pisces; the Hõroskopos in Leo.
We found, then, the Sun to be
in the trigon of Aphrodite and
the Moon, while Aphrodite is
in decline. The first years, then,
were made full of care and
lowly. Since the Moon was
found to be upon a pivot point,
he later engaged in military
affairs and experienced ad- 1 L 85, Gêmeos , which Neugebauer dates to shortly before sunset on Feb. 5, 85
C.E. [RH]
2 That is, Aphrodite in Aquarius is opposite the Hõroskopos in Leo.
3 L 83 in Neugebauer who dates it to about Noon on April 28, 83 C.E.
However, Mercury is incorrect for this date. Mercury, however, is frequently
incorrect in ancient charts because it is so hard to see and therefore develop an
adequate theory for. [RH] 35 vances in rank. Similarly, the Lot of Fortune also was found in Taurus,
the Exaltation in Câncer. The Moon, the lady of [Taurus],1 was found
to be culminating with respect to the Lot. Whence he also came into the
greatest and most commanding fortune. Ares was found to be in the
place of Acquisition. He fiimished property from rapine and robbery
and violence, which was evilly plundered after his death.
Another.2 The Sun, Her¬
mes, Kronos, Zeus in Sagittarius; the Moon in Câncer; Ares
in Virgo; Aphrodite, the Hõroskopos in Libra. The nativity
being nocturnal, we found the
Moon to be in the trigon of
Ares while Ares himself was in
decline, as well as the Lot and
its lord. Whence, he spent the
early years humbly and poorly,
experienced captivities and
servitudes, and was upset with
many dangers. Since the cosectarians3 happened to be in profitable places, he took up the royal
trust as one engaged in friendships and alliances. Then, since the
Exaltation was found in Leo, and the Sun, its lord, was culminating
with respect to the Lot, he was deemed worthy of command and
authoritative rank. 1 The Moon is the exaltation ruler of Taurus. [RH]
2 L 74, XI In Neugebauer, dated to about 2 A.M. of Nov. 26, 74 C.E.
3 Planets of the same sect. In this Valens refers to the Moon and Venus.
[RH] 36 Another.1 The Sun, Her¬
mes in Capricorn; the Moon,
Aphrodite in Sagittarius; Kronos in Scorpio; Zeus in Libra;
Ares in Aquarius; Fortune in
Aries; the Hõroskopos in
Taurus. And the nativity itself
was spent erratically and in
mediocrity at the beginning,
but later was elevated and
partook of crowns and the
archpriestship. For, the lords of
the trigon were found to be
upon the post-ascension;2 and
the third lord of the trigon and the lord of the Lot were found to be
culminating; and similarly the lord of the Exaltation was found to be
culminating according to the Lot, the lord of Spirit also.
Another.3 The Sun, Her¬
mes in Câncer; the Moon in
Taurus; Kronos in Pisces; Zeus,
Ares in Leo; Aphrodite in
Virgo; the Hõroskopos in
Libra. And the nativity itself
became brilliant and notable.
That is, he was acquainted with
kings and deemed worthy of
the archpriestship. For, the lord 1 L 72 in Neugebauer, dated to about 2 Plutão .M. of Jan. 6, 72 C.E. [RH1
2 In the astrology of later times this would not have been viewed as a
particularly positive placement as these planets, Venus and the Moon, are in the
eighth house. [RH]
3 L 82 in Neugebauer, dated to about Noon July Mercúrio , 82 C.E. [RH] 37 of the trigon1 together with the lord of Spirit were found to occupy the
Good Spirit, along with the Lot of Fortune. And the Sun, which gets
Fortune as his portion, was found to be culminating; the lady of the
Exaltation, the Moon, was found to be culminating according to the Lot.
The acquisition2 was irregular and inconstant, sometimes superabundant,
other times wanting, for Kronos and Aphrodite witnessed the place.
Another.3 The Sun, Zeus,
Ares and Aphrodite in Scorpio;
Kronos in Libra; the Moon in
Aries; Hermes in Sagittarius;
the Hõroskopos in Leo. The
lord of the Exaltation, Hermes
in Sagittarius, was found to be Sol H
culminating with respect to the
Lot; and it exalted the nativity
in respect of its mode of living.
And similarly, the lords of the Sol \ Mercúrio trigon and of the Lot, since W
they
were found to be
m
subterraneous, made a treasurer, free from ambition but also niggardly. 1 ActuaUy Venus is the diumal lord of this triplicity, but Mars is the
primary lord. The twelfth house position of Venus apparently was deemed to
be overcome by the strengths of the other rulers. [RH]
2 11 th house from the Part of Fortune. [RH]
3 L 97, XI in Neugebauer, dated to about Midnight on Nov. 6, 97 C.E.
[RH] 38 Another.1 The Sun, Her¬
mes in Taurus; the Moon in
Aquarius; Kronos in Leo; Ares,
Aphrodite in Câncer; Zeus in
Virgo; the Hõroskopos in
Sagittarius. The nativity being
noctumal, the lords of the
trigon, Kronos and Hermes, are
declining. Whence for the first
years [the native] was irregular
in many things, and he lived in
debt, though the support in the
area of parents was good.
Then, after later gaining an
inheritance and augmenting his mode of living by means of advancements and resources, he became ambitious and fit to rule and
munificent, acceptable to the crowds, a friend of kings and leaders, and
one who fumishes provisions for temples and works, and he gained
lasting memory. For, the Lot of Fortune and of Exaltation were found
in Pisces, and Zeus2 the lord of this was culminating. 1 L 95, V, 14 in Neugebauer dated to about 8 Plutão .M. May 14, 95 C.E. [RH]
2 Zeus is also the third lord of the Moon's triplicity and lherefore rules the
last period of life. [RH] 39 Another.1 The Sun, Her¬
mes in Scorpio; the Moon in
Aries; Kronos in Virgo; Zeus
in Pisces; Ares in Leo; Aphrodite, the Hõroskopos in Sagittarius. When the nativity2 was
still young, he inherited great
property. For, the acquisitive
place was found in Pisces,
while Zeus was in his own
place; and Aphrodite, the lady
sharing the trigon in common
and the lady of the Lot and of
the Exaltation, was found to be
marking the hour by degree.3
Another. Júpiter The Sun, Her¬
mes in Capricom; the Moon,
Kronos in Sagittarius; Zeus in
Câncer; Ares in Virgo; Aphro¬
dite in Aquarius; the Hõro¬
skopos in Libra. The lords of
the trigon were found to be
upon pivot points, but opposed.
Whence, the nativity, having
acted well, and having been
well provided for in the beginning years, was found to be
abject and in want in later
years as the result of conflagrations and robbery. For, the lord of the Lot, Ares, was found to be 1 L 65, X in Neugebauer, dated to Oct. 31, 65 C.E. about 8 A.M. However,
according to Neugebauer there is no date that fits all of the positions as given
by Valens. [RH]
2 Here as elsewhere the word is being used much in the same sense as our
‘native’. [RH]
3 Aphrodite conjunct the Ascendant to the degree. [RH] Júpiter L 105 in Neugebauer, dated to about midnight, Jan. 1, 105 C.E. at the
latitude of Babylon and Syria. [RH] 40 declining in the acquisitive place and was witnessed by Kronos.
Another.1 The Sun, Aphrodite, the Hõroskopos in
Taurus; the Moon in Aquarius;
Kronos in Câncer; Zeus in
Libra; Ares, Hermes in Gemini.
In the first years he has great
display and works and political
trust; for, the lords of the
trigon happened to be upon
pivot points. Later he became a
wanderer after a reduction in
his living; for, Ares and Her¬
mes were opposed to Acquisition, and the lords of the Lot
and the Acquisitive place were declining.
Another.2 The Sun, Her¬
mes in Gemini; the Moon in
Capricorn; Kronos, Ares in
Aquarius;
Aphrodite,
the
Hõroskopos in Câncer; Zeus in
Scorpio. After such a one had
been bom a slave and had
entered into a clan, he took up
political leadership and was
ambitious. For, the lords of the
trigon and of the Lot and of
the Exaltation were found to be
properly situated and witnessed
by Zeus. But Ares and Kronos
and Hermes fell amiss,3 whereby they also diminished his living and
brought him into debt. 1 L 61, V in Neugebauer, dated to May 1, 61 C.E. at about sunrise. [RH]
2 L 108 in Neugebauer, dated to June 2, 109 C.E. at about 8 A.M. [RH]
3 Although Hermes is in its own sign, Gemini, it is in the twelfth house.
Ares and Kronos are in the eighth house conjunct the Lot of Fortune,
presumably messing up the Lot. [RH]
41 Another.1 The Sun in Aquarius; the Moon, Zeus in
Scorpio;
Ares, Kronos Aphrodite, in Câncer; Hermes in Capricorn; the Hõroskopos in
Pisces. Such a one became a
eunuch, a priest of a goddess,
notable. For, the lord of the
Lot obtained Scorpio, the place
of God, while the lords of the
sect, Kronos and Hermes, were
found to occupy the Good ^
Spirit,
but
in
opposition.
Whence, he fell into much
trouble, diminishment, and defenses pertaining to governmental and
kingly matters.2 23. Concerning Estimable and Notable Nativities, and, with the
Same Considerations, Concerning Disreputable Nativities and
Those That Come to Naught
And they appended the following places as being necessarily powerful
in relation to the determination concerning estimable and notable
nativities. If, when the Sun and the Moon are in profitable places, they
should have mostly oriental planets as their spear bearers3 while none
of the malefics opposes, they make the nativities fortunate and
estimable, commanding and kingly; likewise also, if the lords of these
should happen to be upon pivot points. If the zõidion of the conjunction
or Whole Moon, or the lords of these, should happen to be marking the
hour or culminating, the offspring will be fortunate. And if the Sun or 1 L 62 in Neugebauer, dated to Jan. 22, 62 C.E. at about 10 A.M. But
there are some problems. On this date Mars was actually in Scorpio, and Venus
in late Sagittarius. However, Venus's position with the 8°T correction would
actually have been in 7°r> by Valens's reckoning. [RH1
2 Apparently the native must defend himself because of such matters. [RH]
3 See Antiochus of Athens, Thesaurus, chapters 23 and 24. This does seem
to be a subject concerning which there was much disagreement. [RH] 42 the Moon or most of the stars should be found in the subterraneous
place, they will become notable and wealthy, but they will ruin their
lives or they will be upset with jealousies and accusations and scandals.
Wishing to decide the matter of happiness more clearly, we will
make it more explicit by means of many and fully examined choices.
For, each kind of figure-description is powerful individually, but judging
the one together with the other, either it exalted the reputation if it was
benefited, or else it ruined it even further if it was afflicted. Whence,
we will append them not as refuting the former powers, but as further
confirming them. So just as we spoke early about the Lot, it will be
necessary to treat both the Lot of Spirit (which is found by day from
the Moon to the Sun, by night from the Sun to the Moon, and an equal
amount from the Hõroskopos) and consider together both its lord and
the place where it happens to be; and similarly the Lot of Basis (which
is found from Fortune to Spirit and from Spirit to Fortune, and an equal
amount ffom the Hõroskopos—though the seventh number does not
carry over to the other side for both day and night nativities, but it will
be necessary to reckon from the nearer lot to the other) and judge
together both the place and the ruler.1
If, then, the rulers exchange places—for example, if the lord of the
Lot of Fortune should be in the place of the Basis, while the lord of the
Basis should be in the place of Spirit, and the lord of Spirit in the place
of the Fortune—such a one will be fortunate, royal, notable. And if the
lord of the Basis should be in the place of Spirit, while the lord of
Spirit should be co-present, he will be fortunate, high minded. And if
the lords of Spirit and Fortune and Basis should be in their own places,
the offspring will also be fortunate. And if the Spirit should be found
with the Sun and its lord should be oriental, such a one will be
fortunate. Likewise also, if Aphrodite should have authority over
Fortune or Spirit or Basis, and should be found to occupy the orient and
be in her own place, such a one will be fortunate. If the lord2 should be
set in the Basis, and the Moon should be co-present with it, such a one
will be fortunate and notable. And if the lord should be set upon the
Spirit, and the Sun should be co-present with it, he will be fortunate. 1 This seems to be saying that Basis is measured by the shorter are
between Fortuna and Spirit both day and night. [RH]
2 The iord’ is probably the lord of Basis, and similarly in the next
sentence it is probably that of the Lot of Spirit. [RH] 43 notable, and sovereign.
If, when Ares is upon the Spirit, it should be found in the places of
the Moon with it being co-present, the nativity will be fit for rule,
commanding, estimable. And if, when the star of Hermes should be
upon the Spirit, it should be found to be oriental while being witnessed
by benefics in places of the Moon, such a one will have his good
fortune from writing and teaching, will be dear to many, one who is
truly erudite, and he will be deemed worthy of honors and gifts and
reputation, and he will be pronounced happy by many. If Zeus should
have authority over the Spirit while Ares has a superior position1 over
it, such a one will not be unfortunate, but effective and estimable; but
having been upset by oppositions, he will be ruined or he will have the
experience of legal processes and banishment. And if the lord of the
Spirit should be co-present with the Moon while being oriental, such a
one will be fortunate and wealthy and generous. And if the Sun should
be upon the Spirit while being truly of his proper sect, the ruler being
in his own place, he will be estimable, graceful, dear to many; but if in
the sect of the other, he will be fortunate later after times of adversity.
If the Iords of the Spirit and of the Fortune should be found in the
place of the Basis, while the rulers are co-present, the nativity will be
brilliant and estimable. Similarly also, if the lord of the Basis and the
lord of the Fortune should be found in the Spirit while the rulers are
co-present, the nativity will be great and fortunate. All those who have
the lord of the Fortune and of the Spirit oriental and in their own places
and witnessed by the Sun and Moon will become estimable and notable
and ones who dwell close to kings or priests, and they will be deemed
worthy of gifts and reputation. If, when Aphrodite has authority over the
Lot or the Spirit, she should be found together with the Sun and Moon,
and one of the remaining stars has authority over these while not being
in its own place, but rather falis amiss, such a one will have hard luck
and be ineffectual at what he tums his hands to. But if some of the stars
should be in their own places, such will dwell with great men or will
be trusted in the royal courtyard, though in the matter concerning a wife
they will come into grief and will be childless. If the lord of the Fortune
or the lord of Acquisition2 should not happen to be in their own houses
or exaltations or trigons or degrees while being upon a pivot point or 1 It is not quite clear what ‘superior position’ means here. [RH]
2 The ruler of the eleventh zõidion from Fortune. [RH]
44 direct, they will reduce the nativity—especially when malefics happen
to be witnessing the places or opposing them; but if benefics happen to
be upon a pivot point, oriental, and direct, they make the offspring
brilliant and estimable; and if upon the post-ascensions, they rise up
through their own efforts.
If, when the Lot of Fortune and Spirit and Basis are ill situated, the
Acquisition is afflicted, they diminish property with the advance of
years. And if the Fortune should fali amiss and should be afflicted,
while the Acquisition should fali well, they become more advantaged
from their early years. If the lord of the Fortune or of the Acquisition
should happen to be upon the lower pivot point or should be
post-ascending, it bestows prosperity and reputation with the advance
of years. When the malefics are placed upon the Acquisition or are
opposing it while the place is not upon a pivot point [in other's zõidia
of the nativity and another's degree],1 they cause destruction of property,
even if the Lot of Fortune and its lord should be well situated.
Whenever the lord of the Fortune and the lord of the Acquisition
should fali opposite one another, if they should be benefics, they cause
the property to be ostentatious and flawed and uncertain;2 if they should
be malefics, they cause losses. If the Acquisition should be opposite to
the Spirit, they provide loss of work and diminishments and damages,
if they should not have benefics lying upon them. When the lord of the
Acquisition is opposed to the Acquisition, it makes the property void.
If, then, it should happen to be malefic, still worse; the benefics produce
the same thing by taking it away, and they cause losses even upon these
[places]. If the Acquisition should fali opposite to the rulers, especially
when they are malefics and are not in sect, they bring losses straightaway. If Ares should be placed upon the Acquisition or diametrical to
it, the things acquired will be wasted on pleasures and drink. Similarly
also, if the lord of the Acquisition should be opposite to the Acquisition
itself, [it produces] those with an extravagant style of living. Similarly
also if the lord of the Acquisition himself should be subtracting in
numbers3 or not upon a pivot point or of anothefs degree, 1 allotrioi tés geneseõs kai zõidiõn kai moiras allotrias. The text seems a
bit corrupt here.
2 tas huparxeis pephantasiõmenas poiousi kai episathrous kai epikindunous.
3 That is, retrograde.
45 or (not]1 having a house. 24. Concerning the Lot of Debt
If the Lot concerning Debt should fali amiss, or its lord should fali on
squares or diameters with it, while the malefics are looking ahead at it2
or opposing it or are superior to it, it makes the nativities debt-ridden.
The Lot that concerns Debt is counted from Hermes to Kronos and an
equal amount from the Hõroskopos.3 Júpiter From the lots, then, falling in the
Acquisition or the stars placed upon or opposing or squaring in relation
to the Lot itself, the matter of the property of the offspring will be clear
ahead of time. And similarly also from the stars placed upon the
Fortune or Spirit or from the Lots falling together with them and from
their lords, especially when they are looking at the Lot concerning
treachery and the Lot of theft, if they should have some relationship to
the Acquisition or the Fortune or the Spirit or the Life, or to the lords
of these lots. It is possible not to have [such a relationship, and suchf
will not safely make acquisitions. For if the places in question should
not have a relationship to the Acquisition or the Fortune or the Life or
the Spirit, it reduces the means of livelihood of the offspring or his
property. But if they should have some relationship to them, you will
determine the circumstances of the property from villainy and treachery
and plots of someone and violence and theft and attack. 25. The Lot of Theft
The Lot concerning Theft is counted, in a diumal nativity, from Hermes
to Ares and an equal amount from Kronos;5 in a nocturnal nativity, 1 The context seems to demand a negative not present in the text.
2 ephoraõ. Presumably a synonym for epitheõreõ.
3 This lot was listed by Al-Biruni also, and is called the Lot of Moneylenders by Bonatti. Júpiter Guessing at a lacuna in the text.
5 This lot is unusual in that it is composed of three planets. This is one of
the few that resembles a planetary formula of the kind known in the Hamburg
School System of astrology. The reader should also notice that it amounts
46 from Ares to Hermes and an equal amount from Rronos. 26. The Lot of Treachery
For the Lot concerning Treachery, by day from the Sun to Ares and an
equal amount from the Hõroskopos; by night the reverse.1 And if the
lord of the Lot of Fortune or of Acquisition or of Spirit should happen
to be on the Lot concerning Treachery or Theft, they will make their
living from violence or villainy or booty.2 And if the lords of all of the
above should fali together,3 they cause the same things. And if the lord
of Treachery or of Theft should be upon the Lot of Fortune or Spirit or
Livelihood4 or Acquisition, the circumstances of the living will be found
from these. If benefics should witness these places, and especially when
they are in their own places or when they are in sect, they become
virtuous.5 But if malefics should witness diametrically or in square, the
manner must be considered.6
We will illustrate nativities that are reduced or come to naught7
after good fortune. If the place that concerns honor and exaltation8
should have malefics opposing which are not befitting the nativity, or
its lord should not be witnessed by Zeus, especially when the lights are
declining or when the Moon is afflicted, the circumstances of reputation
and distinction will be reduced. When the Lot of Fortune is opposed to
the Exaltation or to the lord of the Exaltation, it makes the reputation
and distinction precarious. Similarly also, [when] the Lot of Spirit and
the lords are disagreeable to them, Mercúrio they also happen to be destructive having a completed afflicting Mercury, which is often related to theft. [RH]
1 In Al-Biruni this formula is used for a Lot of Conquest and one of Fire.
However, with the places of Mars and the Sun interchanged it is also listed as
a Lot of Retribution. [RH]
2 tis õpheleia.
3 homou. Júpiter Valens has not given us this lot as yet. [RH]
5 That is, of good moral purpose.
6 The manner of witnessing?
7 ekpiptõ.
8 Probably a reference either to the tenth zõidion from the Hõroskopos or
to the Exaltation of the Nativity. [RH] Mercúrio To the Exaltation and lord of the Exaltation?
47 of reputation. And if the place of the Lot of Exaltation and that
concerning Enfranchisement1 should fali opposite one another, and their
lords or the lots should been seen by malefics, they afflict them, and the
offspring will come into disenfranchisement and reduced circumstances
and suffer certain outrages. And if the lord of the Lot of Fortune or of
Spirit or of Exaltation should fali opposite to the [place] concerning
Enfranchisement or to the Lot or to its lord, or if it should be
predominated2 or witnessed by malefics, the offspring will come into
reduced circumstances and suffer outrages. Similarly also, when a
malefic should bear witness to the Lot—especially that concerning
Enfranchisement—it will cause reductions of livelihood and worth for
the offspring. And this is especially so when it is upon a pivot point, for
in this way the ills of the offspring become conspicuous and manifest.
The lights are malefic when they are opposed to the3 exaltations or
to the lord of the Exaltation, especially when they are afflicted and are
not in sect or even when one or the other of them is [in such a
condition]; for they supply disenfranchisements and reduced circum¬
stances for the nativities. If the Exaltation should happen to be in the
Midheaven, or if a malefic should be in the subterraneous hemisphere, Júpiter then after being advanced and honored by many in their early
years—especially if a benefic is regarding them—they will later be
reduced. If they should be interchanged,5 after having misfortune in
their early years, they will later be distinguished. If the places should
be altogether afflicted, they signify misfortune for the native from his
youth, just as benefics witnessing the places will become presages of epitimia. It is not clear whether this is a place or a lot here. In any case, we have not dealt with this subject in this chapter.
2 kathupertereõ. In the active voice we usually translate this as ‘to be in
superior position to’, but this does not work well in the passive, so we have
used the verb ‘predominate.’
3 It is not clear whether this refers to the exaltations of each of the lights
or to the Exaltation of the chart (chapter 19), which is calculated like a lot. In
this context I would suspect the latter. The reference to exaltation in the next
clause clearly must refer to the exaltation of the chart. Júpiter This placement seems a bit indeterminate. Perhaps the lext should be
emended to read “upon the pivot point of the subterraneous hemisphere," in
which case we would have a malefic opposing the Exaltation at the Midheaven.
5 enallax.
48 good things according to the place-positioning1 of the zõidia and the
stars. And if, again, the Spirit should be opposed to the Exaltation, it
makes the nativities come into reduced circumstances. Whenever most
of the places at the nativity or their lords should be afflicted, and the
conjunctions or Whole Moons or the Lot conceming Enfranchisement
should have the Lot conceming Justice or Enemies or Necessity2 falling
together with it or diametrically opposed to it or in square, they
encounter strong factions and are hindered in regard to enfranchisement.
If the afflicted places or their lords should be few, or the [Lot]
conceming Exaltation or its lord alone should be afflicted, the natives
will go through life without advancement and without brilliance and
held in low opinion. When malefics are opposed to the place conceming
Dignity3 or when they hold a superior position, they bring reduced
circumstances to the nativities. If the lord of the Exaltation and the lord
of the Dignity should fali opposite one another, as well as the lots or
their masters, Júpiter the natives will come to be held in low opinion. If Zeus
should be lying upon the Exaltation while being upon a pivot point, or
if it should become lord of a pivot point, it makes men distinguished.
If it should happen to be in a zõidion or in degrees of Ares, or should
be present with it in its own zõidia, the natives will have the power of
life and death. Whence, when the places and stars in question are found
in profitable5 zõidia, they make the nativities brilliant, commanding,
kingly; when they are upon the middle6 zõidia, they make them
graceful, estimable, fít for rule; upon the declines, successful, effective,
subordinate to the power of others, those who are deemed worthy of 1 topothesia. That is, the places (houses) occupied by the zõidia and the
stars.
2 We have not yet encountered these lots in Valens. [RH]
3 axioma. We do not know what this point is as of this time. [RH] Júpiter This phrase is unclear. Does this condition refer to the opposition of the
Lots themselves and the other rulers (despotês) of these Lots besides the house
ruler (that is, sign ruler)?
5 This statement restricts the profitable chrêmatistikos zõidia to the pivot
points (angles). As far as I can remember, this is the first passage we have
translated that clearly fixes the meaning of ‘profitable’ in context.
6 Presumably, the post-ascensional zõidia (the succedent houses) are meant
here.
49 trusts and rank.1 2 27. Illustrations of the Above Places
As an illustration,2 let the Sun,
O
Moon, Zeus, Hermes be in \ ^
n /
c1 /
Leo; Kronos, the Hõroskopos ^ \. ^ ^ Mercúrio Exaly-'
in Libra; Ares in Gemini; ^
Aphrodite in Câncer. Such a
\
one will be fortunate, commanding, sovereign, one who
possesses a royal fate and one
J? ^ _
T
who is mstalled in great abundance. For, the Lot of Fortune
and the Spirit and the Basis3
/
ended up in the same zõidion; Júpiter /
Tfi /
while Aphrodite, the lady of Netuno these, was culminating in
^
rs
Câncer; and the lord of the
trigon and the iord of the Exaltation were found to occupy the Good
Spirit in the Acquisition. 1 This sentence suggests that Vettius Valens is using the whole-sign house
System here, as did Faulus Alexandrinus.
2 L 188 in Neugebauer, dated to Aug. 10, 188 C.E. at about 10 A.M. This
is the latest chart in Vettius Valens and gives us a latest possible date for his
life. [RH]
3 p is used as a symbol for the Basis. [RH] Júpiter This sort of thing tends to happen in New Moon births. [RH] 50 Another.1 The Sun, Her¬
mes, Aphrodite, skopos in Leo;
Taurus; Zeus in the Hõro- Kronos in
Sagittarius; Ares in Libra; the Moon in
Capricorn. Such a one will be
commanding, a lord of life and
death, for the stars are found to
be properly situated. Another.2 The Sun, the Moon,
Zeus, the Hõroskopos in Aries;
Kronos, Aphrodite in Aquarius;
Ares in Gemini; Hermes in
Pisces. Such a one will be
commanding, sovereign, for the
lords of the trigon were found
to be upon pivot points and
marking the hour, and the Lot
and the Spirit and the Basis
and the Exaltation ended up on
the same zõidion. Ares, the
lord of these, falling amiss and
[unwitnessed in its place],3 1 L 86, VIII in Neugebauer, dated to most likely to Aug. 11, 86 C.E., or
possibly to Aug. 2, at about sunrise. This is based on disagreement between the
Kroll edition of the text and a manuscript called M. The Pingree edition we
have used supports Ncugebaueris position. [RH]
2 L 78 in Neugebauer, dated to April 1, 78 C.E. at about sunrise.
3 Some text problems here. [Additional by RH] This text restoration by the
editors of the Greek text which Schmidt has literally translated is not entirely
plausible since Ares is aspected liberally at least by sign, being in sextile to all
of the points in the first house, square to Hermes in the twelfth house, and
Kronos in the eleventh.
51 caused impediments and banishment and violent death, for he was also
lord of the conjunction.
Another.1 The Sun, Zeus,
Aphrodite in Pisces; the Moon
in Libra; Ares in Câncer;
Hermes in Aquarius; Kronos in
Scorpio; the Hõroskopos in Leo. Such a one will be estimable, powerful, for the Sun
had benefics as its spear bearers and was found to be lying
upon the Lot of Fortune along
with the ruler. And since the
co-sectarians of the trigon fell
amiss and the lord of the Spirit
was in aversion,2 he was banished and willingly departed. Ares was also opposed to the Acquisition,
and the lord of the Exaltation did not occupy a suitable place, but rather
it was afflicted by Kronos, it being in a superior position.3 Whence, we
spoke well earlier. If most of the figures or their lords should be found
suitably situated, they will come into reputation and make a display of
their style of living; but if the former should fali amiss while the latter
fali properly, the circumstances of reputation and of fortune will not last
long. 1 L 101, III in Neugebauer, dated to March 5, 101 C.E. at about Júpiter Plutão .M.
2 Neugebauer refers to this instance of apostrophos (translated by us as
‘aversion’, by him as turning ‘away’) as an exception to the general usage.
. . in No. L, 101, III, Satum, The ruler of Daimon’ is in sextile to this Lot.
Thus we have two cases in which apostrophos seems to mean something
different from ‘not in aspect.’ Neugebauer, op. cit., p. 13. However if kyrios,
lord, is replaced by kleros, lot, then the text gives us the Lot of Spirit as being
in aversion which is correct. [RH]
3 We take this to mean that Kronos has a longitude such that it will rise
first. It obvious does not refer to elevation. [RH]
52 28. Conceming the Propitious and Unpropitious Times of Life
from the Pivot Points and the Post-Ascensions
The times of good or bad fortune are to be comprehended from the
ascension of each zõidion or from the circular period of the star.1 That
is, for those who wish to inquire about the times of life, it is necessary
to attend to the Hõroskopos and the Moon or to the zõidion upon which
the lords are present;2 and for the action or reputation, to the Lot of
Fortune and Spirit and the Sun or to the conjunction or whole Moon, as
well as to the Exaltation and its lord. Those upon the Hõroskopos in the
first determination3 will begin to rule over the first period of time, then
those in the Midheaven or in the Descendant or in the subterraneous
place. And if these places should be empty, those upon the
post-ascensions. But if these should happen to be empty, then those in
the declines, even if they are not potent for such; they will however
administer these matters. Whether those planets which have gone past
the Hõroskopos and the Midheaven will apportion, and then those in the
remaining declines, nevertheless they will not apportion the complete
ascensions or periods; but rather, as much a part of the zõidion as they
can occupy, [they will apportion] a proportionate amount both of the
period and of the ascension. Júpiter For, those planets which are properly
figured upon the pivot points or post-ascensions and are found to be
oriental, especially those having a relationship to the matters of the
nativity, whichever they are, when they should be masters of the places
in question, they will apportion the ascension of the zõidion and [the
lords'] own periods, or the ascension and period of the zõidia upon
which the lords are present. 1 The phrase, “from the ascension of each zõidion or from the circular
period of the star,” is an important one. It introduces the two major methods for
extracting a period of time from a zõidion and a planet, by using the
ascensional time of the zõidion and the planetary periods of the planet. See my
introduction for further discussion of this method. [RH]
2 Presumably the lords of the Hõroskopos and the Moon. [RH]
3 That is, the first item in the list of things just given [RH] Júpiter This appears to be saying that the planets that are not on the pivot points
deliver not their whole periods, nor the entire ascension of the zõidion which
they occupy, but a proportional part according to how far along they are in said
zõidion. [RH]
53 Similarly also, it is necessary for those seeking the times to
compare the remaining places1 and masters (for example, concerning
one's living, siblings, parents, children, etc.), the stars that damage or
benefit, and what each of them is able to produce, in order that we
should not have to write about these things several times. For, their
natures are set out above, but we will also give reminders in the
upcoming chapters. Whether, then, it behooves us to distribute the least
period of the lord and that of that star lying upon it, then likewise the
ascension of the zõidion or that of that zõidion upon which the lord is,
it behooves us in another manner (just as we said above) to consider the
stars ruling the trigon.2 For if both should be well situated, the periods
of time will become estimable and helpful. If partly so, then [the
periods will become] similarly so. But if they should fali amiss, the
nativity will be irregular from beginning to end, or it will be upset with
griefs and dangers unless the Lot of Fortune or its properly figured lord
settles the nativity in prosperity and reputation according to its own
support. And if two or more stars should happen to be in one zõidion,
the period of each will act alone as it is being completed, and the
commixture of two or three stars will indicate the effect. Similarly also,
the ascension of the zõidion, after it has been completed, will again act
alone and together with the period of the star lying upon it or its lord.
And if such times from the ascensions and the periods either of benefic
or malefic stars or zõidia should coincide, both base and good things
will result for each period of time. 29. On Being Away from Home, from the [Writings] of
Hermippus3
Neither Petosiris nor the well-known king4 have spoken out on the
subject of being away from home, which is hard to grasp—or they have i.e., houses. [RH]
2 This sentence seems to be saying that whatever we might do with a
particular zõidion, its lord, any planets in it, and any zõidion occupied by the
lord, by way of timing, we must also consider the triplicity rulers.
3 Presumably an astrologer by that name, although there is an extant
Byzantine dialog between a Christian and an astrologer with that title. Júpiter Nechepso. [RH]
54 only said the following about this subject: “With regard to the times, if
some one of the malefics should make a phase, it will make the nativity
take place while away from home and in troubles.” Which is true, but
beyond these things they have nothing else on the subject of foreign
lands.
The most amazing Abraham in his books on this subject has given
us the explanations of others as well as his own, by discovering and
examining other [conditions] for nativities1 conducive to being away
from home which have the following theorems: While the lights are
setting, when Ares looks toward the decline of the Midheaven at the Lot
of Fortune, or toward the subterraneous hemisphere2 at the Moon or
most of the stars; or if the lord of the Fortune may be found toward the
Lot or the place that concems Foreign Lands,3 or diametrical to them;
or else the Fortune itself should fali wherever the Lot conceming BeingAway-from-Home does, while Ares should also be lying upon the Lot
or should be looking at the place—it makes nativities conducive to
being away from home. Similarly also, when [looking at] the Fortune
or the Spirit. 30. Concerning Being Away From Home4
The Lot concerning a Foreign Land5 is counted from Kronos to Ares 1 Here is a report of an ancient astrologer doing astrological research,
gathering charts of births under similar circumstances and examining these
charts for the astrological characteristics that could account for that kind of
birth.
2 See note to section 26.
3 See below, section 30. [RH] Júpiter apodêmia. This is not so much travelling abroad as being away from
home. The difference is slight conceptually but considerable psychologically.
One could infer from this entire section that the Greeks regarded being away
from home as an affliction and a misery—and not an opportunity to visit exotic
lands and have a holiday. Just note how it is the benefics that serve to minimize
being away from home, while it is the malefics that increase this condition.
5 We have two lots here, the Lot of Foreign Lands, and the Lot of Being
Away from Home. But only the formula for the fírst is given here. These may
be two titles for the same lot, but we will know until we see examples or some
other reference. [RH]
55 and an equal amount from the HõroskoposAnd the following
theorems2 cause the nativities to be readily moved, while the figures
stated by Abraham will also indicate in what seasons3 and times the
stays away from home will take place in such nativities. We will
additionally append some of my own observations on this subject. Let
none of those encountering [them] blame us if we should not
appropriate the labors and observations of others as some do, but we do
bear witness for those men. Júpiter We arrived at the forthcoming [theorems].
For the distinguishing, according to Abraham, of the propitious5
times of those matters which are distributed from the Spirit (for this
distributes), wherever the Lot concerning Spirit should fali in a nativity,
see, for the lord of the zõidion where the Lot will be found, how many
years its small circle happens to be,6 7 and distribute these among the 12
zõidia beginning from the Spirit itself in accordance with the order of
the zõidia1 Then again, whenever its circle should be filled, see, for the
lord of the zõidion next from the Spirit, how many years its circle
happens to be, and likewise distribute these. And again for the
succeeding zõidion if the nativity has years of life left remaining.8
If then the zõidion—wherever its times should happen to be—has a
place indicative of being away from home or the Lot concerning Being- 1 Asc. + cf - *). This formula appears as many different lots in the course
of things. In the Liber Hermetis it is the diumal formula for the Necessary
Place or House. In Al-Biruni it is the part of Necessity and Wish. and Enmity
among others. They all are lots of difficult import. [RH]
2 It is interesting to find such formal mathematical terminology used in an
astrological treatise.
3 kairos. Not time of year, but the more general sense of ‘season of one s
life.’ Júpiter By God, a refusal to plagiarize! [RH]
5 praktikos. Perhaps merely ‘effective’ would be better here, without any
sense of being favorable.
6 The small years of the planet. See my introduction. [RH]
7 We have no way of knowing whether one is supposed to allocate one
degree per year, or one zõidion per year. Both interpretations are possible, but
we will not know for certain until we see some examples of this technique.
Unfortunately there are none here. [RH]
8 This clearly assumes that one has previously computed the expected
length of life. [RH]
56 Away-From-Home or its diameter or square, or the stars subsequent to
the foundation1 should fali upon the zõidia taken Ifom its2 distribution,3
especially if the malefics are not on pivot points, they provide stays
away from home. The lord of the zõidion of the distribution, if it should
not be on a pivot point or should be in aversion to the zõidion while
being malefic, causes stays away from home. Even if it should be upon
a pivot point, it will cause them. Even if the malefics again have the
distributions while falling in the zõidia themselves or square them, they
provide stays away from home. And if a benefic should take on the
distribution itself, and it should be found upon a diameter of the
nativity, Júpiter it causes stays away from home and removais for the native.
When, again, the lords of the zõidia having the times or the
division5 should happen to be in aversion to the zõidia or opposed to
them or predominated by them or not upon pivot points, the zõidia
provide stays away from home.
Especially when opposed malefics regard the lights in the lunar or
solar [zõidia],6 it causes being away from home.
If the lord of the zõidion where the times7 are should not be on a 1 katabolê. The lords of the zõidia subsequent to that which founds the
process, that in which the Spirit falis?
2 The Spirifs distribution?
3 epimerismos. Júpiter It is not clear exactly what the benefic is opposed to here.
5 epidiairesis. [Additional by RH] From later Latin sources we have found
that a ‘division’ is a period of time indicated by the passage of a significator
through a boundary or term, the lord of the boundary being the lord of the
division. The signifícator, the Ascendant, M.C., Sun, Moon or Part of Fortune,
may be directed through a term by primary direction, or move through a
boundary at a profection rate of 30° per year. This of course assumes that
epidiaresis is the same as the Latin divisio. See Schoener, Opusculwn
Astrologicum, Book IV, Canon XII.
6 The phrase “lunar or solar [zõidia]" probably refers to the solar and lunar
halves of the zodiac, the lunar half being from Aquarius through Câncer, the
solar being from Leo through Câncer. But we do not know this for certain.
[RH]
7 A reference to chronocrators or rulers of time. These are most likely
derived from profections, but there are other possible derivations. We will get
the answer to this in subsequent books. [RH]
57 pivot point or should be opposed to it,1 it causes either moves or being
away from home, if [indeed] the Lot concerning Being-Away-FromHome should fali on [this zõidion] or on its diameter or square. But if
[the lord] should be in its own place or should be found in the squares,
they do noí give being away from home.
Hermes and Aphrodite, then, do not give long stays away from
home, but rather grant that the returns are quick.
If the two lots, that of Fortune and the Spirit, should fali in one
zõidion, while the Lot concerning Being-Away-From-Home should be
opposed to the zõidion or should square it, and some malefic should be
upon this place, the natives will experience being away from home.
Similarly also, when the Lot concerning Being-Away-From-Home is
opposite, the star having the times or the one set over the Lot of
Fortune, even if the two places (that of Fortune and that of Spirit)
should fali opposite, it happens to be the cause of removais or makes
the nativities be away from home, especially in the zõidia outside of
pivot points. But even if they should be upon pivot points, or again if
the zõidia where the distributions are should ha ve the places concerning
Foreign Lands and the Lot opposite or square,2 they cause the nativity
to be in the condition of being away from home. Similarly also, if they
should be subterraneous, they make those who are much away from
home.
If again the Lot concerning Being-Away-From-Home should fali on
the Hõroskopos or the Midheaven or the post-ascension of the
Midheaven, the nativity not being by nature conducive to being away
from home, or not having the figures in question, it does not make
those who are much away from home, but the natives are rarely away
from home, especially if they do not have malefics opposite.
And if the superterraneous zõidia should have the times or the
subdivision of the times apart from the twelfth or ninth zõidia, they do
not give stays away from home, as long as the Lot does not give
[them],3 or a malefic is not opposed or does not stand upon the zõidion
apart from benefics. When the subterraneous zõidia have the times, they
do give stays away from home, especially when the Lot concerning
Being-Away-From-Home falis on the subterraneous zõidia. 1 That is, when the lord of the zõidion opposes it. [RH]
2 Presumably the Lot of Being Away from Home. [RH]
3 There seem to be gender problems here in the text.
58 Again, if the Lots (that of Fortune and that concerning BeingAway-From-Home) should have malefícs standing upon them or
opposite, they provide frequent stays away from home.
If the planet which is lord of the Lot concerning Foreign Lands
should happen to be opposite to the zõidion having the times, it will put
the nativity in the condition of being away from home. And if the lord
of the Lot concerning Being-Away-From-Home should also fali together
with the Lot of Fortune on the subterraneous pivot point, it will make
those who are much away from home, especially when contemplated or
controlled1 by malefícs or by the lights. If it2 should fali upon one of
those zõidia gaining as its lot the possession of the distributions of the
times or monthly [intervals], it provides removais, especially if it should
have a malefic star opposite, or similarly also the lights should stand
upon the subterraneous declining places.3
If the distribution should happen to be less4 or opposite, the nativity
will be away from home by transit. But the superior stars,5 especially
in the very wet subterraneous zõidia having the distributions, cause
stays away from home, especially if the zõidia should have the lights or
malefícs lying upon them. But exceptionally, the underlying figures will
be more active if the year being spun out6 has movement for the native
in the place of being away from home,7 or those having nativities
especially conducive to being away from home from the above
foundational origin.8 And wherever the distribution of the general times
or their subdivisions should fali out, whether the lord of that zõidion is
upon a pivot point or not, whether it should not have one of the
malefícs opposite, or whether it should be lying upon one of the zõidia
of the lights, expeditions will result. And when they should be either
upon pivot points or declining, they give expeditions away from home. 1 katechõ. This seems to be a synomym for kathupertereõ, the condition
of predomination or superior position. See note 5, page 64, section 31.
2 Presumably, the subject here is still the lord of the Lot concerning Being
Away From Home.
3 The sixth and third houses. [RH]
41 don't understand what this means.
5 Mars, Júpiter and Satum. [RH]
6 Probably a reference to the profection of the year. [RH]
7 This refers presumably not to the lot but to a house or place. [RH]
8 Referring to the calculation at the beginning of this chapter.
59 And the malefics standing upon the declining zõidia or upon those
zõidia having the times or the subdivisions give stays away from home, especially for those having movement in the year.
Whenever the planet having the times should be found standing
upon the place concerning Foreign Lands or the Lot, or the lord of the
place concerning Foreign Lands should be so found, it provides stays
away from home, especially if a malefic should be square or diametrical
to a dark [degree].1 Similarly, even if the zõidion having the distribution
of the times should be opposite to the Lot concerning Being-AwayFrom-Home, they confer expeditions, especially in the declines. Again,
if the distributions of the times should fali on the declines, while zõidia
are not opposed or predominating, they do not provide stays away from
home, but some experience delays about going away from home and an
aborted departure.
Whenever a benefic should fali opposite to the malefics having the
times or the distribution, or should predominate, or, while it is
co-present in subterraneous zõidia, a year conducive to being away from
home should occur, they cause delays and hindrances of expeditions.
If the Fortune should fali on the place concerning Foreign Lands,
or the lots should fali opposite one another while a malefic stands upon
them or is opposite, it makes those who are liable to be away from
home, as long as a benefic is not mixed up with them or set upon one
of them. Also, if the lord of the Foreign Lands should happen to be
opposite to it (or them) apart from benefics, while Ares again falis
opposite the Lot of Fortune or the Lot concerning Foreign Lands or
stands upon one of them, it causes the native to have considerable stays
away from home. If again Ares should be lord of both lots, and it
should fali in aversion to the zõidia and to those that provide the stays
away from home, or it should fali upon very wet zõidia, it causes the
nativities to be conducive to being away from home.
Ares falling in aversion to the Lot or falling on the one concerning
Foreign Lands, while being the lord of none of them, does not provide
stays away from home, but rather those who spend most of their lives
in the fatherland, or those who suffer delays in going away from home.
Similarly also, if the lots should have benefics standing upon them, they
make those who are not fond of being away from home except rarcly. 1 Assuming that a degree is the only astrological object that is called
‘dark.’
60 It is necessary to fihd the figures for a nativity which do not readily
provide for being away from home because most nativities are
conducive to being away from home, some to constant and diverse stays
away fforn home, others to infrequent and few such stays, since the
figures causing stays away from home are plentiful in some, but not in
others; whence some natives become much travelled, others are subject
to moderate and not constant travelling.
As regards those who at birth have only a few figures conceming
being away from home, if the Lots concerning Being-Away-From-Home
and concerning Fortune at the birth and at the recasting of the nativity1
should fali on good [places], they do not confer expeditions, especially
when the year does not have a movement2 of being away from home;
but if it does have the said figures, they do cause stays away from
home.
Again, if the Lot concerning Being-Away-From-Home is
unconnected to the Fortune, especially when one lot has a benefic, it
will not make those who are fond of being away from home, but rather
those who spend their lives mostly in their fatherland.
Ares in aversion to the Lot conceming Foreign Lands causes short
moves.
When the Lot of Fortune has benefic stars lying upon it, it does not
give stays away from home, especially when they do not fali
subterraneously.
The Lot of Fortune falling upon the Midheaven while being in
aversion to the Lot conceming Being-Away-From-Home, not having a
malefic or light opposite, does not cause nativities conducive to being
away from home, but rather those who spend their lives in their
fatherland.
If the tw-o lots should fali together apart from [Ares] upon the
decline of the Midheaven, having no malefic standing3 upon the zõidion
opposite it, the natives do not readily undergo being away from home.
But when the lots have the two malefics lying upon them or opposite,
they make those who are much away from home, especially when the
zõidia where the lots lie are very wet. antigenesis. As in a solar retum.
2 kinêma. A slightly more general word for movement than kinêsis (as is
a political movement) which is here specified to being away from home.
3 ephistêmi.
61 When the Lot concerning Fortune falis well, having no malefic or
planet that predominates either the lights or the Lot concerning BeingAway-From-Home—especially when Ares is in aversion to the two
lots—they do not give stays away from home, but rather one who
wishes to go away from home does depart. For if Zeus should come to
be upon these zõidia by transit, it prevenis the expedition. But he is
away from home as an exception if the year should happen to be one
that falis out from the Hõroskopos on a decline in very wet zõidia.1 This
is especially so if a benefic does not stand upon it by transit or at birth;
also when the lord of the times gives over2 the year to the lord of the
Lot concerning Being-Away-From-Home, especially when a malefic is
looking on, or the reverse, the lord of the Lot to the lord having the
times. 31. Concerning the Predeceasing of the Parents, with Illustrations
Many have given various explanations about the predeceasing of the
parents, but after examining them, we ourselves find as follows: Since
the Sun and secondly Kronos signify the father, the one more precisely
associated3 with the Moon by day and by night (that is, the one being
regarded by the Moon and the one co-present with it by existing in [its]
house or trigon) Júpiter —that is the one assuming the paternal place. Similarly
also, Aphrodite and the Moon assume the maternal place. For each
nativity, then, it will be necessary to consider which one is more
contemplated by malefics, or which one has fallen more amiss, whether
the Sun or the Moon or Aphrodite or Kronos, although [Kronos] is itself
the destroyer of the father, for if the Sun in assuming the paternal place
is scrutinized by Ares or Kronos while the benefics are absent, the
predeceasing concerns the father; but if the Moon or Aphrodite are so,
it concerns the mother. And if both the lights or Aphrodite should be
scrutinized by malefics, the one that has fallen amiss or is found out of 1 Presumably applying one of the profection methods that count from the
Ascendant assigning one year per zõidion.
2 paradidõmi. This refers to passing on the chronocratorship of an age of
life to the chronocrator of the next age.
3 prosoikeioõ. What follows appears to be a defínition of this relationship. Júpiter kai sumparõn ê en oikõi ê trigõnõi huparchõn. 62 sect signifíes the predeceasing.
Otherwise. If the paternal lot should fali in a masculine zõidion or
its lord is being witnessed by a malefic, it signifíes the predeceasing of
the father. Similarly also, the same will result for the maternal lot,
especially if someone knows if the father is quite safe from danger.
Otherwise. Take [days] from the arising of Sirius until the natal
day, and subtract by twelves from the conjoined number. And with what
is left over less than 12, depart from the Moon at one [count per
zõidion]. If then it leaves off at a masculine zõidion, the father will
predecease; if at a feminine zõidion, the mother. For example, for
upcoming birth of the 13th of Mechir: From the 25th of Epiphi to the
13th comes to 203. Subtract 16 twelves. The remainder is 11.
[Departing] with these from the Moon in Scorpio, it leaves off in Virgo,
a feminine zõidion. Ares was also there. The predeceasing took place
with the mother.
Otherwise. As an illustration,1 let the nativity be the
Sun, Hermes in Aquarius; the
Moon in Scorpio; Kronos in
Câncer; Zeus in Libra; Aphrodite in Capricorn; Ares, the
Hõroskopos in Virgo. Kronos,
then, having been closely
associated with the Moon by
being found in Câncer at night
and being the ruler of the Sun,
assumed the paternal place.
And it was looked at by Zeus
and Aphrodite while occupying
the Good Spirit. But the Moon and Aphrodite, having been scrutinized2
by the two malefics, signifíed the predeceasing of the mother.
Otherwise. When the Sun should scrutinize the Moon, the mother
predeceases; but if the Moon the Sun, the father. And if neither one
should scrutinize the other and should occur unfigured, I take Kronos 1 L 120, Gêmeos in Neugebauer dated to Feb. 8, 120 C.E. at about 7 Plutão .M. The
text does not give the Lots of Fortune and Spirit. I have supplied them. [RH]
2 The reader should note that much of the “scrutinizing” is by trine and
sextile. Hard aspects are not required. [RH]
63 and Aphrodite. If these should not, Kronos and the Moon. If, then, the
Sun should scrutinize and Aphrodite comes in between, it will
intervene1 in the predomination. Know, then, that Kronos will never be
predominated by [Aphrodite], And the earlier passing away will either
concern the father, or the reverse from Kronos and Aphrodite. And if
the planet intervening in between those which are predominating each
other should not be one possessing a power that is predominative, the
intercepted2 planets will be suitably tensed3 to accomplish the specific
effect. And predominations [do] come about in the same zõidion and
diameter; in general, the star approaching another also predominates it,
or else the one among the pair4 that has a power which is predomina¬
tive.5 1 mesembolêsei tên kathuperterêsin. Cf. section 36 of Antiochus' Thesaurus.
2 mesembolos. Literally, the ‘intervened’ planets.
3 eutoneõ. Júpiter ho tên met' allêlõn dunamin echõn.
5 The word translated as ‘predominate’ throughout this paragraph is
kathupertereõ, which we have usually translated as ‘be in superior position’ in
accordance with the second meaning in section 26 of Antiochus' Thesaurus. In
this context it clearly refers to more than right hand position. We now think the
translation of ‘to tithe’ suggested for epidekateuõ in the notes to section 16 of
Book I of Hephaistio as the first meaning of kathuperthereõ is incorrect, and
have reverted to our earlier conjecture of ‘to be upon the tenth house’ suggested
in the Thesaurus, which puts the two planets in a square relationship. If that
reading is correct, it might explain why Valens here seems to be broadening the
deíinition of kathuperthereõ to include conjunctions and oppositions.
emphasizing yet another meaning mentioned in Hephaistio which considers the
approaching planet to be the predominating one. And in the last clause he even
seems to include other types of overpowering. With all this in mind, we may
have to reconsider some of our previous translations of this important word in
earlier Project Hindsight publications. 64 32. Concerning Parents from the [Writmgs] of Timaeus
The matters concerning the father,1 then, are taken thusly: by day, the
Sun will be consulted and the zõidion upon which the Sun stands; [by
night]2 the lord of the zõidion upon which Zeus stands and the zõidion
welcoming Zeus. The matters concerning the mother are taken thusly:
by night from the lunar zõidion upon which the Moon stands and from
the house steward of the Moon; by day from Aphrodite and the zõidion
upon which Aphrodite stands. Whenever, then, the ones being consulted
in accordance with their own sect3 should be found in their own house4
or their own exaltations, having a benefic over them in the tenth place5
or else being witnessed6 by one in any way at all, and should not be
declining and should be in a place in which they take delight while not
being afflicted by one of the malefics, they show the matters concerning
the parents to be estimable and notable and bright. But if the one that
has to signify the matters concerning the parents should be witnessed
by one of the destroyers7 with the presence of the hurling of rays or
being in the tenth place, or should be found in a place in which it does
not take delight, it will indicate that the parents will be obscure and
disreputable.
And the hosts8 to the indicative one will also co-indicate the matters 1 This is somewhat different from the preceding in that the Lot of the
Father and the Mother are not the basis for beginning house counting, but the
places of the Sun and Júpiter, and their lords for the father, and the Moon and
Venus and their lords for the mother. This is similar to Ptolemy's method in the
Tetrabiblos. It is clear that more than one method was used in ancient times.
[RH]
2 This addition seems to be required from the upcoming parallel
construction dealing with the mother.
3 For the father the Sun by day and Zeus by night, for the mother
Aprhodite by day and the Moon by night. [RH] Júpiter That is, sign. [RH]
5 Passive form of epidekateuõ. [Additional by RH] The place or house here
may be intended to be counted from the zõidion of the planet in question, not
the Hõroskopos.
6 aspected. [RH]
7 phthoropoios, lit. “destruction maker.”
8 That is, the stars that welcome the indicative star to the zõidion that they
rule.
65 concerning the parents by position and the witnessing of the other stars,
whether good or bad. If, then, the star indicative of the matters
concerning the parents should fali amiss as to place and should be
afflicted by one of the destroyers, and its host should either be found to
have set under the beams of the Sun, or else neither it nor the indicative
maltreated one should have dealings in the place concerning the parent,
but it should rather be in aversion, it will indicate that the parent will
be depressed and obscure and ignoble. And if in addition to not having
dealings, they should also be afflicted by destroyers while they regard
[them] or by co-presence, they indicate that the parents will be slaves
and subordinates. If, however, while the one indicating the matters
concerning the parents should decline or be otherwise afflicted, the host,
being well situated, should have dealings in the place concerning
parents, having the indicative star as one having dealings in a place not
afflicted by one of the destroyers, they indicate the harm or penalty or
ruin or exile of the parents. When Kronos is culminating, Zeus
subterraneous, it signifies that the father is a slave or a subordinate or
an exile, especially if the Sun is afflicted.
The Lot of the Father is taken thusly: For a diurnal nativity, from
the Sun to Kronos and an equal amount from the Hõroskopos (some
take it from the Sun to Zeus and an equal amount from the Hõroskopos)', [by night from Kronos to the Sun. The Lot of the Mother is
taken by night from the Moon to Aphrodite,]1 by day from Aphrodite
to the Moon, and an equal amount from the Hõroskopos. The Lot of
Parents, then, is found . . .[Lacuna in text.]
One must take the adoption of the father from the diameter dropped
down from the Lot. If the lord of the Lot of the Father should happen
to be upon the diameter, or the lord of the diameter upon the Lot, it
indicates that the father is adopted. Similarly also, if the lord of the Lot
of the Mother should be found in the diameter, and the lord of the
diameter of the Lot of the Mother should be found in the Lot of the
Mother, it will indicate the something similar. 33. Concerning the Bereavement of Fathers
Ares with the Sun square Kronos causes bereavement. Kronos and Ares 1 Bracketed portion supplied by editor of the Greek text. 66 similarly configured with Hermes while Zeus is not regarding them
make for the bereavement of parents, Kronos with Zeus while setting
causes bereavement. The Moon in a bicorporeal zõidion and witnessed
by Zeus makes for two fathers.1 And if Aphrodite should mark the hour,
and the Moon should be subterraneous in the house of Ares, and Zeus
should witness ffom its own house, it will make for two fathers.
One must take the characters of the parents ffom the stars that are
confígured. Kronos will show those who are sullen, jealous, deeply
depraved, suspicious, foul, secretive, those who are surrounded by
suffering, indecent, those who squander, concerning divine matters. . .
, [Lacuna in text] those who are dear to the great. Zeus will show those
who love goodness, who are brilliant, munifícent, possessing leisure,
cheerful. Ares those who are audacious, irascible, precipitate, insolent,
reckless, restless, dangerous, drunks, laborious. For the mother, when
Ares prevails2 over the Moon or rules over Aphrodite, it indicates that
the mother is rough and an adulteress and one who is burdened by acute
suffering ffom blood or decay if no benefic should alleviate it by
looking on. But when Aphrodite bears witness to the lights, it shows the
parents to be are merry, fond of music and good cheer, affectionate, and
religious. Hermes shows the parents to be social and economical, those
who take part in conversation or Science, but those who also lie about
many things or those who behave badly toward more needy persons.
It also behooves us to take the places into account. The Sun lying
in a masculine zõidion and witnessed by a masculine star indicates that
the father will be well-born; but in a feminine zõidion witnessed by the
Moon, it shows him to be idle and effeminate. The Sun in a feminine
zõidion witnessed by Kronos and Aphrodite indicates that the father will
be neither secure nor unknown. The Moon in a feminine zõidion
witnessed by a feminine star shows the mother to be domineering and
irascible; but in a masculine zõidion and witnessed by a masculine star,
it shows her to be irascible and unconquerable. In feminine zõidia and
witnessed by Zeus, it shows the mother to be gentle and kind. 1 dipatõr. This is not a standard lexical entry.
2 katischõ. This may be used here synonymousiy with kathupertereõ
translated as ‘predominate’ above.
67 34. Concerning the Separation of the Parents1
When Ares and Kronos intervene2 between the lights or fali as
intermediates, either with respect to the planets welcoming them or with
respect to their rays, they separate the parents. Whenever the one of the
lights in sect should fali amiss, while the light out of sect should be
co-present with the other as a destroyer, it separates the parents. If the
lord of the Hõroskopos should have dealings, and the Hõroskopos
should be afflicted, and its co-ruler should have fallen amiss, the parents
of such a one will be separated, and he will be unsettled in many things
and have misfortune, and the property of his parents will be diminished.
The parents live harmoniously whenever the lights and their rulers
are harmoniously related to each other. Whenever the host of the Sun
should be harmoniously related to the Moon, and that of the Moon to
the Sun, the parents will live harmoniously.
Whichever one of the lights should be lying out of sect, or else should
be cancelled by a destroyer or have one in the tenth place3 from it and
be linked to it, or be diametrical to one, if [this light] should be carried
first to the Descendant, or if its place should have the worst disposition,
[that parent] Júpiter will die earlier. 1 When this expression occurred in the decan delineations in Hephaistio.
Book I, we did not know whether it meant the separation of the parents from
each other or from the child. It is now clear that it means the former.
2 mesemboleõ. They intervene by hurling their rays in between the two. Cf.
Thesaurus, section 36, where it says the following:
“There is intervention whenever a star should hurl its rays onto the
intermediate degrees of the application.”
But it seems that Ares and Kronos can also intervene when the lord of the
zõidion in which either of them occurs hurls its rays between the lights or is
itself bodily in between them.
3 dekateuõ. This is evidently the relationship defíned in section 26 of the
Thesaurus. Júpiter The text has a singular subject understood in the verb. The father for the
Sun, or the mother for the Moon? 68 If the Moon should be waxing as well as1 if the birth should be at
a conjunction, and one of the destroyers should look upon the first
Whole Moon, when it takes place in a feminine zõidion, it will indicate
the predeceasing of the mother; but in a masculine zõidion, of the
father. If the birth is at a Whole Moon, one must consider the upcoming
conjunction: in a feminine zõidion while a malefic is giving [the Moon]
over2 the mother will die earlier; in a masculine zõidion, the father. And
if the Sun should happen to be in the subterraneous hemisphere, for the
most part the father will die in a foreign land. And if the star of Zeus
should be witnessed by a malefic, and should be declining while a
malefic is post-ascending, it indicates that the father will die in a
foreign land. When Kronos is separating ffom a pivot point, if it should
apply3 to Ares and one of them should bear witness to Zeus or the Sun,
the father will die in a foreign land. If in a diurnal birth the Moon
should be afflicted under the earth, or while the Moon is declining a
destroyer is applying, or the same afflictions arise for Aphrodite, the
mother will die earlier. If the ruler of the Sun and the Sun should not
look at the Hõroskopos, the father will die in a foreign land. When the
Sun is afflicted by a destroyer and Zeus is being predominated, the
father will die a violent death. When Kronos alone, then, afflicts the
aforementioned star, the cause of death becomes choking, dropsy,
fluxions, chilis, poisonings, shipwrecks, or old troubles. But when it is
Ares alone that afflicts, the cause of death becomes a cut from iron, a
bite, fullness of blood, abortion, premature childbirth, inflammation, a
fali, or the violence of both hands ífom the combination of bending 1 The text simply has ‘and’ here, reading ‘If the Moon is waxing and the
birth is at a conjunction,’ which would seem to be contradictory.
2 kakopoiou epidontos autên. The exact astrological sense of epididõmi in
this genitive absolute clause is unclear. By parallel construction with the
preceding sentence we would expect it to be some sort of aspect word, but I
cannot construct such a meaning from the root word.
3 epipherõ. This verb can also mean ‘to bear down upon’ or ‘attack,’ but
in this context ‘apply’ seems appropriate. Semantically, epipherõ is closer to the
traditional word ‘apply’ than is sunaptõ, which has more the meaning of ‘to
join’ and is the word we have encountered before paired with ‘separation.’ Cf.
Paulus, section 17. Incidentally, this is the first time we have had applying and
separating attributed to a body other than the Moon.
69 while also throwing.1 35. Concerning Births Which Are Suitable to Freedmen and
Slaves
Differences concerning family2 and subordinate or well-bom births are
taken from the phases of the birth.3 For if the zõidion of the phase or
the lord of the zõidion should fali amiss or should be scrutinized by
malefics, the nativities will be more ignoble, or else those which are put
down after acquiring reputation and trust. And if the phase should be
found to be upon a pivot point, and the lord should be witnessed by
good planets, lhey will be well-bom and estimable. And if the place
should happen to be in profitable zõidia while the lord should fali amiss
or be scrutinized by malefics, then after being bom freedmen or having
been raised well, they are upset with oppositions and submissions and
insufficiencies. And if the lord should be found in profitable zõidia
while the place should fali amiss, then after having been in a plight over
submissions in their early years and having been carried along in an
erratic fashion, they will be successful and will be held in esteem,
especially if benefics should be inclining. And if the place and the lord
should also fali amiss and both should be scrutinized by malefics, then
after having been taken captive, they will have the experience of
submission. But if, while these things are so, benefics should be
co-present or should give their testimony as well, then having been
released ffom submission after the times of the malefics, Júpiter they will
come into superiority. And if the place should be watched over5 by
malefics while the lord is watched over by benefics, then after having
been born subordinate, they will be turned into freedmen, or they will
advance by the substitution6 and the production of children.7 But 1 kata tên epiballousan tes kliseos sumplokên. This translation is a bit of
a guess.
genos. Here referring to one's clan, whether noble or base.
3 The word ‘phase’ refers to location of the New or Full Moon preceding
birth. [RH] Júpiter Their periods, ascensional times?
5 phroureõ. Yet another aspect word.
6 huperbolê. That is, the secret substitution of one child for another.
70 conversely, if the place is watched over by benefics while the ruler is
watched over by maiefics, then after having been bom freedmen, they
will revert to slavery, or else after having come to the end of their
prime they will voluntarily give themselves up to submission, either on
account of lack of subsistence or on account of credit and commercial
transaction.1 36. The 11 Figures of the Moon in relation to the Power of their ;
Effects
The figures of the Moon are 7 by a natural reckoning, but we have
found 11 just as in others. First is Conjunction; second, Rising; then
when it is 45 degrees away from the Sun it makes its a phase which is
Crescent;2 then until 90 degrees, Half; then until 135 degrees,
Double-Convex; then until 180 degrees, Whole Moon; then when it is
45 degrees away from Whole Moon (which is 225) it makes its second
Double-Convex phase; then until 270 degrees, the second Half; then
until 315 degrees, the second Crescent; then until 360 degrees the
Setting phase. There is also another figure of it when it first begins to
wane.
What Each Phase Signifi.es and What Kinds of Effects It Has — We
will append how the figures in question are also taken in relation to
their effect-description3 and how they and are fitting for a certain god.
The Conjunction, then, gives indications for reputation and power and
kingly and sovereign dispositions, and for all of the public activities
connected with cities, and for parents and marriages and mysteries, and
for all general and cosmic matters. Similarly also, the lord of the
Conjunction both of latitude4 and of the course.
The Rising of the Moon (which is called Light) and the lord of this •7 By bearing the illegitimate children of the well-bom?
1 This seems to refer to some sort of voluntary indenture.
2 mênoeidês. Literally, moon-form.
3 apotelesmatographia. It seems fairly clear in this context that this word
does not refer to the a chart itself, but to a tabulation of effects corresponding
to certain figures. Júpiter Meaning unclear. [RH]
71 gives indications for the determination concerning length of life and
what one does and concerning the support for what is about to be, and
confirms the actions of the Conjunction. And just as the monthly and
cosmic movements are considered from the first visibility, so the lord
of the light1 shows the general effects. Hermes also joins in assisting
until the 4th day of the Moon.
The Crescent formation signifies the upset and the expectations in
life, and what concerns women and mother. And Hermes assists until
the 8th.
The Half formation gives indications concerning injuries and
ailments and whatever happens violently; and furthermore, concerning
children and worth and future goods. And Aphrodite is configured until
the 12th comes about.
The Double-Convex phase gives indications concerning happiness
and future advancement and being away from home and the sympathy
of kin. And the Sun is also similar until the 14th comes about.
The Whole Moon gives indications concerning good and ill repute
and being away from home, also concerning things that happen
violently, and concerning things that issue forth from excess and things
that wax from the least, and concerning sympathies and ailments and
political opposition and sympathies of parents. And it also has the color
of the setting zõidion.
The first lord of the waning of the light gives indications
concerning the diminishment of belongings and difficulties2 and things
that go toward depression, and concerning sudden falis. And Ares is
equipotent to the post-descension and is lord until the 21 st day of the
Moon.
The second Double-Convex gives signs for being abroad and
greater actions and for happiness. And Zeus is equipotent to the god and
lord until the 25th day of the Moon.
The second Half gives signs for old matters and ailments of long
duration and for children. For, Kronos is equipotent until the 30th
comes about.
The lord of the Crescent gives signs concerning the death of the
wife and inactivity and plundering.
Finally, the setting gives signs for bonds and constrictions and 1 That is, the lord of this rising phase. 2 psuxis praktike. Literally, ‘of cooling activity.’
72 hidden matters, for accusations and disenfranchisements.
And the order of the figures of the Moon is thus, but the
commixtures with the 5 gods and the Sun are [are in agreement] with
the pivot points.
Wanting, then, to set out more concise demonstrations of the [treatments] of the schools,1 since I deprecate loquacities and juggling
with fables, I have attached the summaries themselves for those
especially eager for such things and for those who try their hand at
many kinds of training, and for those able to bring forward equal
[details] through the specific notions. For I intend to persuade them,
through what has already been written and through what is about to be
said, to lay aside what is not trustworthy and what is easily misrepresented in Science, and I intend to demonstrate that immortal prognostication is in danger with regard to the ignorance and nonsense of those
who oppose the calcuiators.2 3 Whence those lovers of learning already
practiced in the arithmetical and didactic disciplines will obtain a
supremacy of opinion through this treatise, as long as they are not also
uninitiated in the construction of the canons and introductory matters,
which I did not wish to prefix and repeat. And if we also seem to
compile and interpret the dogmas of the ancients by means of that
which is secure and unbiased and suitably didactic in the treatments of
the schools, by this we will obtain a virtuous commendation from those
encountering it. For, others who make use of loquacity and diverse
methods and make a show of interpretation have in addition overthrown
the pre-existent opinion of prognostication, and they have declared a
belief to be Hellenic by decking out a barbaric opinion with arguments.
One should regard these people as making a display in the manner of
Sirens, who, inviting sailors with a seductive and plaintive sound made
by musical instruments and destructive song, annihilate them on the sea
rocks. Some are affected the same way, and those who encounter the
schools of those [Sirens] have suffered. Those who have been charmed
with a display and adducing of arguments in favor of commencements,
and those who have fallen into a limitless wood and have not found a 1 hairesis.
2 This would seem to refer to an attack on mathematics in general, such
as that staged by Sextus Empiricus.
3 archê. This would seem to be a diatribe against horary astrology. 73 way out, are annihilated not only in the deep but in the labyrinth, while
those who seem to have escaped the danger, by having encountered a
grievous and manifold torture, have a wretched end. If, then, someone
having the wisdom of Odysseus should sail by these, he leaves behind
in his life this august knowledge; having been associated or conversam
with it, he will always fínish his time by taking pleasure in extirpating
the malignant opinions of those who contravene the righteous custom
of the mysteries. Whence if we let them alone, we will end up returning
to their view.1 37. Concerning Injury and Ailment, with Illustrations for Each
Zõidion—for example, Aries Causes a Certain Injury or Ailment,
and so forth.
Since the ancients wrote obscurely about the matter of injury, we will
give a clearer explanation. Some, then, in giving their attention to the
underlying corporeal and psychical places, making a start for the objects
of concern2 in the birth of every native from the Lot of Fortune and
Spirit, make known the matter of injuries and ailments with reference
to the presence of the malefics. For example, the Lot of Fortune, the
breast; the 2nd, the rib; the 3rd, the belly; the 4th, the haunches; the 5th,
the small part; the 6th, the thighs; the 7th, the knees; the 8th, the shins;
the 9th, the feet; the 10th, the head; the 11 th, the face, neck; the 12th,
the arms, the shoulders.3 And the illnesses from the Spirit, for the Spirit 1 This whole section seems to be misplaced. It is not clear what summaries
Valens is referring to at the beginning of this paragraph unless it is what
immediately precedes, but that hardly seems to justify this paragraph as an
digression. The discussion seems to be more appropriate for a preface or
introduction. Perhaps it is part of the missing introduction to the whole
anthology alluded to at the beginning of the present book.
2 tõn melõn.
o The reader should notice the order of the body parts and the places of the
Lot of Fortune. They come in exactly the same order as those normally
associated with the signs or zõidia, but they start with the body parts normally
assigned to Câncer assigned to the zõidion of the Lot. This association of the
first place or house with Câncer is typical of Egyptian astrology and strongest
suggests that the lore of the lots, or at least this Lot, comes from the Egyptian
tradition. [RH] 74 itself is the heart; the 2nd zõidion, the inner cavity;1 the 3rd, that
through which the sperm is carried and the place of the kidneys; the
4th, the colon; the 5th, the liver; the 6th, the second cavity;2 the 7th, the
bladder; the 8th, the bowels; the 9th, the place of membranes and teeth
and ears; the 10th, the gullet; the 11 th, the tongue; the 12th, the
stomach. These have been indicated for Leo for the latter, and Câncer
for the former, since the Moon is the Fortune of the cosmos,3 while the
Sun is mind and spirit.
And those before us [had] these. But by experience the [assignments] seemed to us to be more precisely as follows. For let it be the
case that Ares generally signifies the matters concerning the head and
the sense-organs and eyes. This place, then, as for the alleviation that
we care about, causes headaches, weak sight, apoplexy, poor hearing,
dulling of vision, leprosy, skin eruptions, runny sores, mange, baldness,
insensitivity, putrefaction, attacks of flatulence, callouses, overgrown
flesh, and whatever usually accompanies the sense-organs and hearing
and the teeth.
Taurus signifies the neck, face, gullet, the sense of smell, the nose,
bulging due to a ring and lameness due to bending of the foot, pain in
the eyes, and dangerous causes or maiming due to the Pleiades. This
zõidion is servile and foul-doing. And it causes spasms, excision of the
uvula, malignant ulcers, glandular swellings in the neck, or choking,
injuries, ailments, or pains to the nostrils, falis ffom heights or ffom
quadrupeds, ffactures of limbs, throat tumors, mutilation, hip-disease,
abscesses.
Gemini is the shoulders, arms, hands, fingers, joints, tendons,
strength manly spirit, change, generation of females, speech, mouth,
wind-pipe, voice. When it is afflicted, it produces injuries in these areas,
and it brings them into the paths of robbers and hostile soldiery, and
they are upset with traumas and cuts and excisions of the limbs, or it
produces those prone to jaundice or falis from heights.
Câncer is the breast, stomach, jaws, spleen, mouth, private places. 1 hé entos koilia.
2 koilia. 3 This is Valens' explanation for the places of the Lot ot Fortune starting
from the equivalem of the sign Câncer. [RH1
75 darkening of vision and maiming due to the nebulae.1 And in this place
are made leprosies [in general], dull-white leprosies [in particular], skin
eruptions, apoplexies, those prone to dropsy (the cause being the
spleen), those who walk obliquely or somewhat lamely, those who are
mutilated, those prone to jaundice, those who are variously colored,
protrusions of the teeth or the eyes, those who squint a little, those who
lose their eyelashes or have swollen eyelids, those who are crooked,
those who are harmed by wild animais of the water, and those who
have moles around their eyes and spots in the corner of their eyes, those
who are prone to cough, bringing up phlegm, dropsy,2 pleurisy,
pneumonia.
Leo is the ribs, the loins, the heart, manhood, vision, tendons. They
become, then, maniacs, those who are god-inspired, and those who are
drawn in by violence and depravity, those who undergo dislocations of
the limbs or mutilation through manly contests or training of the body,
and those who are harmed their eyes. And it is a cause of bad breath;
whence it also makes those who are shameful or castrated, liable to
fractures, those who fali from heights or quadrupeds, and those who are
bitten by wild animais, and those who sustain injury by the collapsing
[of buildings] or conflagrations; furthermore, those who experience
melancholy, cankers, and unnatural lust.
Virgo is the intestines, entrails, and the inner private parts. Whence
it also produces both causes of ailments, and those persons who are
weaker, or restrained and bashful in regard to sexual intercourse. (In
order that we should not seem prolix, the injury and ailment are clear
according to nature of the zõidion and the star.)
Libra is the hips, buttocks, colon, the member, and hind parts. And
this place causes paralysis, lesions, hérnias, dysentery, dropsy, and
stones.
Scorpio is the private parts, and the fundament. And it also causes
the darkening of vision due to its sting, maiming, weak-vision, stones,
stranguries, foot diseases, those with much gut, fistulas.
Sagittarius is the thighs, and the groin. And they become those who
are variously colored, those having birth marks, those who are bald, 1 This is because in Valens' day the nebulous cluster Praesaepe was in the
sign as well as the constellation of Câncer. This description would not apply to
a purely tropical sign of Câncer. [RH]
2 sic. [RH] 76 those who are weak-sighted or with eye troubles or maiming, those with
bad breath, gout; and it causes falis from quadrupeds, dislocations of
limbs, harm from beasts, extra limbs.
Capricom is the knees, the tendons, and internai as well as externai
ailments due to its being an enigmatical zõidion. And it causes the
darkening of vision, disabling due to the spike, and maniacs; those who
are harmed by moisture; furthermore, it causes phrenitis; and Caunian
women,1 tribades, licentious ones; those who are servile, foul-doers.
Aquarius is the buttocks, shoulders, tendons, and joints. And it
makes those who suffer from elephantiasis, those prone to jaundice,
who are sallow, maimed, prone to dropsy, maniacs, those who are
castrated, those liable to fractures, and stranguries for some.
Pisces is the feet, tendons, and extremities. And they become
arthritic, those who have white skin, skin eruptions, leprosy, those who
are prone to vice, blameworthy, much injured, with extra limbs,
faltering of speech, hard of hearing, mangy, those who are harmed by
beasts of the waters, or those who are troubled with ailments connected
with moisture.
With these things being so, it will be necessary to examine more
precisely for every birth the Lot of Fortune, with reference to what kind
of zõidion it falis in (and the nature of the zõidion signifies the injury),
and especially the lord of the Lot of Fortune with reference to whatever
kind of zõidion it should be. Similarly also, it will be necessary to
consider the Spirit and its lord, with reference to what kind of zõidion
it falis in (and these will indicate the ailment). And they will be
likewise known to you with reference to the place conceming what one
does. The injuries and the ailments, then, will become more active when
malefics should be upon the places or the rulers, or should witness
them. The lack of injuries and ailments result whenever the places
should happen to be well situated and the rulers unafflicted. Each star,
then, will cause its specific effect from the nature it obtained as its lot.
For if by way of hypothesis the Lot should fali in Aries, and Ares its
lord should be there and it has authority over both Aries and Scorpio,
[we should] foretell injury to the head or parts or fundament. The star
will produce what it is accustomed to producing by its own nature; for
sometimes, when both places are afflicted, both the injuries and the 1 Women who indulge in illicit love, after Caunis, brother and lover of
Byblis. 77 ailments occur, and especially whenever malefics should have the
authority or should bear witness.
As a illustration1 (in order 8 that we may not seem to have
spoken cryptically), let the Sun,
Zeus, Ares be in Capricorn; the
Moon, the Hõroskopos in Leo;
Kronos, in Taurus; Aphrodite,
Hermes in Aquarius. The Lot
of Fortune is [in Capricornj; Sol H ) 22 the lord of the Fortune in
Taurus. He came to be maimed
because of the Pleiades2 and
the malefic Kronos. And he did ^
unspeakable things because of Tíl
both zõidia', for Zeus also, the
lord of the Spirit in Pisces, was found in Capricorn. And from these
things gout was indicated. Of course, the ailment and the injury was
sufficiently found from the Lot3 and the Lord. 1 L 87, I in Neugebauer, dated to Jan. Mercúrio , 87 C.E. about 8 Plutão .M. [RH]
2 Which is in Taurus.
3 Presumably the Lot of Spirit which is in Pisces. Neugebauer seems lo
think the text refers to the Lot of Fortune. [RH] 78 Another.1 The Sun, Aphrodite. Ares in Sagittarius; the
Moon in Libra; Kronos
Câncer [Gemini];2 Zeus in
in Virgo; Hermes in Scorpio; the
Hõroskopos in Capricom. The
Lot is in Scorpio. His parts3
were injured. The lord of Scorpio was in Sagittarius. He
was bald-headed and maimed
by an arrow. And since Zeus,
the lord of Ares and of the
Spirit, was found in the place
concerning God, he was made
to recover his sight through God; and he also became a soothsayer.
Whence also, when the benefics fali poorly, they cause upset with
injuries and ailments; and when the malefics fali well, they are not
injurious, introducing only the causes and the temporal considerations.
And if the planets having authority over the Lot or Spirit should happen
to be somehow intercepted4 or witnessed in the God or Goddess by
malefics, they produce chanters or maniacs or those who are prescient.
Indeed, the compiler has said “If the one showing the injury should be
scrutinized by a malefic while happening to be upon a powerful place,
the fortuitous ailments will become hard to wipe out and incurable. But
if a benefic should be upon the place for feeling pain or should bear
witness to it, [the ailments] will be removed by physicians or with the
help of God.” He says, then, that the pivot points and the two postascensions of the Lots are powerful places, and especially whenever the
malefics should be upon them while being allotted them. It is needful, 1 L 118 in Neugebauer, dated to Nov. 26, 118 C.E. about 8 A.M. This
chart appears several times in the Anthology, but in this first rendition Kronos
is listed erroneously in Câncer. In the other versions Kronos is listed correctly
in Gemini. We have given the correct position in the chart. [RH]
2 Actually Gemini, see previous note. [RH]
3 Presumably ‘private parts’? [RH] Júpiter enapolambanõ. More literally, ‘cut off and enclosed.’ [Additional by RH]
This cannot be understood as ‘intercepted’ in the modem sense of the word.
With whole-sign houses there can be no interceptions.
79 then, to examine the lots more precisely and to the degree. For often
times, the lot falis out in a certain zõidion by the platic1 consideration,
but by the consideration of degree in another zõidion.2 This results from
the degrees of the lights and the Hõroskopos, when [theyl are found
either at the end or beginning of the zõidia.
In general, then, the Sun, the Moon, Kronos, and Hermes, when
they are diametrical or post-aseending, introduce injuries that concern
vision and the causes of other ailments or mania or apoplexy. When the
Sun is post-ascending or when it exists in the same zõidion as Ares, it
produces those who bring up phlegm, those who spit up blood, those
will heart problems, and it produces injuries to the eyes. When Kronos
and Ares are in the subterraneous hemisphere either together or alone,
they produce those with weak vision or those liable to fits, or seers of
gods or the dead and initiates of the mysteries or the unspeakable. They
produce similar things even if they should predominate or oppose the
Conjunction or Whole Moon or the Moon by itself. Or if they should
scrutinize while the Moon is putting an end3 to a certain phase, they
produce maniacs, ecstatics, epileptics, those who chant. 1 platikos. Literally. ‘pertaining to width.’
2 This implies that there was a calculation of lots that only took the
number of zõidia between the appropriate planets into account, and not the
exact number of degrees, just as there were platic aspects that only took into
account the placement of planets anywhere in zõidia that had a certain aspect.
This may also mean that the lot relationship was originally conceptualized in
terms of zõidia alone (namely, the zõidia designated by the presence of certain
planets) and later transferred to the planets, just as the aspect relationship was
originally conceptualized in terms of the zõidia themselves, and later transferred
to the planets that occupied those zõidia.
3 luõ. 80 As an illustration,1 let the
Sun [and] Kronos be in Capri- n corn; the Moon in Scorpio;
Zeus in Leo; Ares in Pisces;
Aphrodite, Hermes in Aquarius; the Hõroskopos in Virgo.
The Lot of Fortune is in Scor¬
pio; the Spirit in Câncer. TU H </ H Kronos, then, was opposed to
the Spirit, the lot producing
[ailments] pertaining to the
intellect and soul, and it also
scrutinized the Whole Moon m and the phase coming forth,2
while the lord of the Lot was opposed to the Hõroskopos. The injury,
then also had to do with the necessary3 places and sensation in the feet,
and he was exceptionally moonstruck4 1 L 106 in Neugebauer dated to Jan. 16, 106, at about 10 Plutão .M. [RH]
2 progignomai.
3 anankaios. This an adjective form of Anankê which literally means
‘necessity’, but is a philosophical term for a particular type of fate, the fate that
comes from agnoia or ‘ignorance.’ Neugebauer translated it as ‘fated’, wliich
is a little misleading from a technical point of view, but conveys the general
idea. [RH] Júpiter Epileptic? [Additional by RH] Could also be lunatic as Neugebauer
would have it.
81 Another.1 The Sun in Sagittarius; the Moon in Cân¬
cer; Kronos in Taurus; Zeus,
Hermes in Scorpio; Ares in
Leo; Aphrodite in Capricorn;
the Hõroskopos in Aquarius.
The Lot of Fortune is in Leo;
Ares was lying upon this, with
Kronos in superior position.2
Since the Sun was found in the
places of Zeus, signifying
matters conceming the groin,
thighs, and feet, it caused
injury in these and gout; for
this also has authority over the tendons. And since Kronos was found
in the subterraneous hemisphere, he had images of gods and the dead
in his mind. 1 L 85, XI in Neugebauer dated to Nov. 24, 85 C.E. at about 10 A.M.
Neugebauer points out that the position of the Lot of Fortune cannot possibly
be in Leo with the Sun as they are. It must be in Virgo. We have left the Lot
in Leo as Valens had it. The Lot does not seem to be signifícant in the
delineation. The Lot of Spirit has been omitted because of lhe uncertainty. [RH]
2 Kronos is in the tenth place rei ative to Ares. 82 Another.1 The Sun in
Aquarius; the Moon in Virgo;
Kronos in Taurus; Zeus, the
Hõroskopos in Gemini; Ares in
Cancer; Aphrodite in Pisces;
Hermes in Capricorn. The Lot
of Fortune is in Capricorn; the
Spirit in Scorpio. The malefics
were opposed to these lots. He
became soft, a doer of the
unspeakable; for, Capricorn is
also licentious, and the lord of
this is in Taurus, a zõidion
subject to feeling. And Scorpio
indicates the place of licentiousness.
Another.2 The Sun, Aph¬
rodite in Sagittarius; the Moon
in Cancer; Kronos in Gemini;
Zeus, Ares in Leo; Hermes in
Scorpio; the Hõroskopos in
Capricorn. The Lot of Fortune
is in Leo; the Spirit in Gemini.
Kronos lying upon this Lot
caused castration; for, the lord,
Hermes, was also in Scorpio
signifying the private parts, and
the Sun in Sagittarius the
places of the groin. Whence,
when the malefics additionally
come into the Spirit [or] when they are opposed to it,3 they make
maniacs or ecstatics. 1 L 116 in Neugebauer dated to Jan. 21, 116 C.E. at about 2 Plutão .M. Valens
has the Mars in Cancer while Neugebauer gets Gemini. However, if one
corrects for Valens' use of the 8°T tropical zodiac, Mars would be in Cancer.
[RH]
2 L 117, XI in Neugebauer dated to Nov. 30, 117 C.E. at about 8 A.M.
3 This could perhaps be also translated ‘when the malefics are rushing at
the Spirit while being opposed to it.’ 83 Another.1 The Sun, Moon,
Hermes, the Hõroskopos in Scorpio; Kronos in Leo; Zeus
in Câncer; Ares in Capricorn;
Aphrodite in Libra. The Lots
are in Scorpio. He was maimed
by means of a barb. Otherwise,
Kronos also had the superior
position o ver the Conjunction
and the lights; and the Iord,
Ares, fell amiss. Another.2 The Sun, Her¬
mes in Taurus; the Moon in
Aquarius; Kronos, Aphrodite in
Aries; Zeus in Virgo; Ares in
Pisces; the Hõroskopos in Leo.
The Lot of Fortune is in Tau¬
rus. The lady, Aphrodite, is in
Aries with Kronos. Such a one
had mange on his head, and
white leprosy and skin eruptions; for, the lord of Spirit was
in Pisces. 1 L 92, XI in Neugebauer dated to Nov. 17, 92 C.E. at about sunrise.
Apparently Mars should be in Aquarius rather than Capricorn. This of cour.se
assumes that Neugebauer^ dating is correct. [RH]
2 L 83 in Neugebauer dated to April 28, 83 C.E. at about noon. This dating
is not certain because the Moon and Satum do not come out in agreement with
the positions in Valens. According to Neugebauer one monlh later on May 24
is better except for Mars. The positions in the chart are left as Valens gave
thern. [RH]
84 Another.1 The Sun, Ares in
Taurus; the Moon in Virgo; \ «5
Kronos in Sagittarius; Zeus in
K
Gemini; Hermes, Aphrodite,
the Hõroskopos in Aries. The
Lot of Fortune is in Sagittarius;
the lord in Gemini. Similarly
T H 52
also, the Spirit is in Leo; the
lord in Taurus. Such a one
became short-armed.2 8 rs / m -r \J Otf/ / \ 117 /
V
/ n
Another.3 The Sun, Her¬
mes in Aries; the Moon in Pis- \ ^
ces; Kronos, the Hõroskopos in
r> \
Aquarius; Ares, Aphrodite in
$ \.
Taurus; Zeus in Libra. The Lot
of Fortune is in Pisces; the Lot
of Spirit in Capricom. Such a
H "b
one became possessed, Júpiter a
maniac. The lord of the Lot,
Zeus, was in the place of God,
Libra. The lord of the Spirit,
3> /
Kronos, was in the Hõro¬ H
skopos. And Aphrodite was //T 05
also found in the subterraneous
hemisphere. / / o Júpiter > \ Sol X \ / m
/ 117 / Sol \
cf 2
8 O \.
n x 1 L 104, IV in Neugebauer dated to April 23, 104 C.E. at about Júpiter A.M.
[RH]
2 Literally, ‘weasel-armed.’
3 L 108, III in Neugebauer dated to March 28, 108 C.E. at about 2 A.M. [RH] Júpiter theolêptos. Literally, ‘god-taken.’
85 Another.1 The Sun, Her¬
mes in Scorpio; Leo; the Kronos, Moon
the in Hõro- skopos in Aries; Zeus in Pisces; Ares, Aphrodite in Virgo.
The Lot of Fortune is in Capricom; the Spirit in Câncer. Such
a one is a hunchback. End of Part I of the Second Book of Vettius Vaiens Anthology ! L 112, VIII in Neugebauer dated to Aug. 17, 112 C.E. at about 10 Plutão .M.
86 Appendix I Transiation Conventions
The following words consistently translate the indicated Greek word.
ruler, rulership: oikodespotês, oikodespoteia
ruler: kurios
master, mastership: despotês, despoteia
-lord: -kratõr (as in horatokratõr, lord of boundaries)
-steward: -dektõr (as in oikodektõr, steward of the house)
co-ruler: sunoikodespotês, see notes to chapter 13 of Hephaistio, Book I.
zõidion: zõidion (See General Notes in Paulus Alexandrinus and Vettius Valens Book I.)
place: topos (See General Note in Paulus Alexandrinus.)
sect: hairesis
boundaries: horia
face: prosõpon
trigon: trigõnon, i.e, triplicity.
house: oikos
kinship, familarity, congeniality: oikeiõsis.
affiliation: sunoikeiõsis.
dwelling: oikotêr
exaltation: hupsõma
depression: tapeinõma
figure: schêma
figuration: schêmatismos
configuration: suschêmatismos
to figure: schêmatizõ
to configure: suschêmatizõ
to come to the attention of (by application, etc): hupodedeiktai
east: heõios (also sometimes translated as ‘morning’)
west: hesperios (also sometimes translated as ‘evening’)
oriental: anatolikos
orient: anatolê (sometimes in plural)
Occidental: dutikos 87 occident: dusmos (sometimes in plural)
to contemplate: theõreõ
to regard: epitheõreõ
to scrutinize: katopteuõ
to testify or bear witness to: epimarturõ
All four of the above words appear to refer to aspect relationships. The
words theoreõ and katopteuõ refer to aspects in either direction, i.e.,
into preceding and succeeding signs. However, katopteuõ seems to have
a negative overtone suggesting that it refers particularly to difficult
aspects. The word epitheõreõ is limited to aspects into the succeeding
signs but, like theoreõ, can refer to both difficult and good aspects.
hurling of rays: aktinobolè
superiority: kathuperterêsis
to tithe (in the active sense of to levy a tax): epidekateuõ
hõroskopos: hõroskopos
to mark the birth-hour: horoskõpeõ
to divide the hour: Hõronomeõ See the General Note to the Anonymous.
midheaven: mesouranema
to culminate: mesouraneõ
pivot: kentron
pre-ascension: proanophora
post-ascension: epanophora
decline: apoklima
rise: anatellõ
arise: epitellõ
set: duneõ
hide: kruptõ
co-rise: paranatellõ See General Note in the Anonymous.
ascend, (of nodes): anabihazõ
descend, (of nodes): katabibazõ
contact: koilêsis
application: sunaphé 88 separation: apporoia
circumambulation: peripatos
degree: moira (See General Notes in Paulus Alexandrinus and Vettius
Valens Book I.)
monomoiria: monomoiria (See the sections in Paulus Alexandrinus on
monomoiria.) crí sis: klimaktêr
to take delight in, rejoice: chairõ
to have dealings with: chrêmatizõ
Such dealings evidently include any or all of the administrative or
goveming functions (i.e., dispositions) performed by the planetary ruler.
master, lord or steward. Possibly the planet's role as spear bearer, and
any configuration it enters into.
enclosure: perischesis
containment: emperischesis
illustration: hupodeigma
A somewhat irregular word for ‘example’, that has just a trace of ‘sign’
or ‘token.’
image: eikõn
Another irregular word for example that may have the sense of a
visualization.
occupancy: Epochê See the General Note in the Anonymous.
under bond: sundesmos.
Literally, that which ties together. Evidently a more general kind of
connection than conjunction (sunodos). See Paulus, Chapter 35.
commencement: katarchê 89 beginning: archê
í - ‘ j:
i 90 The Golden HindPress